SUBJECT: I went with them, and they took us to [? Solsnavitch. ?] They called this the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] They fought-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the [? Dirk-- ?] 

SUBJECT: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] there was-- they, I think, they were-- they had a-- a-- over there, and they have had order. Send me so many for the GI, for the-- for this infections. Send me so many for [INAUDIBLE] factory. I need people for the [INAUDIBLE]. My-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So they took you to to be slave labor? 

SUBJECT: And yes, sure slave labor. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they take you? When they took you from the house-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They didn't beat me up yet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they have a chance-- did you have a chance to pack? Did you-- 

SUBJECT: No. Are you kidding? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you say goodbye to your family, or--- 

SUBJECT: No, to anybody. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --or they just dragged you out. 

SUBJECT: And I didn't-- I remember-- I don't remember anybody. I remember they took me, and I don't-- I-- just what I had on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. 

SUBJECT: I didn't have a-- I had a coat on. This I remember. I had a coat. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of a factory did they take you to work in? 

SUBJECT: They-- I was in Gleiwitz and I first-- they had over there a factory. They was was making for the ammunition. They called us [? Rust, ?] which looks like comes out from the chimney. I don't know how to call this in-- in English. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like soot. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like gunpowder-- 

SUBJECT: And they-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --perhaps. 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Black gunpowder. 

SUBJECT: And I was selected to-- to work in a garden. They took a piece of land, and then they converted this to a garden, and later start to grow. They grow potatoes, and tomatoes. And they-- and they had flowers. I heard that they make from those flowers-- they made something, oil or something. And I ate the flowers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were hungry? 

SUBJECT: Oh, hungry. We were all hungry, very hungry. And-- and late in-- in-- in-- we were working outside where it was a blizzard. And was cold. And once, I remember that we were working, a German went by. He was-- his name was [? Dumb. ?] And he was an engineer. And he was staying there and looking and looking. And I said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] oh, he feels sorry for us. And finally he said, I just wonder how they would move a little faster. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Gleiwitz was a camp, wasn't it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. That was a-- that was-- see, it was a-- a-- a branch from Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They put that on your arm-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --in Gleiwitz. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. First, when I came in-- so Gleiwitz wasn't a concentration camp yet. It was a-- a labor camp. Later, they converted this to a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. And when you first came, they put you to work in this garden. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long did you work in the garden? 

SUBJECT: I cannot remember exactly. Maybe a year, maybe more. And later they called me up on an appeal. And they-- the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] called me. I don't know. Or he called me by my name or he called me by the number. I don't remember. 

And when you call somebody, they know that they're going to send you to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you read the number? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is it? 

SUBJECT: 79257. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what-- 

SUBJECT: I know who made it. How they did it. First, when they converted to the concentration camp. They gave us the other-- first we had overalls when we were on the labor camp. They gave us with stripes, like a real prisoner, other outfits. And they put down the names. 

And we were standing in the line. We didn't know, never, whenever they called us, we know that they're going to kill us. But one girl told us there were a whole wicker table and a lot of-- from Auschwitz, they were dressed like prisoners, too. 

And one set to the girl, and they probably asked-- I don't remember what they asked me-- but they asked, probably where you were born, or from what street, city. Because the other girl came up, and she says, you know what? 

She said, I'm from Tarnow. And this man said, I am Dr. [? Mitch ?] from Tarnow. He was from Tarnow. So one of these men was Dr. [? Mitch. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of the men who put the number on your arm? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A Jewish man? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But they were Polish prisoners? 

SUBJECT: They were probably Polish prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were working in the garden in Gleiwitz, what did you do during the winter? 

SUBJECT: Because I was outside. That's what I told you [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Outside doing what? Well, he took-- what were we-- yeah, we're making-- the [INAUDIBLE]. We put them-- they called this [INAUDIBLE]. And would-- like would put this on the driveways-- these black things. It's for working. 

And later, we were working on [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] It was very hard, like to put the big-- like a telephone pole. And they taught us how to pick it up. One, two, this way, three-- and we were working over there hard, because Dr. [? Schenck, ?] he was the engineer from this factory. He told them something, that they tried to maybe to [INAUDIBLE] I don't know. 

They said there's a lot of foreigners outside going. And that is not nice when the young girls, to put them into this job. And they wanted to shave our head, our hair. And they didn't do it [INAUDIBLE], because this Dr. [? Shenck ?] said on account of the foreigners. I don't know with whom they were dealing. We were too much out to the public to have shaved our hair. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So they were afraid that other people would see-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know what they were afraid of-- anything, but this was. This Dr. [? Schenck ?] was helpful. When he went once, we couldn't have any pictures. And one lady, [INAUDIBLE], had a pictures. 

And he went, he came. And we went-- we saw him. And we said-- we had our signal sign 6. And we were 6, we know that somebody of this comes along. And he came in and showed the pictures. And he said, be careful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get your pictures [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Those pictures were just because one brother was in Israel. We were sending to him the picture. And this was the-- after the war. 

And one of my sisters survived. And she said to me, she's going to Israel. She didn't tell me that she's going to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] Was [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was she didn't have the permission. And the English took her and put her on Cyprus. 

And she wrote, from Cy-- later when she went. She says what Hitler didn't accomplish, the English tried to do. It was a hard life in Cyprus, too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long was she in Cypress? 

SUBJECT: I think she was more than a year. I don't remember exactly the time. That's what [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when you were in Gleiwitz, you had nothing with you. You had no-- 

SUBJECT: No, 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing from home-- 

SUBJECT: No, not a bit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were there for a year? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember how long. I remember that day. I was working and he called me up. And one of the SS wanted to know why he called me. And he says he heard that I'm a good worker. He wants me to go work in the laundry. 

And over there, we were working in the laundry. And you have to have a very strong heart to survive a laundry. For they will bring all the clothes for they took away from Auschwitz to this laundry. They made a very big laundry. They build it. 

And I was the one who took out [INAUDIBLE] a knife made by our prisoner with a piece of [INAUDIBLE]. And we were washing these clothes. And I don't know what the German did with this, they probably sent it to their-- who cares. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you were washing all these clothes? 

SUBJECT: Washing clothes And a lot of I was-- [INAUDIBLE] I was washing by hand, they have uniforms. I was probably-- I was young and strong. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many hours a day do you think you worked there? 

SUBJECT: We didn't know the time. They woke us up. I think a bell was ringing. They woke us up. We stood and they counted us. And everybody took this-- one was working in the garden. One was working in the factory. Was-- was a factory, too, over there. And we came-- they gave us food. They fed us, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they feed you, what? 

SUBJECT: In the morning, we had a little black coffee. This wasn't coffee, you know, a little black. I don't remember what they give us when we were-- no, I don't think so. [INAUDIBLE] they didn't give us anything in the morning. 

We went to work, and they gave us-- at 11 o'clock, I don't remember [INAUDIBLE]. They gave us a little water. And I don't know what was swimming inside. There was nothing. 

But we had a small bread. I remember the size-- for three people-- one bread for the day. One day, we had a teaspoon of sugar, and the other day we had a teaspoon of marmalade. It was our food, nothing else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you sleeping? Were you sleeping-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah, in Gleiwitz we had nice beds. They needed that, I think, they would check in the beds. They were nice. That's what they were-- very careful. The very first night we put down straw. We were on Sundays, we were working till 2 o'clock, and later we had off. 

You could stay outside. But whenever one of the officers went by, we have to stay up. And that's why I very seldom went out, because I didn't get the pleasure. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were working in the laundry. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And can you talk a little bit more about the laundry. 

SUBJECT: Sure, and a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The clothes were coming-- whose clothes were you washing? 

SUBJECT: That we were washing it all. This is important, too. I-- we were washing the clothes from our-- from the prisoners, like I don't say half the things they called us. We were washing our clothes, too. Because if we would be dirty, they were afraid that they will be sick. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And one day, but not all-- I think they were changing our clothes. One they had name was Ilanka. They brought one day from 10,000 Hungarian Jews, they brought 50. They were professionals. They were beauty. They were pianists. They were so-- I remember them when we got together for our piece of bread, everybody get a drop of bread for them. 

One of them was Ilanka. I don't remember if she was from Czechoslovakia or from anyplace. Once she came to me, she says, she gave me half of-- we had a dress and something. She gave me-- in here we had the number. She gave me her-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jacket? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And I gave her mine. And I throw it to the machine. And we have a dryer. 

At night, I come home, and I give her. Finally, I felt something, too. It was a ring, two carets, a ring. 

I took out the ring. I said-- I says, Ilanka! That's the ring! I wouldn't worry about the ring. 

I was worried they would find it. Maybe even [INAUDIBLE] she does-- she didn't grow up with me that I took her. She was so glad to have the ring. It was her engagement ring. It was two carets. 

And she saves the ring, and the day will come, and we will run away, she will take me. She took the ring. And you know, I never thought about running away. Or I never did for save me, too. I was just-- I didn't think. No, I only prayed every night not to wake up. That's what I remember. 

But one night, they woke us up in the middle of the night. And probably the Germans came. And this Ilanka said, Helen, now we are running. The [INAUDIBLE] took us. 

And he said, everybody who needs something asking. And I had one shoe, and one shoe [INAUDIBLE] up. But I know that you don't ask him for any favors. I went with one shoe. 

And this-- and they took our prisoner clothes, and they gave us civilian clothes. That's when the German-- when the Americans would come, they said, they wouldn't see. [INAUDIBLE]. See they didn't want them to know whether-- where the-- I don't know why they did it. 

Anyways, they gave us plain clothes, but they made a red stripe on the-- on the back, that they will know who we are. But somebody else wouldn't. Sure enough, this Ilanka came, and said to me, let's run. 

And my husband was in the same camp. But he wasn't-- and I said to my husband, let's run. And my husband said, see, we are going. And over there, they brought from Auschwitz the young kids, the young. And they would kill everybody, and I have no-- I don't want to survive. 

And I says, if you don't want to survive, I don't want to survive. And this Ilanka had a red stripe on her. And they forgot to put on my coat the red stripe. I gave Ilanka my coat, whatever this was. And she give me hers, and she run away. 

And from those kids, I read later, from Elie Wiesel, the book that she was one of those kids who came in to Auschwitz. They took us out, and they brought them out with another load of people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How close was Gleiwitz to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I never looked up the map. And I know only this. [INAUDIBLE]. I found out that this was the 18th of January. And I had remembered the death march. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before you tell us about that, tell us more about after Gleiwitz, you're in Gleiwitz for how long? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember the dates. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, not the dates, but about how long were you there? 

SUBJECT: A year, two. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the same place? 

SUBJECT: In the same place maybe a year. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They put you out, where they gave you these coats and these other clothing, civilian clothing. 

SUBJECT: He said another thing, take everything what you can. I didn't took a bit. I figure they have the march, some people they took [INAUDIBLE]. They took. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So this was that they were getting you ready to send you on a death march. 

SUBJECT: They-- they later I found out, they-- they something [INAUDIBLE] to death. But they haven't got so much. I don't know how they were too far from the death camps or something. Anyways, they march us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were with your husband? 

SUBJECT: Oh, my husband wasn't at someplace. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He wasn't with you at then? 

SUBJECT: No, the men was separate. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were only in one concentration camp that whole time? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, there was a men's concentration camp and a ladies concentration [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That you stayed there the whole time? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and my husband was there. In that one, I remember, they had Jews, father of Jews. And they-- I remem-- I felt sorry for them. One girl said, [INAUDIBLE] I don't know anything about the Jew. I am not a Jew. And they-- she didn't know that she's a Jew. Her grandmother probably was a Jew. 

But one Yom Kippur, it was the last Yom Kippur in Gleiwitz, this is nice. We decided to fast, everybody. And they sent up-- sent [INAUDIBLE] I don't remember what hour. They sent out the soup that was the food for the day. And nobody touched it. I was so afraid. 

Sure enough, they brought the food back, the soup back. But this wasn't right, what they didn't do to the men when we came back. It was a big-- like the [INAUDIBLE]. They were dragging him, go around him, beating him, beating him, beating him because they were mad for still believe in God. They were still didn't eat the soup in the Yom Kippur. [INAUDIBLE] that's what I remember about Gleiwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm. 

SUBJECT: I remember about Gleiwitz one-- another thing. When somebody did some crying, or the crime, they gave him 25. Very seldom you can survive [INAUDIBLE] of 25. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 25 what? 

SUBJECT: They beat him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: With a whip? 

SUBJECT: They was [INAUDIBLE] after this. I remember that Mrs. [INAUDIBLE], her son died in concentration camp. And when the guard-- the guard something said-- the SS-- she asked the SS to kill her. For-- it's for-- It's for just-- if you are in such a pain, you try to die. And he said, a bullet cost $0.19 and gas is cheaper. He said. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You heard him say that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that I heard it. A bullet cost $0.19. They figured it out. What do you think? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know about the gas then? 

SUBJECT: No, we asked this doctor when they came from-- when they brought them from Auschwitz, the 50 that I told you about this. We asked them. They said, no, nobody said about gas. But when-- when they sentenced one girl-- they-- her name was [? Holtzer. ?] 

They took her to Auschwitz. Why they took her to Auschwitz? For a crime, probably, she talked [INAUDIBLE]. You couldn't talk to anybody. It was not allowed to talk to [INAUDIBLE] German while working in the factory. You has to be-- 

Anyways, they took her to Auschwitz. And they knew they're going to kill her, but they brought her back. I don't know what the reason. I don't know. 

And she told us about those gas and about killing. We never knew. No. We never believed it. My mother didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did she tell you when she came back? 

SUBJECT: When she-- when she came back, she said somebody told her that they are killing the Jews. They're putting them in the gas chamber. Later, I found out from the girls from [INAUDIBLE] again about the-- there was the [INAUDIBLE] fine. Later, they took us for this march. 

I remember-- I don't know how long or when. I remember the bombs. They looked like a Christmas tree upside down. And I remember that I was praying, that I said, [INAUDIBLE] I want to die. Let the other have the freedom. 

They put us in-- I don't know, what is a place, and I saw my husband there. And the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was after you had marched for some days? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, this was-- they march-- I don't know how many days we were marching. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was very cold. 

SUBJECT: Oh, cold in march. And I remembered I was-- the girl said, we walk. And somebody wasn't able to walk. We were helping him, because they would have shot him right on the place. 

They put us into our place. I don't know what. But I remember the faces and the eyes of those they remained, and they killed them then. And we left. And the other, they weren't able to go. They killed them. 

They put us in trains. They pressed us together. I remember the uniforms they had. The guys, the Germans, they were yellow uniforms. They were yellow with with stripes. I think it was the SR-- no, the SR were black. 

Anyways, they pressed us all together. And when we were pressed together, they closed the train. But in fact, this was an open train. And when they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you mean it was an open train? 

SUBJECT: This wasn't-- this was like you-- like you see a train without a-- without a-- it was just like a truck, without-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: A flat car, it didn't have a cover over it? 

SUBJECT: It hasn't got a cover. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No roof? 

SUBJECT: This was maybe a good tomb. Anyways, when we were there a long time, we couldn't move. And they were outside. [INAUDIBLE] a bullet, a bullet. After days, nights, and days, we were thirsty. 

We went by, I don't know what the place, I don't know where they took us. Somebody brought in water. And I remember when I put my hands in a bowl, that the water [INAUDIBLE] down [INAUDIBLE]. 

But one day was a snow. And we had our blanket, a blanket somebody. And one took the snow from the other blanket and we ate. Finally, they took us out. I found out later that that was Oranienburg. 

And they took us out from this train to put us in a different train. And I remember I found a stocking. I put it on with a lot of snow. And I said, I don't want to die thirsty. I was so thirsty. 

And the girl next to me, [? Bronka, ?] her name was [? Bronka ?] [INAUDIBLE]. She says, Helen, I'd like to die with you together. They took us into a train, and I don't know how long-- before- when you know you're going to die, you don't think. 

They took us out in the middle of the night and it was Ravensbruck. It was dark. Probably they were afraid of bombs. 

They put us in, [INAUDIBLE] and I think I was always afraid to die hungry. I don't know why. It was dark. And I was-- and I find a bowl and in this bowl was food. I ate it. 

Later, they took us into a washroom. And took off the clothes. Because they always were looking for gold. Gold, they were so obsessed with this gold. They took our clothes again and gave us different clothes. 

They put us out on the street half wet in this Ravensbruck. I think this was Ravensbruck. Later, they put us to [INAUDIBLE] I was, I think, on Block 30. It as an A and a B. The A was Juden and [INAUDIBLE]. 

And that's when I came in. I saw ladies there [INAUDIBLE] screaming and crying. They were Hungarian Jews. They weren't long there. They wasn't used to this paradise yet. 

I asked her where are you from. And she says, well, how long are you here? She told me three weeks, four weeks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was B? You said A and B. 

SUBJECT: I don't know what was-- [INAUDIBLE] I think I was in the A B. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was this? This was? 

SUBJECT: Ravensbruck. I were [INAUDIBLE] was [INAUDIBLE]. I found it out later. This is the lady who made from the skin the-- the lampshades. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The lampshades. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know it was she? 

SUBJECT: When I-- I didn't know even, her numbers. I remember I had six numbers. But a lady here said to me, where were you? I said in Ravensbruck. Oy! I was in Ravensbruck, too. 

[INAUDIBLE] we had 40,000, 50,000. We were dying in that field. They had to count the people. They thought somebody is missing. 

And she says, you know who our-- we had a lot. One of them was Ilse Koch. I found out from people. 

I didn't think. I didn't care. I was-- yeah, I was only hoping that all my family is already dead. In life they went through this ordeal, and I had to. And I have to die. 

And I will try to describe to you Ravensbruck that nobody can believe it. There were nine people in one small bed. We haven't got-- everybody had the diarrhea. And no toilet paper, no toilets where to go. 

Now you can imagine what it was. In that [INAUDIBLE], I remember I had a piece of coat. I-- I don't know if it's intuition or something. I had a piece of this blanket. 

And they wanted to take me away, this blanket [INAUDIBLE]. I said, wait a minute. And I went out through the window. Because on the top, we had broken windows, too, in the Ravensbruck. 

And an appell, and we were waiting and waiting, and one day, I felt so sick. A lady says go in. She will give you a pill. 

I remember this doctor, whatever she was, a tall one. You don't feel good? She gave me a big pill, and I never took it. 

It probably was-- I figure-- oh, from her, a pill for medication? I throw it away. They wouldn't give you a pill. They would kill you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were nine people in the one bed, and everyone's-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they were dying out, dying out, probably. 

INTERVIEWER 1: People were sick. 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure, terrible. And-- [INAUDIBLE] and from this Ravensbruck, I don't remember how long. But they came to take us. And I thought that they would take us to Auschwitz. 

And they-- I don't know, I got the lady who was in charge-- she-- [INAUDIBLE] she put into the washroom. But later I found out, they came from Sweden, the Red Cross, took out a lot of people. And among them were the two of my-- two of my cousins. They survived. It was from the 11 children what survived from our family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were in Ravensbruck, and you were so sick, weren't they concerned about disease? I mean, you said they-- 

SUBJECT: About themselves, well, sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So didn't they want to keep you clean? 

SUBJECT: Well, sure, they would-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT: I-- I remember, since we must be in-- this must be in April, since Januar-- January until April, I never knew what means to wash yourself. We never saw a little water. 

In Gleiwitz, we had every day a shower. We had-- because we were with this dust. One girl was rubbing the other girl because we were so dirty and it was hard to take it off. They gave us soap. For they-- sure, they were concerned about themselves. 

In Ravensbruck, they probably wasn't. I remember one, they would put us into a-- this wasn't right when they put us into-- to a shower-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was where? 

SUBJECT: There were a lot of-- this was in the last concentration camp when I-- they-- I was in Ravensbruck and in other concentration camps, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't tell us. What were the names? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, after Ravensbruck-- we went to-- they took us out. I think when they took us out from this [INAUDIBLE] is hard to describe [INAUDIBLE] that's two girls who started to sing. But we're told that we don't have any trees, anything. They probably saw a tree [INAUDIBLE] and they started to sing a little. 

And one of the officers of the woman, the SS, said to her, why you are, you are singing? You are going to Gross-Rosen to the gas chamber. But they-- we were on the way to Gross-Rosen, but they probably-- the Allies came, and they took us to another camp. They were running away with us. 

And this was-- we never knew the name of the camp. But a boy, this was a Pollack, he was dressed like a soldier-- in a soldier's uniform. He probably worked for a farmer. 

He said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] You are going to [? Mechelen. ?] And this when I knew that this camp was [? Mechelen. ?] You have never seen a nicer camp than [? Mechelen. ?] 

And you never saw so many lice in my life. One day, my whole shirt was yellow from the yellow lice. The other they were gray. 

And I probably got sick. [INAUDIBLE] but I-- this little food, what they gave us, I didn't eat either, and I didn't sleep at night, not a wink. I don't know how long we were there. 

I remember the girls dying. [INAUDIBLE] I remember the names. In one night, in the girls from-- they were working in the kitchen. They took girls from the prisoner, they called us the [INAUDIBLE]. 

They came home crying. That one of the SS said that they going to put in poison in this food, and they are going to poison her. And the kids-- I felt-- I never saw myself. I saw the kids. I felt so old, and I see everybody's so young. 

I talked what I didn't believe. I said, children, I was so sick. I said stop crying. We didn't know when we came in, and we wouldn't know when we would go out. 

Sure enough, in the middle of the night, they left the poison and everything behind, because the Russian army was up on the back. And they took us out. We were running again. 

The SS, they must be-- they were old people. I know the SS, because she was [INAUDIBLE], we were marching. And I saw a horse, 3/4 of a horse, a quarter was gone. Oh, it's a dead horse. I took a piece of this horse, and the SS was-- they were making fires. And I took a piece and I ate it. 

Later, I saw a rabbit, just the skin, and inside was a liver. I don't know how old this liver was. I took. I ate this, too. 

And we were marching and marching, and we came to another camp. It was Malchow. Over there, I was beaten up by a Ukrainian. She was [INAUDIBLE] because I had the diarrhea, and I was so sick. 

I was laying, just dead, when I remembered a Russian soldier-- no, I remember they were Hitler's-- they were putting in pieces Hitler's picture. And I remember a German-- this was a German lady. I didn't know her that well. I just, don't you see, we are free? I says, are you think we lost our father land? This was a German lady running, too. 

Anyways, this Russian soldier put me on stretchers and brought me to a hospital. I was very sick. How sick I was, when I opened my eyes, I says, I just wonder. And I-- I remember one girl, said in Polish, a Jewish girl, oh, my. Another death person they bring in. 

And she looked, I remember, I said, you didn't look in that mirror a long time, to her. I was fresh, too. I didn't know what I'm talking. 

Anyways, when I said I just wonder when this war will be to end. They said, are you kidding? This war is a long time to end. I didn't know. 

And this the day I remembered the soldiers disappearing, the German soldiers. And later I figured that they had-- they knew what's going on. And they had uniforms ready, the civil clothes, that nobody would recognize them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have such a good memory for names. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, it's terrible. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you know the names of any of the guards? Were they women guards? Can you talk something about-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we-- that-- we-- we-- was one-- we called him-- we had our names for them. He was Bacon. And we called him [INAUDIBLE]. He looked just like-- like a very simple and very-- 

But he was-- when this Ilanka, what I told you about this diamond, she was-- they picked her up to be a waitress. They had a party. And she came, she says, you have never seen nicer music, how this was playing the piano, the same. They were educated people. 

One was Schwartz. I remember they-- that he wasn't in our-- he was-- he was the chairman. They called-- he was-- he was the one who was hanging the people in Auschwitz by they-- by they feet, and putting their head in the water. Whenever he came for inspection, I knew how to run away to product myself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT: I always run to the ladies room. The same day when I didn't have the time to run, he was there looking. We had a hard time, and unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell us about this man Schwartz? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he was with Mar-- he took-- when there was an appeal, [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: When they were calling the names, the numbers? 

SUBJECT: No, they just called us. They couldn't know the names. We had numbers on the arm. Never our name. 

But he said, they told him about the crimes, about this lady [? Holchek ?] what they sent her to Auschwitz. And he said, because she had the husband there also, and she probably-- she gave him something to eat. Anyways, she committed a crime. 

He said, is there anybody have here a husband, too? I had-- my husband was there. But I never said my name. I said-- I had always my maiden name. Because I was afraid they would f find out the husband is there. Two had to survive. One has to be at least killed right away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you know about this man Schwartz? 

SUBJECT: This man-- I knew about this man then before he came. They said, remember he will come. This will be a new man who will come. And be careful, because it's the biggest killer in our history. To be afraid-- what can you do? Afraid, not afraid-- we were always afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell us about any of the other guards or people that were watching you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. There was another. I-- I just-- I don't know. It was one guard. He had a machine gun, marching up and down. I think he was crazy, talking to himself, always. I was always wondering why doesn't he kill us? And when we committed a crime, they hanged us at night. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Describe the crimes. What do you mean by a crime? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, a crime. We had a lady-- a girl, she had name was Lola Lipschitz. She was-- and she was on the gate. When we came home, she was letting us in. 

And every day when they found something, a piece of bread from somebody. They beat him so up, that [INAUDIBLE] should be decided if [INAUDIBLE] has something to give to this [INAUDIBLE] Lola, and they wouldn't find and they wouldn't beat you up. 

Sure enough, they looked in-- in the girls. They looked an hour and they found, he said, 45 grams of [INAUDIBLE]. This would be, let's say, two ounces-- two ounces. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of what? 

SUBJECT: Of-- of cake. He wanted to know, well, who gave her? And she didn't say who. And he put on a pole to hang her. And everybody had to be outside to see how they hang her. 

And I remember I closed the eyes and I sent-- said a prayer. And one of the SS-- [INAUDIBLE] is what we called him [INAUDIBLE] this pianist, and he told him, listen, before you hang her, you have to report to Auschwitz. Because they wanted to have the pleasure to kill the Jews. And they didn't hang him-- her. 

After the war, I found out that she was married to this boy who she [INAUDIBLE] said, they both survived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Lola survived? 

SUBJECT: Lola, yeah. Lola Lipschitz. I forgot his name. He was from our town, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So they didn't hang her. 

SUBJECT: No, they didn't hang her because he saved her life. They put them up-- in no time, they had a place to hang you, to kill you, to beat you, to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were some of the other-- what were some of the other crimes? 

SUBJECT: For [INAUDIBLE] survive, [INAUDIBLE] we shouldn't talk to [INAUDIBLE]. Anybody who-- I don't know who they call that civil list. When somebody from outside went by, they probably-- not everybody-- knew what's going on. Because there was a train in Gleiwitz once. Maybe they have over there coal mines, I don't know. 

But one [INAUDIBLE], he went to the [INAUDIBLE] asked what is this? He says go [INAUDIBLE] if we are criminals. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you see people on the outside in these camps? Could you-- 

SUBJECT: No, they were-- Polacks were working there, but they in from France, from France-- French people. And this was-- I don't think that any of ones who survive-- when we didn't have some people-- they saved a little gold. They gave them that for a piece of bread. 

Once I got from-- they gave us dresses. I forgot to tell-- the people in charge, the Germans in charge, not the SS. One was a [INAUDIBLE]. He was sentenced to 28 years from the Germans. He made a hold up on a bank. And they gave-- he was in charge. 

And the other was [? Walter ?] [? Addock. ?] I don't know his crime, what it was. And they used to beat-- Peter never beat up anybody. But this [? Walter ?] [? Addock ?] used to beat the people. 

I remember when he came once to the laundry. And how he beat up the people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: For no reason? He just beat-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, sure, no. No, he had always a reason. He said they give us dresses, and that you shouldn't shorten the dress. If they-- if she was-- how long the dress was [INAUDIBLE], you shouldn't-- he said that this girl shortened the dress. 

A girl and we shorten the dress? We have a needle, we have a [INAUDIBLE]. We have nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This would have been a crime, to shorten the dress? 

SUBJECT: Everything was a crime. I remember a girl was beaten up and yeah, she was pretty. And she said that she put lipstick on her. Where in the world she had lipstick? 

They were jealous, too, because the girls were beautiful, were nice. We couldn't have our mirror. We couldn't have anything. 

But I remember when I found once on the-- on the-- what it say-- on the trash box, a piece of mirror they probably killed-- they probably broke a mirror. And I looked in. I got scared. I had here holes, in here, holes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Holes? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, because in other words, I had skin-- I was skin and bones. Everything was in-- in, see? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said that some people were able to save pieces of jewelry-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --and get bread. Well, if they took everything away, how was it possible? 

SUBJECT: I don't know how they made it. I don't know. I remember one girl-- her name is-- she's in Israel. Her name is [INAUDIBLE]. She remembered where her father saved the gold. 

And one Ukrainian boy, his name was [INAUDIBLE], she send him, and she told him where. He was working, probably from outside. And they were working, too, but they wasn't in prison. It was a big factory, whatever they had there. 

Anyway, she send him home, and she said, when he will bring the gold for Polacks [INAUDIBLE] coming and working, we would give him the gold, and they would bring bread. Bread was the only dream. 

This money [INAUDIBLE]. And this money came. He said, if he would say, I didn't find anything. But he said he found one chain. The rest he took. [INAUDIBLE] and all our dreams went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But in Ravensbruck or some of the other camps, some of the prisoners had jewelry. How did they hide it, though? 

SUBJECT: No, in Ravensbruck [INAUDIBLE]. I wouldn't survive in Ravensbruck some years. Because over there there was no way to buy anything from anybody. First of all, everybody who came to Ravensbruck was a long time from one prison to the other. We didn't have anything. We had only this piece of bread. 

And one of the officers was a tall lady. And I went to her, I says, can you tell me is any way to get a shoe? She says, you have to give your bread. What I had for a shoe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was this lady? 

SUBJECT: She was an opera singer. Her name was Mar-- [? Marchenka. ?] And she was from Czechoslovakia. She wasn't Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She was a prisoner, though. 

SUBJECT: Probably. And that's [INAUDIBLE] Her name was Lola [INAUDIBLE]. She-- she had a shoe. She-- when they said bring-- bring the [INAUDIBLE] and they took us from Auschwitz-- from Gleiwitz-- he said take everything with you. I didn't take anything. 

But this Lola took some things, and she had a shoe. She gave me a shoe. That's what I had, a shoe in Ravensbruck. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the shoes fit you? 

SUBJECT: No. [LAUGHS] We didn't have shoes to fit. We have-- whatever they gave you, you had to do, as long as it wasn't too tight. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: So then, when liberation came, you were rescued by the Red Cross? 

SUBJECT: No, I was rescued by the Russians. I was months and months in their-- their hospital. And I remember they-- the doctor-- I was probably very sick. I remember only that one morning, a Russian doctor came, a young doctor. 

And I don't remember his face. I remember the outfit. That blue and golden [INAUDIBLE]. And he said to me, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] That means that he came to see-- if I would survive this night, I do. And I was a long time in the Russian camp-- in the Russian hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT: In [INAUDIBLE]. There were Russian soldiers and Russian generals, I-- I think. All the Russian army-- I never looked up [INAUDIBLE]. But I know they were nice. 

But one they came in, a major and a doctor. And he asked me about my nationality. I says, I'm a Jew. And he said, can you talk Jewish? 

I said, yes. Talk Jewish. And I talked Jewish. He said, no, this is not the Jews. 

He didn't believe me. He said, I am a Jew. And the doctor was a Jew, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you speak Russian? 

SUBJECT: No, Polish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But they understood Polish? 

SUBJECT: But I said I would say the prayer. He didn't still believe me. I had-- [INAUDIBLE] I had-- I hadn't got hair, because when they took me-- I don't know. Maybe they-- I found out later [INAUDIBLE] and I was be able to go out from the bed. 

I said typhus abdomenalis. I had a typhus. And they probably shut off my hair [INAUDIBLE]. Or because I have so many lice. I don't know the reason. 

Anyways, this-- I said, I will say you the prayer, what my mother used to say with me. And then, since he know that I am a Jew, he was taking care for me. And this doctor, too. 

They came in in the morning, and they was glad I'm looking better. They gave an order to give me [INAUDIBLE], they said. [INAUDIBLE] is in Polish, [INAUDIBLE]. I thought was in Russian they was [INAUDIBLE]. 

They were taking care for me. And one day he said to me that the Russians like very much the Jews because we gave him Karl Marx. And I said how about the Christians? We gave them Jesus, and they hate us all. 

And he said to me, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] I don't know what it means. Over there I was a long time. I don't know how long I was. But later I found out the dates. Because I remember when this goes back. 

We were all Russian, those [INAUDIBLE] and everybody. He said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And the doctor, a young doctor says, oh, my, tomorrow we have to go, again, march to the war. Another war-- we cannot get rid of these wars. 

And the next day when they had to go to the war, everything was quiet. Nobody went. And now what I figure this was the day when they told the atom bomb. If they wouldn't throw the atom bomb, we would have another war. Because the Russians were ready to go to the war. 

Later I found out the dates. I didn't know what date I was liberated. I found out that Malchow was liberated the 2nd of May 1945. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was Malchow? 

SUBJECT: I-- I read and I saw on the post later, I saw 28 miles Hamburg. That's what I figured, to Hamburg. And Hamburg wasn't far from Bergen-Belsen, I think, too. But [INAUDIBLE] I doesn't-- I later find out. 

But when everything this was, we said to each other, whoever will survive, let's come back to our hometown. Because we wouldn't know who survived and who not. When I came back to my-- to our home town, I found all the houses, but not one men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about your husband? 

SUBJECT: No, my husband-- later. I didn't know that he's alive, too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you go back to your hometown? 

SUBJECT: 1945 must be, I think so. This was the same year. 

INTERVIEWER 2: After you got out of the hospital you went back? 

SUBJECT: After hospital. I was for-- the Russians let me go. Fine, they-- they-- they made a checkup. And I remember they were very polite, and they asked a Jewish doctor to ask me in Jewish how I survive and so healthy. Because they took me all the checkups, and I haven't got [INAUDIBLE]. I said, I don't know. 

Finally, they said, they gave me a slip to go for food, and go home. And one man said, if you will go to this place for food, you will wait another month for a train. 

Now came a train-- they [INAUDIBLE]. I went into the train. I don't know how many days, how many [INAUDIBLE] Poland. Finally, there were four-- four Polacks, too. And I was the only Jew, and we were four prisoners. I don't know for what reason. 

They were in concentration camp. They were there. And you wait [INAUDIBLE]. Polacks. One was [INAUDIBLE] is like the government. And one was the [INAUDIBLE] mayor from the city. 

They were talking in Polish. They go to some place to they need for the city so much and so much. And they were talking to the girls. I was sitting there. 

The girls told them that they were hungry. I was the only one who got a piece of bread and divide it in four. And the two gave her all the [INAUDIBLE] sandwich, and they didn't give me anything. 

Or they saw I am a Jew, or they told him I am a Jew. [INAUDIBLE] this is not fairy tales. This is stories. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So what happened when you went back to-- 

SUBJECT: Later, that went back to Pol-- to our town. And I didn't see anybody but this girl. The [INAUDIBLE], another [INAUDIBLE] go there. When I came back from this [INAUDIBLE], she promised me to save the child. 

This girl asked me, do you want me to save somebody? [INAUDIBLE] promise, I didn't give to [INAUDIBLE], to Torah. Anyways, I said no. But [INAUDIBLE] Jews? I saw my grandfather's house. I didn't go in. 

And then she said, some place on the same street. I went up. They were [INAUDIBLE]. Was woman and there was his niece and another. And I said, can I stay here overnight? 

He says, who are you? I says, I'm [INAUDIBLE] wife. He says [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] [INAUDIBLE] my oldest, the oldest brother of my mother. I says, he was my mother's [INAUDIBLE]. He says, if he was your brother-- mother's brother-- you take the bench and I will sleep on the floor. 

Later, I-- I told you about this girl what I found, later the girl from my neighbors. And when I went to this home, to this poor house, the men said, oh, you-- you are here. You can be a teacher. And he want me to be a teacher. I says, fine. 

I just-- [INAUDIBLE]. I found out there is a Jewish community. And I was the 50th-- we had a slate 50-- I was the 50th Jew who came back. From August, this was way 1945. [INAUDIBLE]. 

Over there, they said-- they asked me to come the next day. They would give me some money. But I found out that-- a girlfriend from mine-- [INAUDIBLE] I had address. 

When I went there, I found a cousin. It was one of the 11 what survived. I don't know where she had the money. She gave me a 100. 

And they told me that my sister was dead. And they told her that I am dead, because I had-- from this sister, I had a letter, too. She wrote a letter from this concentration camp to [INAUDIBLE]. 

I don't know how she knew. Anyways, she wrote to my husband. She knew he was in Gleiwitz. When she's dead and everybody's dead. One told me, your cousin is alive. He's in Bergen-Belsen. This for was [INAUDIBLE], this cousin. 

I went there. I don't know how many weeks took me to get there. Then I came-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You got to Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And traveled? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't know. I came into our railroad station. They said, the train just went. Went-- no first I went to [INAUDIBLE]. No, not [INAUDIBLE]. I went to [INAUDIBLE], because I knew that my sister was in this camp. 

And over there, I found girls from our town. And they said, oh, your sister was looking for you. And she went-- they told her that you are dead. She is in Berlin. We are going over there. 

From Berlin-- I don't remember-- yeah, from Berlin, I went to [INAUDIBLE], though, I think. Yeah, to Bergen-Belsen. Yeah, later, from Berlin-- we went to an English camp. The English fed us and sent us over to Bergen-Belsen. 

Over there, when I came, I found-- my cousin said yesterday-- somebody told me that he saw my husband die. He's dead. [INAUDIBLE] he was dead, like to me, 99% dead. And he-- my cousin showed me a letter from my husband. A day before he got the letter, I am in [INAUDIBLE] in a hospital. If [INAUDIBLE] if I will be alive to send. 

From Bergen-Belsen, I went to [INAUDIBLE]. Took me, oh, some four weeks. I found my husband. He was in hospital. 

And he, said there were Polacks in his room, too. And a priest came into the room. And he says, I hope that we don't have the dirty Jews here around [INAUDIBLE] among us. 

And my husband said, no, you are mistaking. I am a Jew. And with Jew authorities, you'd better stay here and don't go back to Poland, because you wouldn't go far. 

Later, in [INAUDIBLE], I saw so much misery-- children without mothers- be my mother, be my mother? I have all their pictures. We found-- we went to Bergen-Belsen. We hadn't got where to go. And we didn't have-- anyways, it's hot. 

Finally, we were in Bergen-Belsen. We didn't have where to sleep. Finally, I got a-- we got a place, where to stay. 

And the [INAUDIBLE] came. The first was the [INAUDIBLE] gave us food. But we couldn't-- [INAUDIBLE] you don't have any food. You are so sick. You need something special. 

[INAUDIBLE] gave us, I remember, pea soup. [INAUDIBLE] We couldn't [INAUDIBLE] what saved our life. And [INAUDIBLE] your relief-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] the [INAUDIBLE] give you? 

SUBJECT: The [INAUDIBLE] gave us everything. They gave us every week, I think, a package. They gave us milk, powder, some beans. Everything-- eat chocolate. But we couldn't buy what [INAUDIBLE] have. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He's changing the tape. I don't know how much longer to press you. 

SUBJECT: That's all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This last tape was very-- 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 