SUBJECT: Am I Polish? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- no. I said, I knew you were not from Poland. 

SUBJECT: It is Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, Vilna. Vilna is-- 

SUBJECT: Not living. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't say this now. I want you to say this later. Don't. That's a very important aspect. 

SUBJECT: That is one of my questions-- I ask, why? Why is it decided like this? That is the problem with Jewish point of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Look, in America, in the United States, nobody would think, go to-- 

CAMERAMAN: Tape 27. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape 27. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tape 27. No one would ever think that-- that people would want to move. 

CAMERAMAN: OK. This is tape 27 and we are rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ms. Seidel tell us about where you came from, and the life you had, and-- 

SUBJECT: So I-- I was born in Vilna and have a normal life in-- I went to school, and dancing school, and have a very normal life, and very happy life, up to '39, when the war came between the German and Poland. 

And but we have luck that '40 and '49, in my town, Vilna, the Russia entered-- the Russia army entered. And so we have two years less troubles because only the Germans entered in '41. So I can study. And, perhaps, it was not the same like it was up to '39, but it was still a normal life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Under the Russians? 

SUBJECT: Under the Russia. It was Lithuanian. It was the Lithuanian Republic. So we became a Lithuanian town and we lived up to '41. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before that, did you think of yourself as Lithuanians? As Polish? As Jews? How did you think of yourself? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. But what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before '39-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did think of yourself? As what? 

SUBJECT: Of myself. I will tell you, our family-- I-- I was in a school among Jewish children. So we know we are Jewish. My mother was from a Jewish-- from a religious family-- but my father was assimilated. So we never-- they never thought about living in Poland. And they were good citizens-- Polish citizens, even though we have some anti-Semitism, from time to time, because, in our family, I have a brother-- six years older than I, than me. 

And he was a student when in '39, '38. So he even suffered some from the anti-Semitism. But that was all these problems were not a reason to-- to leave, because Jewish family, I think, there is some about-- they were so-- first of all, it was all big families. It was sisters, and brothers, and childrens. And they were very close, each to us. 

From the other side, everyone has his own house, or flat, or some-- everything what he worked all his life. So that was stronger than ever other thing. They never thought that it can come a moment that somebody-- a stranger-- can enter, and throw out them from all this, and to take them without reason. So you are out of the law. 

And even in '40, '41, we heard about that what happened to-- in Poland-- in Warsaw, in Krakow. It begin-- all of this-- not such in a strong way, but it began a ghetto and it began concentration camps, but not in such a big format. But even I remember, when I returned from school, my mother was always read the newspaper and she was very sensitive. So she always cried about that what she read in the newspaper, what happened in central Poland about the Jewish population. So I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was in the newspaper? 

SUBJECT: Yes. It was written in '41, but we were under the Russia-- Lithuania. So I remember-- even it was so close to us-- that I always ask her, why you are crying? It must be a reason that people are arrested or people are put in concentration camp. It cannot be that a normal nation take another nation and they kill them without reason. Because I even cannot understand, as a girl from 16. 

But-- so in '41, when break the war between German and Russia-- so I was, in the moment, standing in the street-- on the head street-- when the German army entered. It was some very big, strong army, because we saw, before, the Polish army, the Russia army. It was also. But it was such a strong thing that even I, as a child, saw it was impossible to fight this-- all this. 

So I remember about what the families-- Jewish-- thought Why they-- they have even two years to disappear. Because all the people, they were from Warsaw. They came to Vilna. Or from Krakow. And during the '40, '41, they bought paper or some documents and they went to Russia, to Japan, to disappear. But only the people from the town-- from Vilna alone-- they sit on the place without moving, because they believe that nothing can move them from the place. 

And I remember when I was standing on the street and it was a matter of my good friend. And I ask her, what will be now? So she told me, don't be afraid. We know the German nation. It is not so bad. We work together with them during the first war. And, first of all, they will give us back our houses that Russia take-- took from us. That was the money problem. 

But it will-- it is a nation. It is not so bad. It will be all right. But it was not like this. Because nobody from that family-- as a family, we have 70,000 Jewish. This was the population in Vilna. And even a very, very small part survived. It was even only three years-- less than in Warsaw or in Krakow-- but it was from the first moment, in a very strong way, because they looked on as not only like Jewish-- it was enough to be Jewish in that time. 

But they looked also-- or they pointed that we must be also communist because we have the two years with Russia. I remember I have one moment when I went out from the ghetto on the-- on the-- like no Jewish? Irish? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Aryan. 

SUBJECT: Aryan. Because I had a very good face, and I can walk like Aryan, I was a child, nobody know me, so-- and I was, part of the time, between-- in a cloister-- between-- with this-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In a convent. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Convent. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Convent. 

SUBJECT: Convent, yes. It was out of the town. And some Christian woman give-- she has some friend. She was alone there and she bring me. It was a good place to be because the German-- it was out of the German-- they were closed. So I remember I have some problems that one girl took from me many things. 

And she told that another man, and he came, and told, how you can hold a Jewish girl there? If you will not send her back, I will bring the police and gestapo. And then this is not only I, but all the people that were there-- all the monks-- not the monks, but the women-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The nuns. 

SUBJECT: The nuns will be killed. So they told-- he told them-- I remember I was sitting in the same room-- it is not a problem she wants-- she wants to survive her life. She must be also communist. He decided. That was-- and I remember all people they caught in the town. That they never can recognize a Jewish, or no Jewish, or German without help from the Lithuanian or some Polish-- they work together. 

So they always thought that never the people want to survive [INAUDIBLE] because he's out of the ghetto. He's also a communist. He must be a spion or something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A spy. 

SUBJECT: A spy. But it is enough to be a Jew in that time, so you have two other thing more. So our family, when the German entered, we live in a very nice flat. So the flat was taken. In 15 minutes, they enter, in our flat, the Polish police and Lithuanian. They don't-- they didn't give us the possibility-- how it was in central Poland-- a few weeks to go to the ghetto, but they came, 15 minutes time-- you can take-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: 15? 

SUBJECT: 15 minutes time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 1-5? 

SUBJECT: A quarter of an hour. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In a quarter of an hour, they asked you to take everything? 

SUBJECT: To take what you can take. What can you take in a quarter of an hour? And to go out from your flat, from all you have. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long was this of after you saw the German army come in? 

SUBJECT: It was a think of two weeks, perhaps, because, during the two weeks, it happened also many things. First of all, we live in a-- a part of the town that was also Jewish and also Polish. But it was a part-- a small-- the small streets. It was once the ghetto. And that was special Jewish. So they decided to build the ghetto in that small streets. So my-- my brother married a girl. He went to-- they were friends for five years. 

And her mother has a house in that small streets, where the ghetto should be built. So before all this, they make such things-- they told that, first of all, they can to take the man. Because, in the beginning, the women, they didn't touch. No women, no children. Only men. And they-- they went to some Polish and Lithuanian-- especially Lithuanian people, they worked together with the German-- to the Jewish houses. 

They had addresses from the community where the Jewish people went. And they looked for-- they asked for the men. They took them not-- they took them how they stand before the ghetto. They told they are going for-- to a concentration camp, but it was not true. Nobody from them came back. They killed them. It was in-- from the beginning. 

So my parents were very strong people. I never was a fighter, as a girl. But in that position, when the German entered, something happened to me in my-- in my insight, that I became to be stronger than the other family. It was interesting. Something happened. Because I never-- in the school, I never was such a girl to fight, to go. I never complained to my mother. What would be me at the time was so quiet. 

So I was really quiet, very quiet. So it was a few reasons it happened why-- my father was caught on the way to his work, before the ghetto. He was office from like here [? [LITHUANIAN]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: A lottery. 

SUBJECT: Yes. A lottery. But it was some big thing in Poland. And they told him to come to the work and they will take care of him. So on the way-- on the way to the work, he went together with a Christian woman. She was working together, in the same office. And because he was afraid, because it happened many things on the way. So on the way he was caught from some policemen, in private. And we even didn't know about it. 

But after that, she came and told us. And they took all the group of the men they caught that day out of the town, to a-- an airport. And there were German pilots. And they took all the group. And they did with them terrible things. They beat them and they-- with guns. And they had to work very hard, all the day. And one of the things what happened-- they told him to dig-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ditches. 

SUBJECT: To dig in the-- in the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the ground. 

SUBJECT: But one boy was [INAUDIBLE] from 20. So they decided that he's a communist because he was in-- in the work-- such-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was in work clothes? 

SUBJECT: Work clothes. And they beat him, and they put him in there. He was alive still. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They put him in the hole? 

SUBJECT: In the hole. They covered the head. All the Jewish-- my father was between them-- to cover that with earth. My father told after that, when he returned, that he saw his eyes. He will never forget it because it was a terrible thing. This was in the beginning. And they told him to dance on the grave. To dance. And after that, they begin to dig for the other, but what happened-- suddenly, came Russia pilots with-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Planes. 

SUBJECT: Airplane. And they decided to bomb. So they took out the guns. And said, now, run! Where to run? Away? We run away. So when my father returned that day-- that was only one day-- and he came back. I didn't recognize him because he was white here. And from that day, it happened something to him that he cannot listen to a German voice. He was terribly frightened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean he was white? 

SUBJECT: The hair became grey. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In one day? 

SUBJECT: In one day. You can believe that. You would take a live-- live person and do like this. So what can happen to a person. He didn't believe even that he will be-- that he will return. So we decided to put him-- because, every day, came-- it was some special persons. They were private-- private persons. But they worked together with the Germans, they knocked to the doors, and they came, and they ask about the men. 

They know it's a family, it's a son, a father. So we decided that we take-- because it was a big-- a big flat-- and there was a few families in there, because, during the Russia, the '40, '41, we all were put in the other flat, because it was not allowed to live in a big flat, during the Russia government. So they give us a big flat and everyone has one room or two room, like this. 

So in that flat, it was seven rooms, so it was a few families. So we take-- we took one room near the kitchen. It was especially before a room for the-- for the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: For the help? 

SUBJECT: For the help. And we put something-- some wardrobe-- like this, to cover that. And I always-- when they were knocked in the door, they came. I always sit-- it was all things that was before the ghetto. I was sitting on the window. I was seeing that somebody is coming. So I opened the door. They disappeared in that home-- all the men. They were in some flats. 

And he asked me, where is this? And this? So I knew, you know? I know all the name of places where the Jewish people worked. And I would say, they went to work. So they never had possibility, up to the ghetto, to take the men from our flat because we really-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You hid them. 

SUBJECT: They were safe there. They were safe. And-- but my father was very afraid. So he was afraid to go out, even on the street, even to buy something. So I that one that he-- to be the person that went out and bought bread and everything. And-- but I went and I took out my signs what I'm Jewish, because we have-- from the first moment when they entered, they gave us-- they told us to put-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A yellow badge. 

SUBJECT: A yellow badge from two sides. So I have it on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Two sides? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Here and here. So when you here, from that side, you have it on the same place. So when I went as not Jewish, I took my coat on the hand. And I went like Aryan, not Jewish. Some people thought that I am even German, because I looked really very good. So they-- I always only afraid not to meet somebody that knew me as Jewish. That was the one reason. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You spoke Polish or-- 

SUBJECT: Polish, yes. I spoke Polish, I spoke Russian, also German. So-- and one day when-- and that was the problem with my father. And my brother also has his tragedy up to the ghetto. One day, before that, some people came in the district where he was married and living. It was the Jewish district. And they had some news that the family is very rich. They know the Gestapo were-- they came. 

And they want to have some gold things, and the jewel, and all of this. So they have-- some, they have in the house, but some, they have in a place in-- it was a big house for many neighbors. So they put in a place in the house where they hold some cord and so on. So I always walked between the two houses. And one day, when I came there, they told me, you know, the Gestapo was here and they took many things from us. 

They even took all of the things without-- and-- but they know that there are more things. They told us, if you will not give it, they will took all the family and they will kill us. So they have-- they have many other things. They give it to me, to put it on me, because I walked not like a Jewish, so perhaps I can save it. 

So I walked, really, perhaps, two weeks with so many demands on me that my mother became very afraid that one day, when I can be caught as Jewish and they will only see the jewel on me, I will be killed only because of that. So she-- I must promise her that I will give it back to the family. And one day, I came to that house and they-- 