[TONE] INTERVIEWER: They weren't prepared-- 

CREW 1: We're ready. I think we're rolling. John, are we rolling? 

CREW 2: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Mrs. Kassow would you just-- 

CELIA CASTLE: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --begin first by giving your name, the place you were born, the date you were born, and then Dr. Klein will take it from there. But start off presenting yourself and how-- well, you know. And go ahead. 

CELIA CASTLE: Well, um, they were bombing the city. 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, your name and your place you were born. 

CELIA CASTLE: Speak a little louder, I can't hear you. 

INTERVIEWER: Your name and the place-- 

CREW 1: Your name. 

CELIA CASTLE: My name. My name is Celia Kassow. It used to be Cimmer-- my maiden name, Cimmer. C-I-M-M-E-R. And I'm married now 34 years and my name is Kassow. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, and you were born in what city and what date? 

CELIA CASTLE: 1923, October 23, in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: And the city? The place? 

CELIA CASTLE: It's a little city that you can't even pronounce-- Szarkowszcyzna It's very hard to spell. 

INTERVIEWER: Well perhaps you can, for Dr. Klein, take us back in your mind to exactly what you were feeling and what you were doing at that point in time when you first became aware that things were very much changing. Describing your family, the kind of life you led, and then what it is-- where you were, where you went. How you knew, as Dr. Klein has asked, that things were happening that were bad in Poland and around you. 

CELIA CASTLE: You see, as I said, running from dormitory, I didn't understand. They said war broke out. Now the Russians started evacuating the families and it was bombing. Constant bombing. And everyone was going towards east. The roads were littered with trucks and bodies. Bodies and bodies everywhere. 

And I was swept with this tide of people going east. I have no idea how to get home. I had no idea how my family fared. And everyone was trying to evacuate but there was no way. No way. 

And after some time-- I don't know, I can't go into detail-- I realized I want to go home. So instead of going east, I started heading west. And on the way, I stopped, which I think is worth to mention. There was a Polish girl in my dormitory who was very good to me who helped me out a lot. And I figured out, gee, she's only a couple of miles away from here. I'll stop there and I'll get something to wear to cover myself. I had a flimsy nightgown on. 

As soon as I came down to her gate, she said, get away from here, you dirty Jew. And this is the first time that it hit me-- that I really understood what it's all about. It really didn't hit me until then, which was a few days later after the bombing. She said, get away, you dirty Jew. And this is when I turned back and I started heading towards home. 

When I came home, the Germans weren't there yet because they couldn't occupy every little city, but they set up some kind of a government with the local militia and they gave them orders to loot and to break, a pogrom, to the fullest extent. Just do as much damage as you can. And they started breaking windows, walls, floors, looking for valuables. They were destroying everything in sight. 

And of course we all ran for our lives to the woods. And at nightfall, when it became quiet, when we could hear no more looting, we came back to our supposedly what once were homes. There was nothing left. Nothing. Absolutely nothing. Everything was broken. What they couldn't cart away, they broke. 

And this is when my sister started giving birth. I had an older sister who was married. And she gave birth amidst all this rubble and it was indescribable. And since then, they organized the ghetto. It wasn't enough they just-- our people, our town. They had to bring in all the Jews from the surrounding little towns. And our ghetto became the main ghetto for this region. 

And our house was very large. We had a huge-- we had four big, huge houses. We had a restaurant in it. They built, um-- what do you call it? Platforms. One, two, three high. The ceilings were high. And people were pushed in like sardines. And our house housed thousands of people. 

And they kept on bringing more and more and more people every single day and there was no room anymore to put them in. The windows were boarded up. We were not allowed to look out a window, ever. Everything was boarded up. 

We were not allowed to go out and get water. Every day, there were different decrees. Jews, uh, turn in your bicycles. Jews, turn in your valuables. Jews, turn in your winter coats. Uh, children are not allowed to go to school. Jews don't walk on sidewalks. Of course we had to walk on the streets and the Germans had a pleasure of riding over us with cars-- with anything they wanted to hit us. 

And we were confined to this ghetto, and every day, there was a different decree. Today, they want 25 Jews. They take them up and they shoot them. Just for no reason at all. 

DOCTOR KLEIN: And your own family. Could you tell more about your family? What the change was-- 

CELIA CASTLE: Well-- 

DOCTOR KLEIN: --in your family life. 

CELIA CASTLE: --my family was in the ghetto with us at that time and we were all in one house. 

DOCTOR KLEIN: You can tell us about your family. 

INTERVIEWER: Before. 

CELIA CASTLE: My two brothers-- one-- the older brother became very ill with pneumonia. 

INTERVIEWER: So I think what Dr. Klein would like to know is, tell us-- 

CELIA CASTLE: I can't hear you, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us about your family before the war. What kind of family you had before. 

CELIA CASTLE: Before, well. As I said before, my father was in business and my two brothers were in school. I was going to a private gymnasium, if you heard. [INAUDIBLE]. This was on the Latvian border. And I loved my school. I loved to be in school and I intended to become a professional person. But of course, when the Soviets came in, I wasn't allowed to go to school anymore, so that's the reason they wound up in [INAUDIBLE]. 

My parents being businesspeople, my father was away a lot on business to Vilna. And my mother ran the restaurant. And we had help-- a lot of help in the house. We grew up, I would say, upper-middle class. We were considering-- considering, compared to other people, well-educated because most of the people went to [INAUDIBLE], which was only seven grades. I went on to a gymnasium, which was out of town. It was very expensive and was very hard for Jews to get into. But my father could afford it and I had the grades, so I was accepted there. 

And my younger sisters were, of course, expected to follow suit but they didn't live long enough to do it. My older two sisters got married. And my older brother-in-law was drafted in the Polish army and he got killed there. And the younger brother-in-law was in the ghetto with us. 

And every single day, they used to come and take people to work, us included. And the work was just incredible. You see that cars could not drive in the snow and ice, so they used to get us out of bed and give us jobs to chip away the ice, of course with no regard for our health because we weren't dressed at all. So people got pneumonia and died off like flies. 

Every single day, the same story. They just used to get us out of bed-- just come and knock with their rifle butts in the windows and the walls and get us out. And this was the every single day the same story. And my mother volunteered in the ghetto to bake bread for to ghetto since our oven was equipped to handle this large amount of bakery. We had a restaurant so we had large ovens. 

The reason she took it-- undertook to do it-- she couldn't see the starving people in her house. She couldn't take it. So by baking bread, she really added more water and more water every single day. She diluted it. The bread finally wasn't a dough, it was like milk, and she put it in containers and baked bread so she could steal feed the people, but it wasn't enough. People had tuberculosis. People had pneumonia. They were dying like flies every single day in our house. Dozens of people used to die. My mother couldn't take it. 

And then she said to us-- she said, look, kids, we took care of you up until now. From now on, you're on your own. Run, scatter, look for a hiding place. I worked in the kommandantur. This, I like to mention because I think I helped the ghetto a lot. Myself and a cousin who worked for the Germans. I was picked from a lot of girls to be their waitress to serve the meals three times a day. 

This helped me a lot because I could see and hear what was going on. And this is how we found out that the action will take place in the ghetto. We knew the date and the time. And this is one reason that our ghetto had the largest amount of survivors at that time. A lot of them perished later. But the ghetto really had a lot of escapees at that time because we knew-- I was there with my cousin and we knew that the Lithuanians are coming in in truckloads every single day, more and more. And we knew it spelled trouble. The only way they come is for extermination of the ghetto. 

And when we saw them coming in at night, we were at guard in our house in the attic. We had guards watching the kommandanture, which was across from the ghetto. And when we saw them jumping off the trucks, the wires were cut beforehand. We were all pushed towards the back of the ghetto and we all ran in the woods. A large percentage escaped from my ghetto, I must say that. 

And we still have here in New Haven quite a few people from our ghetto because we were really well-prepared. A lot of people escaped. But-- 

DOCTOR KLEIN: And your family? 

CELIA CASTLE: My family. My father died in the ghetto. He didn't want to run. He remained in the ghetto. 

DOCTOR KLEIN: What do you mean, died? 

CELIA CASTLE: I didn't know. I just turned around. Pardon me? 

DOCTOR KLEIN: What do you mean, died? 

CELIA CASTLE: I can't hear you. 

DOCTOR KLEIN: What do you mean your father died? In what a way? 

CELIA CASTLE: I don't get it. In what-- 

DOCTOR KLEIN: Your father stayed in the ghetto. 

CELIA CASTLE: Yes. And he died. He was shot there the same day. I would be shot. I turned around and I saw a classmate of mine who was a policeman and his rifle jammed. He looked at me and I looked at him and that's the only reason I'm alive. His rifle jammed. He couldn't shoot me. So I escaped. 

I had no idea who else is alive. I had no idea. I found myself in the woods with my youngest sister, the one that's alive now, and I asked her, I said, is anyone else alive? She said, I don't know. And we were in the woods and we ran into a lot of people. And one was asking the other one, do you know who is alive? Do you know who escaped? We didn't know at all. 

It seems that my sister and her baby and my mother were in one part of the woods and my other sister and her little child of four and-- yes, two of them-- were in another part with my younger 15-year-old. And my 15-year-old went out to get some food for this child and she was killed together with the mother of my cousin who is here in New Haven. Their eyes were gouged out and they were left on the road. 

And then a peasants told us that he buried them and he showed us the place, which was through my brother. Came after the war and he moved the bodies to a place because this was a road. The two of them were buried right there and then. And my other sister with the little baby was nursing her at that time-- at eight months, she couldn't nurse her anymore, so they had a few gold pieces with the watches, rings, whatever. My mother and sister decided to send the baby to the ghetto to Glubok. There was another remaining ghetto. 

So they put a nametag on the baby's neck in five languages. My father was very well-known. And they sent the baby to Glubok, which the peasant took the money and the baby and he brought the baby to the ghetto and he threw her over the fence. And the baby would have survived, but then-- anyway, they went to another ghetto and they were killed in the next ghetto. But he did bring the baby to the ghetto. 

And you see, when they exterminated our ghetto and the surrounding little ghettos, the Germans were afraid of Jews congregating in the woods, so they sent out [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] through the woods with loudspeakers. You'll be safe if you all come to Glubok, which is a big ghetto, you will be given work. You will be given housing. Please come to the ghetto, to Glubok. 

Well of course we knew that eventually Glubok will be exterminated, too, but we had no choice. You couldn't live in the woods anymore because you were hunted down like animals. So a lot of people started going towards Glubok, including myself and my little sister. And we didn't know if there was anyone in Glubok that-- any of my family survived. 

Upon entering Glubok, I realized that my mother is alive and my two sisters with their children are alive and one brother-in-law. My brothers, I didn't know. When I came to Glubok, it just so happened that the day before-- Glubok was very large. It was close to 10,000 people there. I, uh-- they told me that the day before, the Germans told everyone to come to the Schlossplatz, and they told people from 16 to 25 to step aside, which they did. They were killed. 2 and 1/2 thousand people from 16 to 25, including the children of my first cousin. 

So when I came into the ghetto, this woman went berserk. She started hitting me and pulling at me and clawing at me. She said, what right do you have to be alive and my children are all dead? And she started hitting me with such force. So she said, you should be dead, too. My children are dead. 

But we were the same age. We went to school together. Then, all of a sudden, my mother comes up-- I didn't know she was alive-- and she said to me, what business did you have to come here? My mother to me. She said, I fed you and I clothed you for so many years and now you're a parasite. Out you go. You were in hiding. Why did you come here? 

I mean, she meant for me to go. She didn't want me to stay in the ghetto. She knew I had a chance to go and hide because someone wanted me. She said, out you go. I don't want you in here. I say, mother, I want to die with you together. And my little sister, Slava, was only 10 years old at that time, so she said, I'm not going. And there was a peasant who wanted us-- who wanted to hide us. 

She said, I kicked you for so long. Out you go. My mother was really vicious but she had a purpose. She wanted me to leave. And then she broke down. She started crying. She just looked out and, I do love you. You know I do. The reason I want you to go is because at least one person should remain alive of the family. She said, you know we're all going to be killed in here. Please go. 

I said, no, mama, if you go with me, I'll go. If you don't go, I don't go. She said, look, you see your sister with the baby? You see the other sister with the child? How can I leave them? Your father is dead. Your younger sister is dead. We'll remain together. Please go. 

So the farmer that offered me, uh, his home, risked his life. He put on a yellow star, entered the ghetto, believe it or not. You could enter the ghetto at that time because they were gathering the Jews. He came and he found me. He said, you're going out with me. I said, how can I go out with me? You're risking your life. They're going to kill you. 

He said, I don't care. We'll go out. I have papers for you. And I didn't look very much Jewish at that time. I was blonde. He said, you're going with me. 

Sure enough, we took off the stars-- him and me-- and the two of us set out on the main highway. And we hear a horse, crib, and buggy behind us and a tall man in it, and he say, hop in. Hop in. I said, that's the end. 

It was the, uh, secretary of the governor with a friend in a horse-driven buggy. He said, why didn't you get a ride with us? I mean, I was a good-looking girl. I was young and the guy was young and we didn't look like anything they would be afraid of. They gave us a ride and we started talking, and at that time, I didn't know that my brothers are alive. 

And while I was on the highway in this wagon heading towards the guy's farm, I see someone walking that looked very familiar to me. My brother walks in a very peculiar way. And I noticed he's walking and staring at me, and I knew if he'll say one word to me, this farmer and his whole family will be tortured to death. 

So I went like this to him. He shouldn't say anything. And this is the first time I knew that he is alive after the ghetto. I didn't know. And I don't know how I looked. I-- really, I-- I can't picture myself because I didn't know. And all of a sudden, I see him alive. He passed us by. We went to the ghetto. 

I found out later that there were a lot of wounded Jews in the partisans at that time and he came in to get medical supplies. And he smuggled them out and went at night, risking his life, out of the ghetto, back into the woods. Anyway, the farmer and I and the two [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] whoever they were, they decided they're going to stop in a village. There was a dance going on. And I had to dance the whole night. I danced. I danced the whole night and sang. And you can't imagine how I felt by singing and dancing but I did it the whole night and no one found me out. 

And in the morning, we went and I landed in the farmer's place and I remained there until the blockade in 1943, October. Now the life on the farm is-- I can't begin to tell it because what it meant to be in hiding. The guy made a hole under the floor in the barn. 

The wall consisted of maybe as wide as I was-- two feet-- and as long as I was. You couldn't turn. If you crawled in on your stomach, you remained on your stomach. If you crawled in on your back, you remained on your back. Sometimes when it was quiet, he would pull me out by my legs and give me a chance to straighten up my bones, and give me a little food. 

But it was harvest time, and the farm was full of workers. So sometimes I remained for a week and 10 days in one position under the floor in this hall. There was no other way. There was no other way. And late at night, sometimes he would pull me out because they worked or slept in the barns. So I couldn't utter a sound. 

And the rats were so big. The rats are indescribably big. And they used to chew on me. And you couldn't-- we learn not to scream. You just remained in this hole. And this went on until October 1943. At that time the partisan movement was very, very well organized. 

To go back a little bit, in December of 1942, my family went from the ghetto of Glubok. My mother came originally from another ghetto from another town, from [? Posteff. ?] And she had her whole family, four brothers, and sisters, and cousins, and uncles. So she figured out that she wouldn't be starving if she went to Posteff. So they worked it out. I don't know how they did it, but my mother and the remaining two sisters with their children and my little sister moved to [? Posteff ?] ghetto. 

[? Posteff ?] ghetto was situated near a very large lake. Unlike our ghetto, they had a free place to run. They didn't. When they exterminated this ghetto, they rounded everyone up towards the lake and everyone was exterminated. Very, very few people remain from [? Posteff. ?] This is one ghetto that people did not have a chance to escape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who told you about that? How did you know about what happened [? at Posteff? ?] 

SUBJECT: Well, my sister, the only one? My little sister swam under-- she was a champion swimmer as a child. She swam under the ice in 40 below. I can't begin to believe it. Even now, I can't. It's just unreal. She escaped, the only one. 

Took her three weeks to make the 40 kilometers or 50 kilometers from this ghetto to where I was hiding. She knew where I was. But she would not ask the peasants where [? Lapaschino ?] is. She was afraid. She knew if she ask it will be dangerous. So she kind of sneaked around barefoot, naked, hungry, frozen, swollen. 

One day the person was feeding the cows, and he had huge baskets that they used to have on their shoulders-- they were huge, about a yard in diameter-- with hay they used to carry to the cows in the fields. He spotted her lying there frozen. He put her in the basket, he brought her in. 

When I found out that she is alive, I knew that the Glubok-- the [? Posteff ?] ghetto was gone. She told me. She said, everyone is gone, I'm the only one alive. And this is when we started joining a hole under the floor together, my sister and I. And this lasted until 1943, in October. 

At that time, as I stated before, the Germans made a blockade on the partisans. The partisans were getting very well organized by that time, by 1943. They had radio contact with Moscow. They had parachute drops of ammunition. And they had personnel, trained personnel to organize like an army. 

And the Germans were afraid of them, because the war was not going so well for them. And they knew that eventually, they'll have to retreat. And would be very difficult to retreat with the partisans working in the background, so they decided to exterminate the partisans. 

And this blockade was one of the biggest ever, ever. They made the partisans occupy the woods. We had dugouts, and we lived in those dugouts. And from there, we conducted our missions of sabotage. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let us come back. I would like-- let us-- 

SUBJECT: 1943? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let us come back. You spoke about daytime How was it about time when you stayed alone? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, when we were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In hiding. 

SUBJECT: --my sister? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Alone, when you had been before your sister joined you. 

SUBJECT: But that was not for many months. Because I went in hiding in June, and my sister came in December. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: So I stayed a few months 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you tell us about your feelings, emotions when you stayed-- in the--? 

SUBJECT: Well, feelings-- there were no feelings. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes? 

SUBJECT: You were so numb. In the first place, you didn't know if there's anyone alive. You had no contact with the outside world. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you very numbed? 

SUBJECT: Numb, completely. Now I used to ask the peasant what's going on? He said, I don't know. There were no papers. There were no radio. The only thing I-- I would hear, that the Germans, at that time, deprived people of salt. And salt was such a commodity that they would risk a life for a bag of salt. 

And I used to hear the peasants-- how many did you get today? They used to pass the barn. There was a main road. They used to pass by the barn with Jews. They use to catch five, 10, and for each Jew, they used to get a sack of salt. And I used to hear them. 

When it was quiet, when there weren't any workers in the barn, I used to crawl out. And the barn was built of timber, very large timber with little grass in between. So I poked out the grass, and I could very, very-- by narrowing one eye, I could really look through it, and could see what was going on outside. And I could see them passing by with Jews in the wagon tied hand and foot. They use to catch them in the woods for salt. 

So the feelings? The were no feelings. You were completely numb. You didn't cry. You didn't communicate with anyone. The only thing that you thought about is, I like to survive, I like to see what will be the end of it. 

I like to know if there's anyone that survived. I wanted to know. I had no idea that I have two brothers alive, and that I had a little sister alive. I didn't know that. But by being alone and being 17 and being exposed to cold, and wet, and rats, and worms, and hunger, you didn't think much. Really, I can't think that I thought of anything. 

And then later on when the harvest was finished, and there weren't any workers in the house, the peasant gave me a potato. And in the potato, I put a cotton and a stick and a wire and a little oil. And I was able to read by this light. So I passed my time reading a lot. He brought me books, and I read, and this really helped me pass the time more quickly. 

And of course, when there was a danger that someone might be coming, in the hole I went. But my leisure time was when I was able to spend outside the hole, just sit in the barn and do a little reading. Thinking? You tried not to think, because it was very painful to think. You couldn't. You couldn't concentrate on any thinking. 

But I was just hoping. I said, maybe, maybe someone will be alive. Maybe someone will show up some day. And sure enough, when my sister came, when I knew that the family is gone, it was very traumatic for us. I couldn't cry. I couldn't even cry for six months. There wasn't one tear out of me. We couldn't talk. 

My sister was swollen, frostbitten, very, very sick with pneumonia. I don't know how she survived. She made it. She made it, and then we would be lying, the two of us, and we never talked. We couldn't talk. But then we got a gun. 

And then our two brothers found out that we're alive, and they got in contact with our peasant. And they said, the first thing, girls, you need is a gun. Because if you will ever be caught alive-- I can describe to you what it will mean to be caught alive, a Jewish girl. They didn't kill you, but they hung you on a butcher hook, and they cut you to pieces. 

So he said, you're never going to be caught alive. He said, I give you a gun. I give you a gun, which is worth-- I can't even tell you how much, he said. I gave an awful lot for this gun. And he said, I want you to know that in case you know the Germans are advancing, one has to shoot the other and then shoot herself. Never, never, never, he said, under any circumstances allow yourself to be caught alive. 

Well, my sister and I were in hiding one day. And we didn't know that there was a blockade approaching, this 1943 blockade. And the farmer, when he said, quick, Germans, be as quiet as you can. 

We were in this little hole. I don't know what happened, so much water started coming in. We didn't have any air to breathe, and the water was coming up for our chins. I don't know how long we stayed there, for three days, four days, five days, I don't know. 

And then we heard footsteps over us. So I said to my sister, now you kill me first and then kill yourself. She said no. She said, you're the older one, you're going to kill me. I say, no, you're the younger one, you're going to kill me. 

And she had her gun poised at me, ready, because we heard German, and we hear a lot of footsteps. It just so happened they were retreating, leaving the barn. And the farmer gave his three knocks and we knew we were safe. 

And this was something that I'll never forget in my life. We were drowning in mud, and filth, and our own excrement. Because we did not-- we could not go outside. We had no bathroom. And we were lying in this filth, rotting. Human corpses, really rotting. Being alive, barely. I don't know-- we were covered with sores. We were frozen, we were cold, we were numb. We could not think at all. 

But then when the Germans retreated for a couple of days, he took us out. We had a chance to be washed up. The fed us hot meals. And of course, back in the hole we went. And then a couple days later-- 

The reason the Germans came there, they were surveying the area. They set up headquarters in this farm where we were hiding, my sister and I, to conduct the blockade on the partisans. Headquarters in this farm where we were sitting. Now what do we do? 

My sister was smuggled out to the partisans. And the farmer said, you're too big, you're too noticeable, I can't do it with you. It's too late, the Germans are all over. 

You have to go in the open, you have to come to the house, live with us. I said, live with you? I mean, are you crazy? He said, the Germans are all over. You can't escape, it's too late. 

I got up my courage, cut my hair, put a smile on my face, put on a dress, and went into the house. Sat down at the table to eat. Who do you think marches in as an interpreter? My best friend, a Polish girl from school. Helena [? Vonkavich ?] was her name, I'll never forget it. 

I was blonde, all those peasants were dark. I don't understand what kind of freak luck it was. Because usually, the Poles are blonde, the Jews are black. I was the blonde one, they were the black ones. 

They were eating at a table, and they had those wooden spoons, and they were shaking. There was a 13-year-old and a 16-year-old, the girls. There was so frightened. I was with them with the German came in the house with this interpreter. 

I don't think she had mercy on me, I doubt it very much. I think what she was concerned with is the farmer. She looked at me, I looked at her, and she did not let on that she knows me at all. They came, they surveyed the area, they took measurements, they set up heavy machinery, and they went. 

The same night, he said to me, you have to go. He said, because your life is really in danger. There were rivers, one large river and one small river meeting at a T right on their property. And they were in this corner here. 

He took and he constructed a raft of three big trees. I don't know where he got them, how he got them. He put me on the raft, shoved me across the river to the partisan area. Of course, partisans were about 40 kilometers away. It's not that I just went and I knew where I was going. 

After lying under a floor for almost a year and a half, I didn't have any muscles. I was soft, I was achy. I didn't know what the outside looks like. The light blinded me. I couldn't, I couldn't adjust to the light. I went. 

He told me in which general direction I should go. The partisans should be here and here and here. After wandering about at night in the dark cold, and my feet swell up something awful. I didn't know how to walk anymore. 

I heard some footsteps, and they called in Russian, who are you? So I said to them, I'm Jewish. What's your name? I told them. How do we know who you are? I said, well, I have two brothers who are in partisans. Their names are such and such. OK, we know who they are, come with us. 

They took me and they led me to the partisan camp. It was such commotion. It was such chaos, I can't describe to you. The partisans were getting ready to evacuate. 

Evacuate where? Everything was German territory. I mean, where do you go? There's a blockade in this area, so you try to go out to different woods to a different area. How do you go? You can't use the roads. 

INTERVIEWER 2: May I interrupt for one moment? Let us go back-- 

SUBJECT: Can you speak a little louder, please? I can't hear well. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let us go back to the relation between you and the peasant. What did you think about the peasant, that he saving you [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Oh, my peasants were extremely, extremely fine people. They saved not only me, they saved hundreds of other Jews. We have a lot of Jews that live in Atlantic City, that live in New Haven that found refuge there. Everyone that passed by-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: With this family? 

SUBJECT: Those-- yes, this family. They-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was his [? passion, ?] this family, that they saved so many? 

SUBJECT: Well, they were Poles, and they were very kind people. I think it started probably with me. The guy knew me when I was in school and our families did business together. And we liked each other a lot. 

As a matter of fact, he came to our ghetto in Szarkowszczyzna And before the extermination, he said to us, he said, look, I know there's something cooking. Your ghetto will be liquidated. Why don't you come with me, as many as you want? 

And my mother and my father said, oh, come on, don't be crazy. I mean, people never believed it's going to happen. They never believed. My mother used to say-- and she was an intelligent woman-- they can't kill off a whole race. 

It's just impossible, impossible. And they refused to go, and she refused to let me go in the ghetto. She changed her mind later on. That's why I didn't go with him. 

But then he said, look, whenever the ghetto is exterminated and you find yourself in the woods, please come. You know where I am. And I came there, and I brought another girl with me, and my little sister, the four who went to this Glubok ghetto. 

And whoever passed by, everyone found bread, clothing and help. They were very kind people. Not too many like this existed. But I think it started way back. 

Their family and my family were very close friends because we did business together. They used to sell a lot of grain to my father. And they were kind people. They weren't too many, but there was some families that were kind. Not too many. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What I understand is that your mother had been a very energetic person in the ghetto. You didn't spoken much about your father. Was there change in the family? 

SUBJECT: Well, my father was a very hard-headed man. My father was a businessman. And everything with him was black and white, there was nothing in-between. Either you live or you die. Suffering, it wasn't for him. 

He knew much better than we knew that it's just a matter of time. You escape from one ghetto, it's just waiting weeks, months. You'll have to go through suffering in the woods in hiding, and then you'll be killed in the next ghetto. 

He didn't want to see his family being killed, so he was the first one to die. He died voluntarily, he did not leave the premises. And this policeman that had this gun poised at me-- he was the one that wanted to take off my father's ring. He had a very heavy ring. 

So he chopped off the finger with the ring. We knew that. Someone told us. That was the truth. And then he tried to kill me, and my father said, I'm not going to live to see my family being killed and tortured, I want to die right here. 

And he said to us, everyone run. Wherever you can find a place to hide, hide. Don't try to stick together because it won't work. Each one will scatter in a different direction, maybe one of you will survive. This is the instructions he gave us, and I never saw my father again. Never. 

My father had a very bitter lesson, because you see, when the Soviets came in and they nationalized our property and gave us an [INAUDIBLE] paragraph, which meant that he was not to leave the city. He was not free to move, to travel, to do anything. He was given the most menial jobs, really filthy jobs. 

He was taken. His home was taken away. He was given a room, one room for the whole family. They slept on the floor. And the people, the Communists, the ones that were really in the highest circles stepped over him every night when they had to go to sleep in the next room. So it was very disillusioned with the Soviets. 

And you thought when the Germans occupied-- that whatever will be, it can't be any worse than it was. They really-- people were very, very naive. They didn't understand what was going on. They thought maybe, in different region, but us? White Russia? We're innocents. They're not going to exterminate us. 

And he was so disillusioned that he was willing to die the first, and not to see his family being exterminated. He was very-- he knew he was wrong and he didn't want to admit it. So I think he paid with his life. This is my theory, I don't know. But he was very-- I wouldn't say embarrassed, but he was-- his pride was hurt that he misjudged the whole situation. 

And he said, I am not leaving, I am dying right here. And this is the way-- the last time I saw them was in the ghetto in 1941. I haven't seen him since he died right there. And my mother and my family, [INAUDIBLE] '42. So it gave them another couple of months, that's all. It wasn't life. 

But there was no way, no way that we thought that we could survive as a unit, as a family. We knew that we'd be killed. It was just a matter of time, but yet everyone tried to hang on to each day. Every day was very precious, so you try to hang on, although you knew that the next day, you'll be dead. Or maybe the next day. But still, we tried very hard. 

I don't know, there's one incident that I would like to tell about living in the ghetto which was very unique. I was only one girl that went through it. As I said before, the war for us started with the Soviets walking in. It was very bad for us, because we were considered bourgeois. 

There was a Polish captain who wanted to have a restaurant way back in Poland. In the small towns, there was only one permit for liquor, a permit to have a restaurant with liquor. My mother had it since World War I. 

This captain wanted this permit to take away from my mother, and my mother said no, you're not going to have it. It belongs in the Cimmer family, we're going to keep it. He said, some day I'll take revenge. 

Well, when the ghetto was formulated and he became the kommandant, he-- every single night, he used to arrest a wealthy person. Used to send in two policeman, take the person in. There was a torture room, he used to torture the person. 

And then the Jews used to buy out this person. Like, they gave gold and silver, and samovars, and watches, whatever they have. And of course, each day, another person and another pail of gold, and another person, another pail of gold. 

One night, two policemen come for me. I said, me? I'm 17 years old. Yes, you. We have the order to arrest you. They brought me in there and they brought me to the kommandant. 

He said to me-- I said, why am I being arrested, I'm only a child? And he said, I want you to be my mistress. I said to him, you want me to be your mistress? I knew what they did. They didn't have to ask permission. If they wanted to rape a girl, they just did it. The girls were too terrified to resist. 

He said, yes, I want you to openly move in with me and live with me as my mistress. I said, no, I won't. I'll kill you. I said, I know you will, but I won't. Now I have a lot of people from my town who know it's the truth. He said, well, you'll change your mind by tomorrow. 

They put me in this interrogation room. And there were maybe 50 policemen lined up, and they were beating me with a rubber hose. They beat me the whole night. They beat me until I completely lost consciousness. I don't remember one thing. 

I just remember at dawn, I woke up, and this kommandant was standing over me. And I know it was very cold. The floor was thick with water, and froze with ice. So I was under the ice, and I was stuck to it from the blood, stuck to this ice. 

So he asked me, how do you feel? I didn't answer. Did you change your mind? I said no. He said, OK, you're going to be shot. I didn't know that during the night, everyone was alerted to bring in gold and valuables to buy me out. 

And there were pails of gold and valuables because I was liked in the ghetto. I was a young girl, and it never happened to a young girl before, I was the first one. And everyone, whatever they had, they offered to buy me out. And they were running to the kommandant, he said no, it's not going to help you. She's going to die. 

This was his revenge. Because my two older sisters were married, and I was the next in line at 17. Now the ghetto-- see, the small towns, in order for you to understand what was happening-- 

There was a big square, like the green in New Haven. And on one side of the square were our properties, were a lot of homes. My father had huge homes there. And the other side, it was the kommandantur. And the ghetto was this way, and the kommandantur was that way. 

And the cemetery road was past the ghetto, past the fence that way. And four policemen were leading me by the fence to be shot. There's screaming. I'll never forget, everyone was hanging on the fences, children, women, men, adults, anyone, old people. 

Everyone was screaming my name, reaching out with their hands to touch me. But they couldn't, the policemen were guarding me very, very closely. I was in the middle in the four. And they took me to the cemetery. 

And the policeman told them-- the kommandant told them that she's very stubborn. And he called me a nice name. And when she'll say that she-- she'll get scared, and she'll say she wants to be my mistress, shoot her. If she'll say no, let her go. 

Which up until now, I can't understand why it happened. The brought me to the cemetery. They said to me, you want to be his mistress? I say no. And I heard shooting, and that was it. I don't remember anything else. I remember waking up in the ghetto. 

They summoned the Judenrat to bring me, they thought, my body. But I was alive. They brought me into the ghetto, I was alive. They did not shoot me. And I remember very clearly the stupidity of a young 17-year-old. 

I said to my mother, Ma, he didn't do it, he didn't do it, he didn't. And my mother, said, ssh, ssh, it's fine, it's fine, don't worry. I was black, completely black. I turned black-- I don't know-- from fright or something. It took me weeks to recuperate. 

But I don't think I ever regained my sanity. I was really insane, I must say. I must have been. I could never sleep after this. I was frightened. I was completely insane for months and months and months. And then gradually I began to be alive again. 

But this is something that was witnessed by the whole ghetto. And there are about 20 people that saw it that are alive today that could really tell you the same thing. How I made it, I don't know. Why he didn't shoot me, I don't know. 

But he did not rape me. None of the policeman raped me. No one touched me, which is a mystery to me up up until today. I don't understand, I really don't. The cruelty was such that I don't know. 

Why didn't he shoot me? He could have. Why didn't he rape me? I don't know. But he let me go. And I returned to the ghetto, and then the ghetto was exterminated anyway a few months later. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are saying that you have been insane. What do you mean by that? When you are saying-- 

SUBJECT: I can't hear you, I'm sorry. I can't hear you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said that you have been insane after-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, insane to an extent that I couldn't relate to my family. I couldn't relate to anyone around me. I wasn't aware where I was, what was happening to me. 

I was like a zombie walking around. Like a zombie, I ate, and I walked around, communicated with people to a certain extent, but I did not make sense. I don't think I was normal. 

But then little by little, I went back to work in the Kommandantur. And this is when [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] before this happened. One thing relates to the other. They needed someone to serve them three meals a day. 

And they were looking for someone clean, and what they called pretty, and well-mannered and so on. So from about several thousand girls, they picked me and I must say, they didn't mistreat me. I used to come in there three times a day, serve them their meals. 

Of course, my nails had to be polished. I had to be very clean, very neat. They gave me soap, they gave me all the cosmetics to be nice and clean. My hair was shiny. I had to look well, because they entertained a lot. 

And this gave me the opportunity to spy. I could read German very well, and I reported everything to the ghetto. And working for them really helped a lot of people escape. And then after this happened, they kept on asking for me. Where was I? 

And I wasn't able to work. But then when I recuperated, I went back to work for them. And I worked in the polizei until the last day the ghetto was liquidated. 

And we knew about the Lithuanians coming in. And as I said again, our ghetto had a record escapees, a record. But they were in the woods, but later on, they were in ghettos, in other ghettos, and they were exterminated there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You feel Rights pride that you saved-- that because of you, you could save so many people? This is something which you are-- 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --for you? 

SUBJECT: There was a book. I forgot what the name of it is. And my name is there, and my cousin's name, Cimmer We really worked very hard, we risked our lives sneaking into files, German files. And we copy it, and we brought it-- we had a Judenrat in the ghetto. They knew that-- I don't know. 

The Judenrat consisted of several people whose mission-- I didn't envy them. Because for example, if the Germans wanted every day, 20 people to be killed, they had to make a quota every day. They had to make a quota. It was very difficult for them, but someone had to do the job. 

A cousin of mine who was in the Judenrat was being lynched in Glubok. People wanted to lynch him, and he was in the hospital being operated on, his eyes. And he escaped, and he learned it where I was hiding with the farmer. 

And then again, after the war he was in Israel. And people lynched him there. They had to put him on an ambulance plane and bring him back to the States, the same person. He was in the Judenrat. 

Yeah, it's a long story. That's the truth. But someone had to do the job. I don't say it was easy. I don't say I'm for it. But the Germans wanted a Judenrat, someone that would run the ghetto. And the people were chosen to do it. I mean, who? 

Who had to do it? Who was the one to be chosen? It was an extremely difficult judgement to impose on people. I really don't impose a judgment on them. 

OK, he-- it just so happened that his whole family came in from another ghetto, cousins. And I cringe when I think about it. And the Germans found out about it, and he asked them to give the family, give the names of the eight people. And otherwise, 500 people of the ghetto would be killed. 

And he handed over his family. And one of them-- two little children-- my brother was a policeman at that time. He threw them over the fence, and they're in Israel now. And they are the ones who instigated this lynching, the two cousins. 

And it was a very difficult judgment to make on people. He was weighing eight people versus 500 people. So he gave the names of his family, the first cousins, eight people. And the 500 were killed eventually anyway, but the eight went. 

And of course, they never forgave him. They live in Israel. They're cousins of mine. Everybody will know who I'm talking about. He was lynched there. Every bone was broken. They had to take an ambulance, bring him home. 

But things were done by Jews that I can't be the judge, I really can't. There was a ghetto. Now even in the ghetto, there was discrimination. There was a rich ghetto and a poor ghetto. 

Whoever had some kind of-- I would call it prestige, I don't know-- was housed in the ghetto where we were. Better housing, although we were packed like sardines. Better working conditions, supposedly. 

In the other ghetto, there were people homeless from little towns that had no roots, nothing, no one to speak for them, no one to help them. Poor little peasants, poor little remnants from other ghettos were shot in the other ghetto. Of course, when they needed the quota, the other ghetto was the one to be chosen. It was discrimination in a way, I must say. 

But someone had to go. The Germans did not know where the Jews are coming from. For example, one day, they said they want 25 bookkeepers. So of course, people who were bookkeepers volunteered. They were all shot on the spot. 

The second day, they would say they want other professionals. They kept on shooting off the intelligentsia every day, someone that had a little intelligence, a little education, went first. And people who couldn't think as well were left to work. 

Although I don't think anyone could think for that matter at that time. People were really numb. We couldn't think. I don't think we could function as normal human beings. 

You couldn't think very hard. You just didn't think, you just lived from day to day. You just lived, you did your work. And at night, of course you were used to guns, the gun butts beating in your windows, up, up, up, up, on the road. And of course, you got pneumonia and you died. And we were used to it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned before when you came to the forest-- 

SUBJECT: Can you speak a little louder, please? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned before that you came to the forest, to the partisans. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And it was a chaotic situation. 

SUBJECT: Well, it was chaotic in one respect that we were-- the partisans were ready to evacuate the region. Now as I said before, where do you evacuate? There was no free territory. There were Germans everywhere. 

They encircled this area in three rings, tanks, the heaviest ammunition, and planes. I saw trees uprooted, roots that I've never in my life imagined existed, maybe 50 feet roots, huge. They were bombing. Of course, a lot of us got killed, but a lot of us eluded the Germans. 

They would not go in the woods, they were afraid. But they would try to bomb blindly. The enemy was very large. So of course, they couldn't kill everyone. The tactics were like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was about you? Could you tell more about-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I was new. I've never been out in a year. I've never seen so many people. I was frightened. I didn't know who is alive and who is dead. I found my two brothers, and I found my little sister in the partisans. But in the chaos, we got separated. 

What I did find out is my older brother had a knee injury. Now if you have any injury and you can't walk you're as good as dead. He was begging to be shot, please don't leave me behind alive. 

But we had a lot of people that are here in New Haven and that are in New York that knew him very well, and they pooled their resources. Whoever had one watch left over, or maybe a gold piece or something, and they bribed a pilot who dropped ammunition. 

We used to have contact with Moscow, and there were those little planes that used to come in and-- I mean, lead the operation of the-- of a creation of the partisans. They bribed the pilot. There was no room for him in the plane. They tied him to a wing, I swear. They tied him to a wing with rope and they evacuated my brother. 

Because if he were left behind, he would have been dead, no question about it. So they evacuated him. We didn't know whether he made it or not. But obviously, he did make it. We found out after the war, he came back alive. He's in Israel now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you talked about before, you mentioned a child who was crying, and what a mother had to do-- 

SUBJECT: Which child? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --her child. Some child that cried. 

SUBJECT: That was my sisters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That cried too much? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, that was-- yes. In the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the woods. 

SUBJECT: That I had to kill one. I mean, I was asked to kill a child. When we were in the woods, coming away from the ghetto, we were all little groups of Jews in woods. We heard crying here, we heard crying there. 

And maybe, you know, maybe my father was alive. Maybe you know of someone was alive. And then I ran into a group of Jews, maybe 12, 15, and there was a cousin of mine with her children, a little girl of four or five, and a little boy of maybe eight, 10, 11 months. 

And he had a voice, it was such a raspy voice, it was impossible. And in the woods, when a child cries, it really rings out, and the Germans would really come very fast. So the group of Jews said to her, look, Teitel you can't be in the woods with this child. Either get away or kill him. 

She became wild. She looked at me-- you! She said, you're a big healthy girl and you're my cousin, you are the one who is going to do it. I said, what? Why did you choose me? I said, I'm only a child. I always used to say, I'm only a child, please leave me alone. 

Anyway, she had to do it, there was no choice. She wanted-- she has a little girl and herself to think of. I saw her put the child in the swamp, put her foot on his neck. She drowned him. I saw it with my own eyes. 

And that wasn't the only isolated incident. There were a lot of incidents like this, that little babies were killed off because they were crying and they were endangering the life of other Jews. And the parents that did escape with little babies kill them themselves. This is one incident that I saw, that I was a witness to. The rest, I didn't, but I know it happened continuously. 

I know one man was running from the ghetto with a bundle-- he's in Canada now-- with a bundle and a child. And in the shooting, he got so confused he dropped the child and he saved the bundle. When he came to a safe place, he realized the child was gone and he had the bundle. He's in Canada now. There were horror stories that are just too numerous to tell. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened with the cousin? 

SUBJECT: I can't hear you, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened with your cousin? [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: The cousin? She died too. She came to Glubok, to another ghetto, and she was killed. Her husband and her brother-in-law-- the brother-in-law was a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] He was a real Betarist. He was the leader of the Betar in our town. Very, very fine young man, educated. 

They both of them with the rest of their children-- they had two and one, three more children. They died in a barn with I don't know how many Jews. They burned them alive, her husband and her brother-in-law. She then went to the ghetto in Glubok, and she was killed over there like anyone else. There were very few people that were left. 

Now in [? Posteff, ?] my mother's family, they were about 150, 120 people, brothers, and nieces, and nephews, and relatives, and cousins. The only one that's alive is my sister. No one else survived. Everyone else was killed. 

Not one single person survived. I lost my mother there. I lost two sisters, their children, and a brother-in-law, plus uncles and aunts and cousins. Not one person escaped from [? Posteff. ?] It was the most difficult ghetto to escape from. 

Now when we started evacuating, the tactics were like that. We used to come into a village and get the oldest resident and tell him, get us out in a single file somewhere where it's safe. You know where the Germans are, because you're on the outside. During the daytime, go and watch the movement of the Germans at night. Get us out. 

We were thousands and thousands of people. I went out in a brigade, they were completely-- 