LEO: They what? 

DORI LAUB: Did some talk back and still continue to be Nazis? 

LEO: Most-- most of the-- most of the Germans that, uh-- once the-- once we were in our permanent positions, they are-- most of the Germans were very demure, they were very quiet. They, uh, did not, uh-- they did not-- they lost their, uh-- their-- their particular oomph. I remember one instance where we-- where a former German, uh, he was some kind of big shot in the arm-- in the-- in the local government. He was-- I think he was a former Burgermeister, but he was a member of the Nazi party. Because we had him on our list. 

He came in and he wanted, uh-- he wanted to go and visit a town about a few miles away from, uh-- from the-- pit-- from Bogen where we were, and he needed special passes. And he was a-- he was-- I thought he was more arrogant than usual. And I must have been maybe angrier with him than usual. And, uh, I gave him a pass. But I made him-- I, uh-- I made him walk the 10 miles. I thought that would have been punishment for him. 

And I put down on his pass that he cannot get any-- a lot of people were hitchhiking then. They were picked up by-- by even our vehicles. And that was my punishment for him. Why? I don't remember anymore. But he must have said something that upset me. I can't remember really. I-- the-- the-- the-- I did talk to, uh, to Germans. I did talk to Germans. And I told them, how could possibly a thing like this, what happened in Germany, could that happened without them saying anything. And most of the Germans, they were denying all knowledge. The-- 

They never did anything wrong. They never said anything. They never-- devolved-- well, one of my best friends is Jewish, et cetera, and their grandmother was Jewish, et cetera, et cetera. Uh, I-- I'm trying to recall a particular instance where-- where any-- where the arrogance of the Germans came through. Uh, the only-- the only one I really could think of, like I mentioned before, that-- that [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] SS a colonel that surrendered the-- the division to us. He did not want-- well, he was quite arrogant. He felt that, you know, he could not surrender to part that is his rank. But I did not discuss any politics with him. As a matter of fact, I did not discuss any politics. 

DORI LAUB: How did you introduce yourself to the people you interrogated? 

LEO: Uh. 

DORI LAUB: And what lan-- and the language. 

LEO: Well. 

DANA KLINE: Speak in German? 

LEO: [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

So-and-so came in from the party. 

DORI LAUB: You introduced yourself differently. 

LEO: Huh? 

DORI LAUB: How did you introduce yourself? Can you say it again? 

LEO: Well, there was a, uh, [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

DORI LAUB: [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

LEO: [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

DANA KLINE: No, there was more. 

DORI LAUB: You said something else about yourself. 

DANA KLINE: You said you-- your name plus something else. 

LEO: Oh, [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

DORI LAUB: Can you say the whole thing again? 

LEO: Oh, yes, yes, OK, yeah. [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

And then usually he said he didn't do anything. Well, then I came out with my paper and said, well, it says here by our, uh, uh, [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] 

And then, started in. And then usually in 1945, I spoke better German. First of all, I went, you know, I-- I-- I studied German in the army. I had to go ask certain question. And they usually asked, why do you speak, uh, why-- how come you speak German so well? Well, then I told him that I-- I li-- I lived in Berlin, that they made me leave Berlin, and that I am a-- that I am a German. Well, sometimes there was-- they said they didn't believe it. Oh, you're just kidding. 

I said, I wouldn't, you know-- and then, of course I said that I wouldn't kid. And, uh, the, uh-- But overall, there was no-- they were all very, very helpful, really, the Germans, then. They were trying to please. They were trying to do anything you wanted them to do. I always had the feeling that, eventually, they're going to try, you know, to get even. I wouldn't, uh-- I wouldn't tr-- I personally did not trust them. I lost complete trust in them. 

I would not. I felt that whatever they tell me is a lie. And many, many times I told them so. I said so. You are lying, you're this and this. Because it was not, uh-- it was a lot of, uh, uh, basic questions which we had to know. We wanted to find out, uh, who-- who was a reliable person by getting, you know, who we could appoint. You see, the whole thing was done, the Germans were supposed to govern themselves under our supervision. So we had to find people that were, uh-- that were, we call trustworthy. 

They joined maybe very late in the party. They might have not joined 'til 1941, '42, you know. The ones that joined right in 1933, those were the people that were automatically, uh, eliminated from any type of, uh, of trust that we could, uh, uh-- we could-- the one thing I asked though, the first thing I asked when-- whenever it was, are there any Jews in town? Uh, that I did, I asked. That's the first thing I did. And if I did find any, I myself and our group did give them special privileges. 

DORI LAUB: Can you tell us where you found-- 

LEO: Uh, give them an extra-- well, we gave them food. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember finding them? 

DANA KLINE: Did you find many? 

LEO: Yeah, oh yes, yes. I found-- 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe one? 

LEO: Yes, I found, yes, I remember, we found, uh, uh-- when we first came into a town, uh, they usually came up themselves. But sometimes they were, uh, uh-- I found a, uh, a lady and her daughter, a French woman. She was hidden. We found in one place, oh, that's interesting, in one place we found a, uh-- a-- there was a Catholic, uh-- 

DANA KLINE: Nun? 

LEO: Nun? Oh, well, it wasn't a-- it wasn't a-- there was like a, uh, I don't know what they call it, where there are three or four nuns live. It was somewhere in Bavaria. And they had a few Jewish kids, which we didn't know. And so all of a sudden, they came and they brought, oh, about, uh, I don't know, maybe six, a couple girls and a few boys. They brought them and they said, those children are Jewish. They said, well, what, uh-- how did you, uh-- where did you find them? Well, it seems that the parents, they were hiding them. 

DORI LAUB: The nuns were hiding-- 

LEO: The nuns, yeah, the German nuns were hiding them. It seems that the Germans were, uh, either coming through, I don't recall exactly anymore. Anyway, they dropped the children off. And they were hiding them in their, uh-- 

DANA KLINE: Convent? 

LEO: In their con-- yeah, convent, in their convent, evidently. And when we came up, they wanted to know how they now could get in touch with their parents. They were European children. They were, uh-- I think they were Polish. Somehow they made their way to this particular town. Uh, I called the, uh-- the, uh, Jewish welfare board. Rabbi, some further back in Frankfurt. And they came and got those children. And I really don't know what happened. 

But so, in other words, there were some Germans that helped somewhat, not too many, very far in between. I found a man in-- in one of the towns that I knew as a k-- as a-- as a child. He used to have a-- he used to have a toy store in Berlin. There I go. And there he comes into the office. And I says, you look awfully familiar. But I know I could not have, uh-- you know, I could not have known you because, uh, you're not from Am-- he says. And he happened to have a toy store. And I used to go as a kid in his toy store and buying toys. And he was hiding. And he was not in a concentration camp. He was hiding somewhere. He was hidden by somebody. 

DORI LAUB: By a German? 

LEO: By a German in Bavaria somewhere, yes. But I'd happened to, uh-- to know him. Uh, we found a German soldier, a, uh-- a German sergeant hiding a-- a Jewish woman. He was-- he was in-- that's an interesting story, too. He was at the Wars-- Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, this particular man. And he found that young girl. And he-- I guess he fell in love with her. And somehow, he got her back-- he got her back to, uh-- to Germany. And he was hiding her all throughout the war. And she came forward after the war was over and mentioned it, that she was Jewish. Now, how true it is, I don't know. That's the story she told. 

DORI LAUB: You? 

LEO: Yeah, me and, uh, us as a-- as a group. Not me, personally, it was told to us, and I happened to be there. You see, we were-- in other words, as military government, anything that anybody ever had to say came to us. It was like a town meeting. We had to pass on it-- We had to pass on it who could get bread, who could get milk, you know, there was, uh, shortages. Who could get, uh, food, who could go here, who could go there. 

DORI LAUB: The first question w-- was, are there any Jews in town? 

LEO: That was my personal question. 

DORI LAUB: It was. 

LEO: Yes. 

DORI LAUB: And do you remember responses to that? 

LEO: Most of them said, we don't know. 

DORI LAUB: Yes. 

LEO: Somebody said once in a while, I think I heard there's a Russian Jew. He came from a-- from a camp. And he is over there or over here. Most of them denied all knowledge. They never seen a Jew, they never knew a Jew. They never did, uh, anything to a Jew. It was just, uh, propaganda. They don't believe it, anyway, you know? 

And when you show them pictures, there was great, uh, uh, shock. I don't know how true it was, how-- how sincere it was. There was a great shock in their behavior. But, uh, nobody really said, very, very few people came through saying that I-- I hid somebody. Uh, except for those two nuns, there was really-- and for this German soldier and-- 

You see, as soon as American troops came in, or probably English troops, so as soon as we came into France or Belgium or Holland, if there was any Jew hiding, they came forward. They came forward. They-- they came forward with the free French. They were partisans. As soon as they felt that they could divulge their identity, they did. And, of course, we were very, very nice to them. I was very nice to them myself. I was trying to help them. If they needed clothing, I-- I got it for them. Uh, you know, if they needed-- 

DORI LAUB: How? 

LEO: How? You go into a, uh-- you go into a house and you say, how many suits do you have? You know, I'm the boss, I have the gun. And you say, you don't need this suit or, what, you got a pair, two pairs of shoes, ones with holes, ones without 'em. See if the good ones fit this guy, you give it to them, and you will worry about. See, that we did. We, uh, ah, uh-- we, uh-- we felt revenge. We felt, uh-- If any-- If anybody that we felt is deserving of it needs something and this was a-- was available, we were requisitioning it. We were requisitioning it when any refugee group came through. They used to travel in groups, by the way. Usually, they-- they never traveled by themselves. 

DANA KLINE: Walking? 

LEO: The-- The former inmates or-- there was always like five, six, seven people together. You know, and they had a place to stay. They needed a place to stay. And I-- we just removed some Germans from a house. And we told them that's yours. 

DORI LAUB: You remember one such a group coming to your door? 

LEO: Oh, a lot of them. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe one group? 

LEO: A lot of 'em, a lot of, uh-- a lot of, uh, mostly, uh-- uh, well, mostly younger people, mostly younger people. Uh, I, uh, I don't know who would see this. It's not a-- not-- they were actually right, you know, in the beginning, they were doing a lot of, uh, uh, looting, an awful lot of looting was done by refugee groups. Uh, they themselves took whatever they needed and only the-- in the beginning, only the second and third wave was a bit more. Because we had to stop it. Orders were given that they couldn't just go and-- and-- and, you know, take, uh, whatever they wanted. But when we did it, it was OK. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember arresting or having to s-- 

LEO: I never did. 

DORI LAUB: --clash with the-- with an inmate? 

LEO: Any, any, any any-- 

DANA KLINE: Refugees. 

LEO: No, we never did. We never did, we just told them. Uh, there was, uh-- there was one young fellow, he-- it was one young fellow, he was especially, uh, rough, with a couple rapes involved. And, uh, he, uh-- I mean, we never arrested him. I just told him, get out and s-- and I don't want to see him again, you know. Because I wouldn't do that. I couldn't do that. I-- that was, of course, unofficially, you know. I told him, tomorrow morning I'm going to come look for you, and you better be gone. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LEO: And he disappeared in the-- you know, there was-- you see, there was a great, great, uh-- there was-- in those days, there was a great, great movement of people. Uh, it's-- it's, uh, hard to describe that. You know, people were going every which way. This one was looking-- even the Germans, they were looking for their-- for their sons, you know. They were missing in action. And this one was, uh-- was captured by the Russians. And they-- they came to us, they wanted information from us. 

DORI LAUB: You mentioned that you never spoke the language or never visited Berlin again. 

LEO: Never. 

DORI LAUB: Why? 

LEO: Well, in the beginning, I-- I had no desire to go back to-- to Berlin. Uh, in-- in the last couple years, I-- I changed my mind somewhat. Because, I guess, I get older and I want to s-- you know. I never got back. I-- I shouldn't say I had no des-- 

DANA KLINE: Did you have the opportunity? 

LEO: No, I never had the opportunity, really. If I would have the opportunity, I would have gone maybe to visit my father's grave. Because my mother's is not available. It is not there. That's the only thing I have left. I have no desire in visiting Germany. I have no desire of spending my vacation there, of sight seeing, or anything, like I said before. I'm still mad. And I don't, you know, I have no desire at all to go and visit or see, uh. 

Because after all, the, uh, what else-- why should I-- you know, those people, they-- I shouldn't s-- they-- they broke up my-- my-- my-- you know, they were responsible for a great change in my life, for a change to, uh-- to be very truthful, I would never have left. Why would I have left? You know, I would have gone to school. I would have studied. I would have gone to college, I'm sure, and would have gone to-- I would have, uh-- would have led a normal life like I do here, but I would never-- 

DORI LAUB: See, though, how is your life different? What is the change? 

LEO: Well, I have no family. My family is all gone. I have nobody. That has changed. I had to-- I had to learn a new language. So I spoke English somewhat, which I learned in school. I had to-- I had to-- I had to adopt a new-- a new culture, a different culture-- 

DORI LAUB: Has it changed you-- 

LEO: A different environment. Pardon? 

DORI LAUB: Has it changed you? Are you a different-- have you become different? 

LEO: Yes, I think I have become different. 

DORI LAUB: How? 

LEO: I think I can hate. I don't think I ever hated before. I think I can-- I can dislike people. To me, uh, if you're, uh, you know, if you're not a J-- if you're a-- if you're a German, you're automatically suspect. I don't care, uh, if you had anything to do with it or not. That's my personal, uh, thinking. 

DANA KLINE: What do you feel when you meet a German on the street in America? 

LEO: Right now? 

DANA KLINE: Mm-hm. 

LEO: Nothing, no desire. I wouldn't want to be-- I wouldn't want to be his-- I wouldn't want to be his friend. I wouldn't want to associate with him. Uh, it's just a person. It's just a person that-- that I meet. I meet a lot of people. You know, you meet a lot of people. But there's no-- there's no kinship. There's no feeling with a German. 

DORI LAUB: Any difference between young and old Germans? 

LEO: Well, only lately, yes. At one time, if you would have asked me that 10, 15 years ago, I would have said, once you're German, you're no damn good. Uh, now, I-- I'm-- I'm starting to realize that, uh, you know, the younger people, after all. At one time, I would not have bought anything German, which I probably would do today. I don't think, uh, I-- I-- I would maybe buy a German car. At one time, I would never have thought-- I thought it was rev-- repulsive to me for a Jew to buy a Volkswagen, which today it isn't that bad anymore, you know. I don't know if I would buy one. But I probably-- 

DANA KLINE: What did you think of your son going back to Germany? 

LEO: Uh, well, he-- I don't, uh-- I didn't mind him going back to see the places that I wanted him to see for me. And that was my birth place, you know. Because I wanted to know, like I said before, today, if I would have the opportunity, I would go to Berlin and spend maybe a day or so there, and get out of there. 

DANA KLINE: So he was your messenger? 

LEO: Yeah, basically. I-- I didn't think it was a good idea for him to travel around Germany, no. No. I don't think it was. I wouldn't-- I wouldn't spend my time there. There are too many other places you can go. 

DORI LAUB: But you wanted to know about the house and the tree? 

LEO: Yeah, I would wanted to know if-- if, uh, for some reason or the other, I guess, as you get older, you become more mellow and you, you know, you-- you go back a little bit. You're not as stubborn anymore as you were. I wouldn't-- I wouldn't mind, uh, going. But I wouldn't want to spend any length of time there. I wouldn't want to go to-- For instance, I wouldn't spend my time at a German resort. Why would you want to go into a, uh-- I call it-- I don't want to go into a, uh, cemetery and-- and-- and spend vacation there. That's not a place to do it. 

That's what I feel. That's all of Germany is. Not only personally for me, but for me as an American, I-- I can't, uh, I can't forgive what they-- what has done-- what has been done to me. And that's-- that's, you know, my-- that's my feeling. But like I said before, I would, uh-- I'm not as-- as-- as dead set against things today as I was 20 years ago. It's-- 

DORI LAUB: Is there anything else you would like to say? 

LEO: I don't know. Is-- Is there anything else you want to know? Did I, uh, jump around? 

DANA KLINE: The one thing that I do remember, you received a package from-- 

LEO: Oh, OK, yeah, this might be an interesting thing. We lived-- is there still film left? OK, I'll make it fast. We-- as I said before, we lived in a-- in an apartment house. And there was a-- a fellow that was managing apartment houses. 

DORI LAUB: That was where? 

LEO: In Berlin. He was managing an apartment house. And he was-- him and his mother, I'll never forget, and they were awful, awful nice people. And after I came back from the service, suddenly I get a letter from him, that he has-- that evidently that when they deported the Jews from Berlin later on during the war, they sealed the apartment for some reason or the other. They sealed the apartment. And I guess they sold the stuff or the Germans came in and they took it. I don't know. 

But anyway, there seemed to be some personal belongings before my mother left was turned over to him, a great big crate. And if I want it, he would send it to me. And we sent some-- some friend over, some person we know went over there. And he looked at that thing. And it was personally like bedlinen in there. Evidently, it was turned over to him for safekeeping because they thought that they might come back. And when they, you know-- so if they do come back, there was clothing in their dressers, shoes, uh, sheets, pillowcases, table cloth. 

So evidently they-- and he was hiding that for them. So when they do come back and they have to start all over again, that they have at least some-- some things that they can start, uh, you know. Because they knew the apartment was sealed. And even if they come in, taking out most of the stuff, you see, they would get the apartment back, I guess, they felt. Anyway, I asked for the stuff to be sent over. And it was sent over. And, uh, I did not do anything with it. I-- I-- I did-- I hardly looked at it. I-- I couldn't do it. I-- Uh, we gave it away to, uh, Goodwill or somebody. 

DORI LAUB: Without looking at it? 

LEO: Pardon. 

DORI LAUB: Without looking at it? 

LEO: Well, I opened it up and I-- but it was too, uh, difficult for me to go through it. I-- I couldn't. Because there were things in there that-- uh, my mother used to do a lot of, uh, embroidery work, you know, like, uh, cross, uh-- 

DANA KLINE: Stitch. 

LEO: Stitch and stuff like that. And I found quite a bit of stuff there. And I don't think we kept anything. I really don't remember. That's another thing. You see I-- there's certain things I don't remember. My wife probably would remember that more so than I can. I don't think we-- we kept it, we kept the-- any of this stuff. There might have been, I think, yes, they did. We kept a, uh-- I think we kept a, uh-- a Challah cover which she did, a velvet Challah cover with the Hebrew lettering on it. 

DORI LAUB: What lettering? 

LEO: Hebrew. 

DORI LAUB: What lettering? Do you remember? Challah? 

LEO: I guess so. I don't know. 

DORI LAUB: And you use it? 

LEO: Yeah, we-- we do have it. It-- It's falling apart now. But we do use it. 

DORI LAUB: For? 

LEO: We-- we-- whenever we use it, we-- 

DORI LAUB: Who sits around the table now when you use it? 

LEO: Right now just me and my wife. We have no children left. They're all gone. 

DORI LAUB: How many? 

LEO: I have three children. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LEO: I have a son and two daughters. 

DORI LAUB: And they would all sit around with this Challah cover? 

LEO: Well, years back when they were smaller, I think we did. Yes. We made, uh, knish on Friday night. 

DANA KLINE: They knew where it was from? 

LEO: Huh? 

DANA KLINE: They knew the story behind it? 

LEO: Yes, yes. I think I have mentioned it to them. 

DANA KLINE: You spoke to your children about your family? 

LEO: Yes. 

DANA KLINE: As they were young? 

LEO: I do-- I do speak to my children. I don't think I ever mentioned any particular-- I don't know if I remember any-- ever mentioned any particular detail, like I said before, I don't, uh-- but I think I told them about, uh, their grandparents, my parents. I told them about my-- their aunts, my sisters. They know where they come from. I think they know my background. I don't know if I ever mentioned, uh, anything in-- in great detail what happened. Of course, they know that I had to leave. They know that I had to, uh-- that I went-- I was in the service. But I never discussed, uh, maybe I should, but I never did. 

DORI LAUB: And that such a Friday night, in some way your mother was present, too. 

LEO: Well, at home. 

DORI LAUB: No. 

LEO: Yes. 

DANA KLINE: Here in Norwich. 

LEO: My mother? 

DORI LAUB: Your mother was present to this memory. 

LEO: Well, of course, it was because of that. It is still there, I have it. I have, uh-- I have my-- my tefillin uh, bag that belonged to my father. And I have the tefillin that belonged to him which is still there. 

DANA KLINE: You took that with you when you left? 

LEO: Yeah, that one I took with me. And my-- I think my-- probably my grandmother made me take that. I still have my bar mitzvah tallit, which is a wool tallit. It became moth eaten, but it's still there. I have that. I still have my, uh, tallit bag that my sister made, which is quite a few years. Yeah, I have that. A few things that I still have, but nothing really that, uh, this, uh-- I don't-- what else is there available. But this particular thing, yeah, this particular thing we used-- we used at home, this Challah cover. Yes. And that showed up again in that box, pretty sure. I don't know what else we-- we kept there. I don't-- like I said before, I don't like to go through with it. 

DORI LAUB: OK. 

LEO: Is that it? 

DANA KLINE: Thank you. 

LEO: OK. 

[TONE] 

