GREGOR: I want you to know, no, wait, it's, uh, according to my parents, when my father started, uh, went to Germany with-- with my mother, my first place actually was in Germany. But I was a infant when we came to-- to Latvia. So I don't remember at all, Germany, you know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: All right. 

GREGOR: But, uh, so I never actually claimed my birthplace Germany, but originally it is Germany. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes, that's all right. So you-- when you were an infant you-- you lived in Latvia. Where? 

GREGOR: In Latvia, all my life, all my schoolings, everything in Latvia, yeah. In the town where we live was Libau. And in-- in Latvian it's called Liepaja And in Russian it's called Libava 

LAUREL VLOCK: What was your family life like? 

GREGOR: I beg your pardon? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Your family life, what was it like? 

GREGOR: Well, our family life, we were, I believe, six children, four sisters and two brothers. And we all, we had a little small factory of soft water drinks. And the whole family worked in the [INAUDIBLE], no outsiders at all. It was very small. And the family was a Hasidic family and were observant. And we were the only factory in Libau closed on all holidays and Shabbat. And the atmosphere was a beautiful atmosphere, a very peaceful atmosphere. 

And life, this was a small town, but, uh, a beautiful little town. The whole town is on the water, on the Baltic Sea. Now, I've, as a youngster, I don't want to go into it, maybe, it's a long story, somebody heard me sing. I always sang as a choir boy in the-- the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] what was called, the only temple with a choir, children's choir and adults in a great cantor. And I started to sing there as an altar boy, six years old. 

And we went to a Hebrew day school where my uncle was the chief rabbi [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] was a famous personality in Libau. He was the head of this day school. And as years went on, my parents wanted me to go into the rabbinate. But five generations before me were all Rabbis and cantors. And I don't know what happened, so to say, overnight that this great professor, Professor [SPEAKING GERMAN] from Vienna came to visit, you know, in Libau, his old mother. 

And he heard me sing at a relief concert for the local Jewish hospital a few songs. And after I came down from the stage, I was only 17 years old, not yet 17. It was in the summertime. And he said, seems to me you have a great voice. What are you doing? I said, well, I live here. I studying now. He said, I think you should, uh, try seriously to become a singer. You do have, you are blessed by nature with a beautiful voice. 

And I would like you should sing for me tomorrow. And I did audition for him the next day. And that was very upsetting to me, that after I auditioned and he said you have a great voice, I had to pay for the audition. Anyway, I didn't tell my parents. So it went by, about months, they said, but how can you support yourself? 

Well, my parents haven't approved, they can't send me to Vienna to study. And they said, what can you do? Do you have some trade? I said, well, I know some watchmaking. My uncle in Libau had a watchmaking store. And I always loved watchmaking. And I knew how to fix watches. 

He said, I have many people in Vienna who are watchmakers. They will give you work. I will try to achieve what I can do a scholarship for you in the conservatory. And this was the end of it. And after four weeks, we received mail. And I didn't tell my parents yet. It was German, certainly. My older sister knew languages very well. And he has talked to some people who would like to employ me in Vienna. And he can arrange for a scholarship for me at the [SPEAKING GERMAN] Conservatorium. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What year was this? 

GREGOR: This was in the year 1931, in 1931. 

CREW: Excuse me for one moment-- 

GREGOR: Yes. 

CREW: I'm going to make a very fast change on this because-- 

GREGOR: OK. 

CREW: I'm getting a sound which I think I'll hear less of down here. 

LAUREL VLOCK: He has a very resonant voice. I would imagine that's what-- 

CREW: Yeah, you [INAUDIBLE] with the voice. It's booming right through the microphone. 

GREGOR: Well, I have a little cold. I have a little cold since yesterday, travelling from the Cape with air conditioning all the time. Well, whole family got together, what to do. And my sister sent a letter to the professor. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What year was this, sir? 

GREGOR: And this was in year, I think, 1931. And the family decided finally to send me to Vienna to study, study music, to study voice. My family never had the idea that I will become an operatic singer. This was out of the question. But coming to Vienna and listening to the beautiful music and listening to the-- to such great singers, it was a center of music. 

Well, my professor decided that my future will be as an operatic singer. Family got together $7, I remember, and a ticket. And I came with $7 in my pocket to Vienna to study. It was very difficult. If I would have had another ticket to go back, I would have gone back in two weeks. While what he promised me was, in a sense, true, but not true. You could not work there with a Latvian passport. 

You had to be an Austrian to make a living in Vienna. This was strictly forbidden to work as a student and to earn money, taking away the livelihood from another man. They misunderstood him, what he said. They thought that I live out of the town but I am an Austrian, anyway, I didn't have it. So it was quite a struggle for nine months. He was nice to me. He supported me with meals. And it was difficult. 

In a short time, I had 22 apartments in Vienna. I paid a small amount for two weeks then I had to move out. It was difficult. It was very difficult. And again, it was luck, after nine months I sang again at a relief concert for the Jewish community of Vienna what was called the [SPEAKING GERMAN] in Vienna. This was like in a government. And there again a man, [SPEAKING GERMAN] chief secretary of the [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

And he asked me to sing for his son who is a violinist and who is a conductor in a temple. And this was [SPEAKING GERMAN] It was a big name in Vienna. And he gave me his card. And the next day I sang for him. First question, he asked if I'm Jewish. I said yes. I didn't look Jewish. I was very blonde. And I speak the language German best than-- better than English. I speak many other languages. But German was very, very close to me, the language. And he engaged me to sing as a choir soloist where he was conductor in a temple. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How long were you staying in Vienna? How many years did you stay? 

GREGOR: I beg your pardon? 

LAUREL VLOCK: How many years did you stay in Vienna? 

GREGOR: I stayed for 4 years. I stayed 4 years. It's-- I graduated [SPEAKING GERMAN] Conservatorium. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And then you went back to-- to Latvia? 

GREGOR: No. In my first engagement was in Switzerland and [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] was one of the leading tenors. I created 12 major parts. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Well, how did you get interned in the Riga ghetto? What made you go back to Latvia? 

GREGOR: Well, this is a very good question. I went back to Latvia that the Latvian counsel in Vienna, as long as I was a student, I didn't have to go back to make my military duty. Everyone in Latvia at the age of 21, you had to go into to do your military duty as a soldier for 11 months, everyone. And now, that they heard that I am not anymore a student in Vienna and I reached 21, my 21 birthday, if I wouldn't have gone back, I could never go back to Latvia to visit my parents. And this was the reason I decided to go back. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So you served in the Latvian army? Uh-- 

GREGOR: I served in the Latvian army for a very short time, yeah. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Not the 11 months? 

GREGOR: Not for a full 11 months. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why? 

GREGOR: The reason, while under this period when I served, the Russians came in and occupied the Baltic without a war. They came in to liberate us. And this why-- this is the reason I didn't finish, even, my military duty. Certainly, Latvia couldn't stand up against Russia. So they occupied Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania without a war. 

LAUREL VLOCK: This was the year, what, when this happened? 

GREGOR: This was the year in-- in, uh, 1939 until 1940. Uh, we happened to be Russian citizens for nine months. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Were you worried about, uh, if, uh, about the Jewish situation at that time? 

GREGOR: Well, the Jewish situation was immediately changed when the Russians came in, immediately. Uh, the first thing, they took away all the big factories and all the big stores. They, at, the people, the intelligentsia, so to say, immediately suffered in this case, you know. The people who have been in my field felt a little bit better, while, up to then, we didn't have Jewish operatic singers in the Riga National Opera. 

Well, I don't know if you're familiar with the Latvian situation, the Latvians, from way back, have been very anti-Semitic. They happened to be the greatest help to-- to the Germans, to the SS, the greatest help. I don't know if you know that's, uh, the last trial in Riga under the Russians, they ask, uh, the Major [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] who was in charge of occupied Latvia, how come they have chosen Latvia and brought in so many German Jews and the hundreds of thousands to be killed in Latvia? 

And the answer in German he gave at this trial was that the [SPEAKING GERMAN], the soil, you know, of Latvian soil was willing to do this dirty work. And also, you must have known through many, many books, that many Latvians sent-- we were-- have been sent to Warsaw to do the killing in Warsaw, also in [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] in [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], in many different places. 90% of the Latvian population became SS in uniform. 

So when the Russians came in, certainly they didn't kill people. But immediately, they liquidated, let's say, they had three daily Jewish newspapers, they cut it down to one daily newspapers, to one daily Jewish newspaper. And my father, an example who was a supporter of all the daily newspapers, he was lost without the Jewish languages. Then the language at home was Yiddish, you know, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

And after six months, they wiped out even the last newspaper. They warned me as I was engaged, you know, in the Riga National Opera, not to go into a synagogue. They will take pictures of me. This doesn't go as-- as an employee of the government that I should be an observant Jew. That doesn't go. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Were are you at all especially concerned? You had been in Vienna when Hitler came to power. So you must have known what the German attitude about Jews was better than other people in Latvia, perhaps? 

GREGOR: Yes, that's true. When-- when, the summer I came back from Switzerland and, uh, Hitler marched into Austria, this is the year I left, but there was no such inkling in anybody's mind-- that-- we knew something is going to be hard. It's propaganda of years back against the Jew, everything else, but we have never heard, then, of concentration camps. And we have never heard then, of killing people. 

This was out, far out of our-- our mind. Even in ghetto, when the first big ghetto was liquidated and they called it [SPEAKING GERMAN] you know, "to bring the people to different places." And the [SPEAKING GERMAN], the people who were left the ghetto, you know, they all were killed, you know? Only later, years back, we knew about it, what happened to our people when they liquidated the big ghetto. And the-- the ghetto, in Riga, the big ghetto lasted only 37 days. And then they cut it down to a small ghetto for people, younger people, who still could work, who still can help. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You were in the Riga ghetto? 

GREGOR: I beg your pardon? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Were you in the Riga ghetto? 

GREGOR: I was in the big ghetto. And then, I was separated from my wife and her mother, separated from my family in a smaller ghetto. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Because you could work? 

GREGOR: Because, you know, younger people, still could work, still could help. But sick people, elderly people, and youngsters, they didn't need. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why didn't they take your wife? 

GREGOR: There were very few youngsters in Riga ghetto. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Very few youngsters? 

GREGOR: Very few youngsters. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why didn't they take your wife with you to the smaller ghetto? 

GREGOR: Why? They? They could-- they separated immediately, the men from the women, and there was no choice. My wife could have gone with me. They selected 300 young women only from the big ghetto, only 300 young women. And the ghetto in Riga, when they made the selection, approximately about 5,000 men, only a few youngers-- youngsters, only 5,000 men. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How long were you in the small ghetto? 

GREGOR: Now, the small ghetto where I lived for a short time only, from the small ghettos, they selected workers every day to go out for slave labor work. Then they had [SPEAKING GERMAN], they call it, where people worked under their supervision in town all the time. And they didn't go back to the ghetto. They stayed there in the cellar overnight. They had for them this was called a good [SPEAKING GERMAN]. At least you have enough food and you had a bed to sleep, you know? I, for instance, was work-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: What was the word you used? A Kazanero? Wha-- what was that wo-- 

GREGOR: I beg your pardon? 

LAUREL VLOCK: What was that word that you used, a good what? 

GREGOR: [SPEAKING GERMAN], it's called. Well, they selected you from the ghetto, to be, I worked with other 12 Jews in this on-- on [SPEAKING GERMAN] it's called, a street. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What does the word mean? 

GREGOR: [SPEAKING GERMAN] That says had you stay overnight and you worked there at the place. And they didn't bring you back to the ghetto. They selected people particular who could speak their language. Well, I worked in this place. It's called, uh, um, a litt-- let's say, a motel. This house was converted for a motel for officers only. And they could stay there for three nights only. And then they went to the front, officers. 

We then had, I must tell you this, that already we had the yellow star on the left-hand side and the big star, you know, in the back. And for Jews, we're not allowed to walk on the sidewalks, only in the middle of the street, and not alone, only with a German guard. Well, many times we had to go from our working place to the ghetto. Particular tools, when I needed a tool, I worked as an electrician as many, many different work, you have to know-- you have to do something as specialist to stay, really, alive. Otherwise, they didn't need you. 

At this place where I worked, and I worked most of the time nights. And they used to come in, you know, the officers, and to register them and take away their luggage, this was my job. And some of my friends and colleagues worked downstairs in the cellar at the heating system. All slave labor, one was a doctor, a physician who worked, uh, with me. 

And we stayed at least, I must say, we had it better by not being in the ghetto with the other people and having a place where to sleep and food. And a lot of stealing went on, particularly food. This was all in our mind how to steal food. And you could exchange food, you know, for other things. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who were you stealing from? Where would you steal from? 

GREGOR: Well, I'll tell you funny s-- give you an example. When they send you out to work at the port, Riga had a big port, and their food came in, particular liquor. And this was the time that you could organize, it's called, some of the liquor and change this for bread. You didn't need liquor. I, um, have gone to the ghetto a day before the little ghetto was liquidated completely. After the signal, you know, in the Warsaw ghetto, and this is very well known, that's they collected ammunition. 

In every small ghetto we had this idea not to die as sheep, you know, and to have, you know, at least kill a few Germans and a few Latvians. And everyone was obligated to bring-- bring in ammunition and whatever you could to the ghetto. Now, I must tell you a very interesting story. The man who was in charge where I worked was [SPEAKING GERMAN]. This was his name. He was in charge. 

And as I-- he came, it was 12:30 at night, from a movie, from drinking, he was drunk. And this house has an-- had an elevator. And I was bringing him up the elevator and he said to me in German, certainly, that tomorrow the whole ghetto is going to be, on Monday, this was on Saturday night, that the whole ghetto is going to liquidate and all the sick people and the children left will be eliminated. And I didn't know if this is true or not. 

And the next day, 6 o'clock in the morning, And I had to wake him up. He had to make that report to the [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And matter of fact, at 6 o'clock in the morning in his own home, I listened to the broadcasting from London, was-- was strictly forbidden. But he was so drunk, I knew he would not be awake. And I listened. Then, the news, you know, it was very important for our people to bring in, that the front is coming closer, you know, that the Germans are losing. That was very important. 

And as I listened to the broadcast, I was shaking him. And he said throw cold water on me. Then he had to be in the [SPEAKING GERMAN] 7 o'clock in the morning. Now, I didn't know then but he'd told me. That this is a true story, that all the Jews are going to be liquidated. All of them who are not going out for work on Monday morning as working people. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How, uh, h-- what year was this? 

GREGOR: This was in the year in 1943, 1944. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You had not gone to concentration camp? All this time you were-- 

GREGOR: Not yet. Not yet. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Your wife and-- 

GREGOR: This-- after this ghetto was liquidated then everybody went to concentration camp. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Your wife and your-- your-- your child, your parents and all, were you worried about them? Did you know where they were? 

GREGOR: Not at all. I know my parents in Latvia, in Libau, we had so many rumors that Libau, not a single Jew is left. And this is true. They are finding far few people left from Latvia, in particular, not in the small cities. They were all liquidated. Early, in 1942, my parents and my sisters and brothers. They were all were liquidated then. 

I know that in 1942, my father was taken away, I heard it from some other people. This was before Yom Kippur night. And he never returned, certainly. Nobody ever returned, you know. Now, I want just to tell you this story that I told [SPEAKING GERMAN] that I have to go into ghetto. I want to relate this message to the whole ghetto. And I had a friend who cut three fingers off his, in Riga, he's in L-- in New York, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a dear friend of mine who cut three fingers in electric saw in, um, in my place, where I worked. 

And he had to return back to the ghetto while he couldn't work. And he was bandaged with-- with paper bandage, nothing, you know. And as I came into the ghetto, I couldn't go alone. I had to have a German who was leading me into the ghetto four miles from my place where I worked. And he was very mad, this was on a Sunday morning, that I disturbed his Sunday. So I had this bottle of Hennessy what I stole the same week before. 

And I gave him the bottle of Hennessy, should keep quiet. The reason why I said to myself I have to go, I need some electric tools. And, you know, in ghetto, we had plenty of different things, you know, Jewish people know how to organize and how to-- how to get along. And this was the reason I couldn't go alone. He on a bicycle. His name was Schmidt. I remember it like today. He was a corporal in-- in the SS. And he on a bicycle, I running after him in the ghetto. 

And I came into the ghetto, I saw to this Mis-- Mr. Parkin? this is another great story, you know, another great story. Eh, what-- what I heard, I don't know if it's true or not, I just said to him, you must see to it that you and anybody who can work should go out tomorrow morning as a working man, not as a sick and not remaining in the ghetto, while i said everybody who is going to remain in the ghetto is going to be liquidated. And this was true. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What, um, you were a singer. You were a cantor. 

GREGOR: Well, excuse me, in Europe, I-- I was never-- never a cantor. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Oh, when you were a singer, in the place where you lived, this sort of little ghetto outside the ghetto, you had other people with you, did you sing in order to keep their spirits up? 

GREGOR: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What kind of songs? 

GREGOR: This is recorded in many books, in Max Kaufman's book, that I kept up the morale particular at night when everything was quiet to sing them songs, songs of hope. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you remember any that you sang? 

GREGOR: Well, many of the songs what was familiar to them in Latvia, you know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Can you sing one? 

GREGOR: In those years to give them hope. Uh. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Can you s-- 

GREGOR: With many poems that I have written myself, Jewish poems. And uh, many of them I don't remember. I have created some of them here. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Can you sing or-- or-- 

GREGOR: It's only in Yiddish language. 

LAUREL VLOCK: I know, but you said in Latvian, there were some songs in Latvian. 

GREGOR: Well, in-- in Latvia songs, most of the songs for-- for hope, um, I sang in Latvian was from a man [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] who perished in 1942 in Krakow in a burning synagogue, they put in, this man. Uh, he created, you know, the famous song [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] you know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How does that go? 

GREGOR: And, uh, [SINGING IN LATVIAN] 

Many of the songs, you know, what people used to bring in from different ghettos, different concentration camps, you know. And many of the songs, today, when they are printed, I heard them the first time in concentration camps. Now, after this ghetto was liquidated, all the remaining Jews of Latvia were sent in-- in a concentration camp outside of Riga. And many few people know about it. And the name of this camp was Kaiserwald. 

Now, one thing I must tell you, in Kaiserwald hundreds of people were killed. But we didn't have yet a crematorium. We didn't have a chimney in Kaiserwald. And now, when the front came closer and closer, again, the sick people and the old people, they liquidated them. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How did they kill them? 

GREGOR: And then the rest of us were sent with the last ship going out from Riga. In 1944, we came to Stutthof. I showed you my original jacket in Stutthof. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Uh, would you hand him his jacket? The Stutthof, uh, Stutthof was in that-- 

GREGOR: Stutthof was not far from Danzig, a big city, Danzig. This is my original jacket. Every prisoner, every had a number. We never had names. We had a number. And this little sign means that you are Jewish. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How were you-- can you hold that up a moment? How were you able to keep that jacket? 

GREGOR: Now, this and the day I was liberated. I, this was my only possession. I said, I must take it a long to show the world the real Nazi Germany, what they have done to us. Very few survived from Latvia, I want you to know this, very few. The population in Latvia in 1941 was only 100,000 Jews all together. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The star is black and I thought the star was usually-- 

GREGOR: Well, in concentration camp, you know, they had-- they didn't have-- only in different camps, they had the yellow stars. In Stutthof I will tell you why, in Stutthof there were only 3,000 Jews left. And this-- it was a camp of 100,000 inmates. Now, who were the other 100,000? Political prisoners, the whole Norwegian police, 42 men, beautiful looking men, they are locked in. But they didn't go out, most of the people don't-- didn't go out for slave labor work. 

They received packages from the American Red Cross. From the American Red Cross, they used to receive packages. We used to stay behind the windows, and used to throw us a little piece of bread. That's all what was in your mind, was-- was how to stay alive was bread. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Ho-- 

GREGOR: You know, the chimney in Stutthof, we were burning 24 hours, nonstop. I want you to know that many of the people, there are thousands and thousands of people who were never in the concentration camps. They have never seen Stutthof. They had railroads going direct, you know, to the gas chambers. And from the gas chambers into the oven. 

And our own people, a commander of 20 Jewish people, helped them, those poor people, to bring them in. They thought that they would stay alive, you know? But they had better food than we. They selected them. Because they didn't have a choice. But some of the people wanted to be there, you know, and help us poor people going into the chambers. It was called, you know, that they have to undress themself and take a bath. 

And I want you to know, as many years now, 35 years went by, now, I personally feel it's more difficult now than 35 years ago. The smell of human flesh comes back to your nostrils. And you asked me before a question, about how everybody su-- survived a different way. And I must mention this. I survived to a good Christian who helped me all the way. And this happened in Danzig. 

See, when he came to this huge camp, workers, I mean, directors used to come from all over to select specialists. And the first thing, whatever trade you have, they didn't need anyone who was a singer or a doctor or a professional. They didn't need those things. Better to say that you are not a singer, that you are a mechanic. This was important. 

And as we were standing there with one of my colleagues, the colleague was, now, was a great cellist, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And we talked to each other. The next profession, whatever they call, we have to run out. Otherwise, it's not good. To stay there in the camp, this was your end. As a working man, you had always a chance to steal and to get food. 

Now, they called electric welders. And we both ran out. First, you had to run 200 meter to see that your health is still good, that your physical health is still OK. And the rest who could not make it the 200 meters were sent on the left-hand side. And we know the answer, they were-- they were [SPEAKING GERMAN], that called. They were food for the oven, immediately. They didn't go back to the barracks. They went immediately you know, to the oven, to the gas chamber, to the oven. 

Now, as we came out, and this director asked me how long did I work as an electric welder, I said five years. Five years? OK. And the same night, they send us by a transport to [SPEAKING GERMAN] in Danzig. This is a place where they used to build the boats. They still build the boats today. It's one of the biggest companies. 

Then, as I came along with other six men at this [SPEAKING GERMAN], you know, where they used to produce U-Boats, in-door, U-Boats parts, U-Boat had six parts. And the man, the master who was in charge gave me a mask and the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] And he told me this is the place and this is what you have to do. They way, apparently, I took the mask and the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], he knew. 

Are you a mechanic? I said, yes, I'm a fine [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I am a watchmaker. He said, who needs watchmakers here? So he got angry, took the mask back, and the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and showed me how to do it, you know, how to weld. And we were an-- very anxious to do it. First, it's under a roof, you know? And you get something to eat. And in a short time, I became a very good welder. From 12-- I worked only nights, I want you to know, only nights. 

And from 12:00 to 12:30, they had a coffee break, so to say. Very few Jews only left. And they had Italian, French work-- all kind of workers. They had a half an hour at break and they used to get hot soup and bread, not the Jewish workers. 

I want you to know, all the workers had this jacket on. You could not escape that you are-- and as I was pulling on a-- on a big crane, one piece to another piece to combine them together, one of my colleagues wanted to be very helpful and said, you see this man, he's-- he's an opera singer. He called me over. He was eating a sandwich. He said, why did you lie to me? And I said, I am a mechanic, but I was not an electric welder. 

And from this time on, he said to me, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. From me, you don't have to be afraid of me. I am not a German. I am a Danziger. As you know, Danzig was a free state. He didn't consider himself as a German. And from this night on, this man didn't know what to do for me. Then our place to-- to s-- to work, to sleep, was 20 miles, by trains they transported them, in a small train, to work at the [SPEAKING GERMAN] in Danzig. 

And in this camp, we didn't have water. A camp without water, I want you to know this. And typhus, and all kind of sickness we had this in this camp. But they allowed us to take in a can, water from our working place. Now, this man built for me an-- another can underneath and poured in his soup, I should have soup. And as we marched out from the working place, they controlled us constantly. And we didn't have heat. And everyone was obligated to take a piece of coal or a piece of wood and get it under your arm and march out like this, they shouldn't control you, you know. 

This man, the first thing, he used to come in, he used look for a piece of wood and not to go longer than my coat. They shouldn't see it. This was his first job, this wonderful, wonderful man. I want you to know that the first thing after I was released from the hospital, from a Russian military hospital, then, the Russians liberated us. The front was going a different way. And I went on a special permit by the Russians after I was four months in the hospital with typhus-- that's a terrible sickness, I was reduced to 80 pounds at the end of the war-- to find this man. 

I could not find him. Then, Danzig was bombed out. There was not a place to stay for me overnight. There was not a single house left. They leveled that. While there was a big port, all the ship's upside down. You know? This man, and I wish we would have had more gentle people like him. Now, many of the gentle people, they are much afraid even to talk to you. They thought immediately you know, they had some connection with them. 

This man didn't know what to do for me. You know, this bringing in, not only food, the soup, but bringing in wood for the stove was very important. Important first, for body heat, and secondly for the terrible lice we had. So we used to heat this oven in the center. In the barrack, we had one-- some 40, 50 people. And we used to take off the clothes. 

And the-- the lice, they used to pop. By-- this was the only way to get rid of them. I've never-- you should never see it, lice, big ones. They had almost a cross on their back. And how-- that's the way they used to pop from your clothes. And through the lice, that's why we all were infested, you know, with-- with typhus. And this man was so wonderful and marvelous to me, at the end of-- of this [SPEAKING GERMAN], they knew the front is coming closer. 

He used to bring me, you know, a razor to shave to look better. In the moment you look like a [SPEAKING GERMAN], they didn't need you. That's my health is still better, a shaver. And he made a-- another key to his toolbox, then he changed to days work and I worked only night, that I should go to his tool box and take out some food and some razors to shave yourself. 

He also dared to do and to put on a pair of working pants and the pants were from this material, too. And we went in on an empty U-Boat. And he asked me to undress myself. And he gave me a working pair of pants up to here. And he brought me in-- in the working place for a shower. You know what that meant? A shower? To have a shower on your head. And I fainted immediately. But my German was very good. We talked, you know, to each other. And he let me have a shower. The shower was only-- not for Jews, only for the Gentile workers. 

And after my field, what were called, was liquidated. And they didn't have any more material for my field. And he knew that I had to go working on the water. And he didn't want me to go out in the bitter cold working on the port, you know. There when you didn't do it right they pushed you in the water like nothing, like flies. You know, they didn't care about you. 

So he went to another master under a roof and he said, I have a marvelous worker for you. He is an excellent specialist. And he brought me in to this specialist. Now, the man gave me a blueprint. And I tell you, I didn't know should I hold it this way, this way, I couldn't read a blueprint. And he said, in back are all the parts, 38 parts, and you have to put them together. 

And this was a gadget what the Germans find out after, by the end of the war, when a U-Boat goes down and it can't come up anymore, one by one, they pushed out the human being under the water to come up top. And I worked on this-- on this part. And as I was anxious to put it together, I called the new master and said, is this right? He said, I don't know. 

He didn't know himself. He said a French worker worked on this project here. But they took him away to another part. And he was nice. And he started to work with me, helping me along. And he put the blueprint in the proper perspective. I didn't know even how to hold it. And when one gadget was ready, I was not so stupid, I followed the numbers. And then I put. 

And this master, the old one, used to come every day to visit me. And he used to yell and scream, this must be ready. And then used to come closer to me, in the corner, you will find some bread for you. The [SPEAKING GERMAN] bread, you know, soldiers bread. He used to bring me, this man. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why-- wha-- what motivated him to help you? 

GREGOR: Excuse me, I didn't hear. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What motivated him to help you? 

GREGOR: He said to me when he heard that I am an operatic singer, he said, and you have to do this slave labor only while you are born a Jew? This was his first remark. He couldn't get it in-- what did you commit? To them, you know, to the outside world, when you have these clothes on, they thought you were a prisoner, you were a murderer, you are something, to the outside world. So he could not understand. He said, this is why they locked you in? For you are a Jew? So to them, it was something, was new. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did he ever ask you to sing for him? 

GREGOR: No. He never asked me to sing for him. 

LAUREL VLOCK: He never heard you sing? 

GREGOR: He never heard me sing. 

LAUREL VLOCK: He just believed that you were? 

GREGOR: He believe while through my language. And I know so many languages and everything else. And he asked what opera, what opera did you sing? And I said the Rigoletto and the Pagliacci and Butterfly and Tosca, what I created so many times, you know, in German and in Latvian language. In the Riga National Opera, they sing only in Latvian language. Only two operas we sing in Russian. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] I mean, and then Russians came into us, you know. 

But this man, I'm tell you, everyone will tell you a different story how they survived. And it's true. And I must tell you if I am an American born here and to listen to those stories, I could not believe that you could survive with the treatment and seeing these killings daily. And to hold back a man who died with me on the same bed on top, you know, and not to report him, while to get his piece of bread. 

Can you imagine a thing like this? Not to report him. And only at night, you had to lay out the-- the dead people, too. They have to count them. The Germans, everything must be exactly, must be, the count must-- must be exactly. And if it's not, if somebody is-- is-- it's-- it doesn't coordinate with their books, they used to stay for two, three hours, an appeal, it's called, 'til everything was intact. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The man did you ever find him? 

GREGOR: Never. Never. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you know his name? 

GREGOR: His name was Danziger. As Danzig, his name was Mr. Danziger. Short man, I see his face in my dreams all the time. Such a kind man, could not get it in his head why do people have to suffer while they are born Jews. For what? And he himself, had to be very careful, you know? Always yelling at me and screaming at me and then, coming closer, said, here, we're gonna find some bread. He even finds a piece of wood. While they, too, were watched very much, not to be a J-- a Jew lover, you know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: When you were in this work situation, you were going back 20 miles to this camp, did you ever lead people in songs so that they would keep up their spirits? 

GREGOR: Now many, many times, everybody in the camp knew that I am singer. Most of them were my Latvian Jews, they heard me in many parts, you know. And, uh, they always, always, not so much in this little camp, when the camp was so infested with typhus and everybody was way down and while it was so sick, you know. 

And at this last-- and then, from this camp, you know, when the front came closer, they called in all the prisoners, you know, and we went back to the big camp. And from the big camp, we marched about three weeks with-- with nothing. We lost hundreds of people at this march. From this place they thought they will establish another place for us where to work. 

LAUREL VLOCK: I press you about the singing because I have heard and I wondered if it was true that even in these terrible conditions, sick, uh, uh, thin, uh, skinny, that people sang. 

GREGOR: Now, in this story about my-- This Is Your Life film, as the last boat went out with the prisoners on the bottom, it was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I want you to know this. And the ship going from Riga to Stutthof that this became. And then, there was many people already dying in the boat. I raised my voice to God to sing [SPEAKING GERMAN] in the bottom of the ship. 

This was recorded, you know, all the books and all over. Whenever, you know, I was in the mood, if I could help, we tried to help each other. But I must tell you, that most people in the concentration camps became like animals, like animals. There, you could see the real character of a human being, particularly, those people who have been very wealthy in time of peace, they could not take it. They were the first ones who died, the first ones. 

We have come from a very poor home, you know, we knew a little bit about suffering and not having all the luxuries. We could get along much better, much better. But the people themselves, you know, intelligent, highly intelligent people, they could kill you but for a piece of bread, your own people. You know, in the morning, 5:00 in Stutthof you used to get a piece of [SPEAKING GERMAN] bread for the whole day. 

Now, all of us were very hungry. We used to eat it up every crumb with both hands. And those of us with a little bit more sense and still your mind still was working good, I myself cut this piece in four pieces and I had one piece immediately. And the other three I put in my pocket. It was a lot of pains And you constantly had to control yourself, yes, you still have it. 

Then, stealing went on constantly. See, they didn't let you-- even, you didn't go out of work, this day, let's say, they didn't let you into the barracks. In sleet, in the rain, you had to stay outside. The only heat we used to get in Stutthof was body heat. That's, we stayed close together. And it was amazing to me as being brought up in a very strict orthodox home that some of them smuggled in, we don't know how, a pair of [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], you know, what you put on-- on your hand and your head. 

And people used to give up a piece of bread to let them put that [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] It was remarkable, you know, to say-- to say prayers. Used to give up a piece of their bread to let them have the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] to put on. We don't know how they got it in. Then, the few pictures I had from my family was destroyed, right, in this camp, too. Everything was taken. We had to undress completely. They shaved your hair. You could not have anything in your possession, you know. 

Now, this was the only heat. And they used to give us a coffee with this bread, a [INAUDIBLE] it used to be called. Now, everybody was pushing to get to the end of the line. Why? To get the thickness of the chicken to get something in your stomach. This was constantly in your mind, how to get more food. So everybody used to-- not to get the watery part, but to get the thickness of it. 

And what's remarkable was so little food still to stay alive and to have all your faculties, you know, working. Some people say, how come you still have your teeth, you know? You know, and didn't you have a dentist? So sometimes ridiculous, foolish questions, you know? I will tell you, people who suffered their whole life with heart attacks and bad stomachs, they were cured in concentration camp. But their mind was not anymore on their sickness, their mind was how to get a piece of bread and they were cured in concentration camp. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Were you saying that people would try to steal the bread out of your pocket? Is that what you were-- 

GREGOR: Your own people. Your own people. That's all what was in your mind, it was food. How to get more food into your stomach. You didn't care about-- about anyone, about nothing. You know, how to getting more food. And the [INAUDIBLE] were very sad when it was overloaded. The people used to come in. They didn't have enough room. It was three deckers, you know, two and two, one head here, another head here. That's the way you used to sleep. 

And-- and it was overloaded. They needed more space. So they played tricks. And we never knew in the morning, the third man, four steps forward. So we didn't know, is it for good, is it for bad, for what reason? Are you going to stay? Or are you going into the oven? This was-- This was-- then, you didn't have, uh, this was very clear to us. It wasn't like in the beginning, we never could visualize that a people like Germany where we were-- to start it in Germany, such a high-cultured people became like barbarians, like murderers, all of them to listen to one man, to one man. Who-- who-- 

That's why it's very difficult now, too. What's going on, you know, today in Iran, you know. Under that particular, yet, under the name of religion, what is terrible. When you-- I heard, too, this morning news, you know, that they are calling a special UN meeting to condemn Israel and to see to it to create a Palestine as free-state, a special meeting. Not a special meeting for the Jews who suffered so much. 

And I feel, too, the creation, the few who survived, that's how Israel was created. The world had a little bit of mercy on us. When I heard this news this morning that the UN in a special meeting to create a Palestine state, who their slogan I don't have to tell you, it's known to anybody else, tis to call it Israel again. Israel was created through the ashes of the concentration camps. 

LAUREL VLOCK: When you were liberated, did you find any members of your family in Latvia? 

GREGOR: None. I mean, the first-- the first thing, you know, I went never back. I mean, I didn't go back. While we know, eh, we have known Russia before, you see. Most of the people from Latvia who have experienced the Russian occupation, you know, and what happened to our Jewish culture, you know, never went back, you know, to look for our beloved ones. But we have known the story, you know, that nobody is left, nobody is alive. I had two sisters who immigrated to Israel as youngsters, both illegal came to Israel. 

Since then, you know, they've both already died. And in our home, this was a tragedy then, as they left as children. While they were [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] And inspired by the Zionist movement, one sister left in a fictitious marriage. A boy had a certificate to go to Israel and he could take along his wife under that English mandate. 

And my other sister who was active in Maccabi a sport organization, were sent with five other athletes to participate in 1936 at the Olympiada in Israel. And she never returned. And under name, she went underground with the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And those were my only two sisters who-- who were left 

LAUREL VLOCK: What-- what-- 

GREGOR: They died. And I'm only, the only survivor from my family of 72, now. The only survivor. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Sir, we're running out of time. And I just wanted to ask you one last question. From all of this experience of years of concentration camps, of work camps, and so forth, what has it left you with? What do you feel now about what happened to you? 

GREGOR: Well, it's a feeling, you know, that's the few who survived. And what you are doing now, I think, is very important. That's, we are getting older and the story should be told again and again and again, the unbelievable story, while it's real. And soon, this will become, you know, history and none of us will be left. But to give you a message of hope is never to give up, never to give up. It's the-- the Jewish idea, you know. It's-- we-- 

Those of us who knew the history of the Jews, you know, we went through many [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. We went through Spain and we went through Babylonian. And still, we remained-- we remained Jews. You know, a small remnants, for sure, but we remain. And I feel, even today, um, by the grace of God, that could happen any place. That's why there should be a warning. There should be-- 

The world has not learned yet a lesson, that one man can turn around and-- and millions of followers, particularly when it comes to religion, this is possible, but it could happen anywhere. That's why we have to be on guard. We have to be very careful. Now, I feel a little bit more secured while we have Israel, little Israel, what we have to support all the time, all the time, our only refuge, god forbid, if something should happen. 

And the American people have been very generous. They stay here, they support Israel and everything else. But we have to tell the story again and again and again and again, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], you know, you should remember. And I felt a little bit uncomfortable to record my story and the story of our people and [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And then I couldn't sleep the whole night. I said to myself-- I said to myself, maybe this is the proper day to record this story [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

Reading last night, lamentations [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and this morning, I personally felt their tragedy 2,500 years back was not as great as this in modern times, to have this horrible holocaust. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Eh, I--I-- I had to had-- have to have you end there, because it was so powerful. 

GREGOR: Well, it's-- it's just-- 