SUBJECT 1: Is it interesting for you? I told you because I-- we were not in a concentration camp. We were just in ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We've interviewed a lot of people who haven't been in camps, and it's interesting. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah? OK. No, I think you are going to see my husband. 

SUBJECT 2: You must realize I was in-- in the Chernovitz ghetto too. 

SUBJECT 1: Pardon? 

SUBJECT 2: I was in the Chernovitz ghetto myself. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes? Oh, this is interesting. But do you remember something? 

SUBJECT 2: A little, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Where did you live? 

SUBJECT 2: We lived-- I don't remember. 

SUBJECT 1: On what street? You don't remember? 

SUBJECT 2: Taboragasse. You know it? 

SUBJECT 1: Pardon? 

SUBJECT 2: Taboragasse. Tabora. 

SUBJECT 1: Taboragasse. Yeah. See, they had German names back then. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, we are. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We are. OK, fine. 

SUBJECT 2: I was born in January, 27th of January, 1914 in a city called Siret in Bukovina, Northern Bukovina. And it's Siret because there's a river called by that name, Siret. And I was the only son. My parents were Chaim and Gittel. And I had four sisters. 

My father was modern but very religious and knew a lot of Talmud and Hebrew. He was brought up very knowledgeable in Yiddish and-- I mean, Jewish studies. And he didn't want his son to go to public schools. He thought it was a waste of time. So he kept me in cheder and teaching day and night, day and night until-- and he used to pay a fine every year, because it was compulsory to send your kid to elementary school. But he would say send every year, pay the duty. He was in business. 

Until when I was nine years old. They came to arrest him. He doesn't send his son to school, they're going to put him in jail. And this is when he decided that he took a private tutor for me. And within two months, I passed in one day two exams, the elementary school and the admission to lyceum, to the school. 

Then I went to the state lyceum in Siret for eight years. And I passed my baccalaureate in Chernovitz. You could not pass in the city where you went to school. After I passed my baccalaureate, while I still continued to study Jewish studies, Talmud and the prophets, part time, even when I was still 15 or 16, I had private teachers teaching in cheder. 

And then after I passed my baccalaureate, things were very economically for my parents. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was about what year? 

SUBJECT 2: This was 19-- I was 17 when I passed baccalaureate. I was born in '14. That's '31. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Early '30s. 

SUBJECT 2: 1931. The Romanian-- the Romanian government had just passed a law a year or two before, that everything the peasants owed the Jews they don't have to pay. And my father, all his-- all he had was because he was in the construction business. So he would give the peasants to build houses. So everything he had to pay what he owed the bank, but they didn't have to pay him. So he really went, like, bankrupt, and we had a very tough time. 

So I registered to Chernovitz at the old university in chemistry and so on for one year. In 1932, he sold part. He had a few things of real estate, and he says he wants me to be a doctor. First, he taught me I should really be a rabbi or whatever it was, but who knows what? But then he found out that I'd rather be a doctor. 

So I went to-- , yeah I tried to get admitted first to Iasi, Bucharest, but we had numerous closes in Romania. You really couldn't get in there. With all the exams, it was really ridiculous. There was only two, three doctor so you could be admitted. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And why could you not get in? 

SUBJECT 2: Because I was a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because you were a Jew. Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: I went several times to Iasi. I went to Cluj, to Bucharest, and could not be accepted because I was a Jew. So I tried-- at that time, it was hard to get in, even in Prague, in Czechoslovakia and Austria. Anyway, another one or two from the city went to Italy to study. And they could recognize the first year I lost. They would admit me in the second year, so I wouldn't lose the first year I went. Because I had credit in chemistry and so on, they considered this pre-med. 

So I went to Italy, and started to study medicine there, first in Padua. I was two years in Padua. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your family at this time remained? 

SUBJECT 2: They remained in Siret. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I see. 

SUBJECT 2: They remained in Siret. And by that time, my older sister got married. Before that she married I was still in high school. And nobody else, really. So it was very tough for my parents to keep me in medical school. Even though it was not easy for me to study either, with very little money. 

But then I came back, because they just couldn't afford to keep me. After two years, I think, I interrupted, came back home, and right away I had to go into the army. Because I was by that time 20 years old, and they drafted me. I didn't get any extension because of studying. So I went for one year. Being that I had a baccalaureate, I had only one year to do army in Falticeni, which was a city in Moldavia. 

And when I came back from there, my father needed to made a little money probably selling again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the army like? 

SUBJECT 2: Where? The army? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like? 

SUBJECT 2: The army was not good. It was very bad for Jews. Especially in Falticeni. It's in Moldavia, [INAUDIBLE] the city. And the regiment, they used to call it in German a Straf-- Strafregiment. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Punishment? 

SUBJECT 2: They lost-- they lost the flag during a battle before. So everybody else had to suffer, because who knows how many years before that, the regiment-- so "Dorobanti 16" it was called. 16 Dorobanti. The regiment was a penal-- a penalty regiment. It had all the worst things, they would send there. So we were sent there. Typhus was raging. There was no water in the city. They used to sell water. 

We passed for Falticeni, by the way. [We didn't stop. But I was what you call in German Einjaehrig. because I had baccalaureate. And I tried to work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was the Romanian Army? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, Romanian Army, 1936. In other words, when I came back in '35, I did not go back. I stopped one year, doing the army in Falticeni. It was '35, '36. But at the end somehow around, May, March, April-- it was Easter time-- there already started to really be anti-Semitism in Romania. The Guard, the Guardists and all this business too have an influence. And they wrote all to the regiment that Jews should not be trusted to bear any rifles or anything like that. So we'd be used in offices, especially Jews who came from Bukovina, which was before Austrian. 

Now, they did not trust the Jews in these areas at all. Never did. They always considered them as second grade citizens and not trustworthy, Bukovina and Bessarabia also, by the way. So they had nothing to do with us. We were 10 or 12 Jews. So they sent us home in April or May. We did not finish even the year there. 

So I came home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was that a good experience or a bad experience, to be sent home that way? 

SUBJECT 2: It was good. It was better than being there, because it was really-- the city was-- with the mud, a very bad city. And we were really treated very, very bad. I cannot say that I was hit or really-- not because I-- others were, by the way. Even from the students. From the--. 

But I had not my own family. My aunt, she came from that part of the country. Her family had nearby all these glass factories in her Falticeni. And he made sure-- you know, I went in when I came to Falticeni, introduced myself-- that I get a few days off when I wanted, and that they don't really give me a very hard time. So I had it a little bit better even though I did not have money that time to give to the officers. You had to scm---. 

But then I came home, and I had nothing to with myself, so I started to tutor. So I get some money, because my parents had still-- my father still was not making much or very little. And of course, you know, a young man going on a small town, right away, they read you a shidakh. You know, what's he going to do? You understand shidakh? You understand what it means, shidakh?" 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, what does that mean? 

SUBJECT 2: Get me married with someone. Put me up with a girl. 

INTERVIEWER 2: An eligible bachelor. 

SUBJECT 2: And they-- you know, they try to talk me one girl or another. Then one day I had to meet-- my sister, my other sister was already married also and lived in Chernovitz. So I came to have a date with this girl who also studied medicine, by the way, in Italy. And it's not important what came out, but after this my aunt-- I don't know whether Bella told you that I married a cousin. Bella is my cousin. 

She says to me, just like this, her mother, "Why do you have to look around?" Why don't you marry my daughter? So anyway, she said. And this is how my father talked me into it. She says, listen, this way you'll go back and you'll study. So as a matter of fact, the last I went back to study, not to Padua. I went back to Bologna. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I don't understand how being married at that time-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, I did not marry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, but how? 

SUBJECT 2: But I just promised. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And how? 

SUBJECT 2: Eventually I will marry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How were you able to get back to your studies, then? 

SUBJECT 2: Her mother helped me a little bit, her parents. And I had an uncle. He would send me money. My father and brother in the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did your cousin's mother help you? Is that-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bella's mother. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, Bella's mother with some. My parents also had. But I felt like I'd made a commitment. And I finished. I went back to Bologna. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So about 1938, they sent you back to Bologna to finish? 

SUBJECT 2: 1930? No, '37. '36. I missed only one year. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: I went back. I went to Bologna, and I had three more years to do. And I finished in 1939 in Bologna, medical school. And the war already had started, and Mussolini and the whole business. I didn't really know what to do. Go home? Go to the United States? I was in two worlds. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it for you as a Jewish student in Italy at that time? 

SUBJECT 2: Until the war, until the combination Mussolini-Hitler, it was not-- I didn't really feel it. I can say I give credit to this. I didn't-- oh, we lived-- I mean, we had friends, Italian friends, but they didn't really know what a Jew was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were things meanwhile getting worse for your family? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you aware of that? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, yes, yes. And as a matter of fact, by that time, I would get money to support myself from the United States, from my uncle. And so I decided in case I cannot go home, I might as well take the board exam in Italy. You were entitled, you know, you finish school to take the board. And so they sent me to Palermo-- not Palermo. Catania. And I had passed board there, so I can practice in Italy, wherever. 

And by that time came, it was the start of 1940. In other words, I became a doctor in 1939. And sometime during the winter, I passed this board. Spring, I decided, you know, it was very bad already. Hitler was already occupied there. You couldn't go Austria. I decided to go back home. And I went to Yugoslavia, back home to Chernovitz. I mean to Serit. They were still in Serit, my family. 

But I was officially, call it or not, engaged. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you go back, then? 

SUBJECT 2: First of all, I didn't know what the future of the Jews was going to be in Italy. Some of them really didn't make it. Some of them went afterwards to Yugoslavia and the Partisans. Some were sent. Some survived. And I thought it's my duty to come home, you know. I was the only son, my parents were getting older, what to do? What I can help out? 

Who thought at that time that things are going to get-- I really did not know much about what Hitler was going to do, or whether Hitler was going to come in altogether. So I went back. And I started to prepare myself for-- you had to pass an exam in Romania. A board again. It was a very complicated thing. To be able to practice with a foreign diploma in Romania, you had to pass two exams. 

One was called "echivalare." In other words, you had to pass like here the board. And then libra practica, another exam that you can practice medicine. So I got all my papers together, an they sent me to Iasi. Iasi was the university in Moldavia. And I spent there a few weeks to take my exams. 

While I was there, in Iasi, the Russians, the Russians entered. They had a pact with Germany that they would take Bessarabia and a part of Bukovina, which included Chernovitz up to the-- to the border. I mean, they started to march into-- 

And I remember that in Iasi, that we were several students. We woke up in the middle of the night, the Pedell it's called in German. The clerk, the university clerk, to give us the diplomas, because I thought if I have to go back, I must have at least my diploma and that medical exam. 

And it was a very interesting, interesting, memorable trip, because I came by train, which was the last stop. The train wouldn't go further into Chernovitz. It stopped. The station is called Adancata. It's Russian today. To go to Serit, where I was, where my parents lived, my family, you had to take a train at Adancata to Serit. 

And the train stopped there, and I had to make a decision where to go. To go to where my parents are, or to go to Chernovitz, where my bride is. And it was a torture for me, this half, an hour to make the decision. And it was a Friday evening-- I remember this very good-- in that gas station-- a railroad station. 

And I decided to go to Chernovitz, not to go Serit. And the train was leaving for Serit, and I went over to this train. I met a man I knew from that city. I said, "Listen, you will probably see my father tonight, I'm sure, you know, at the synagogue. Tell him you saw me, and that I was going into Chernovitz." 

And so we started to walk. It was a walk of 30 or 40 kilometers. Romanians on one side, and we waited to get in and to the territory where the Russians were already. And it was a very dangerous walking. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were alone? 

SUBJECT 2: No, I was with two others also. We came together from Iasi. We walked along the railroad. And the Romanians gave us a very hard time, because they knew we were going towards the Russians. They were retreating. 

Anyway, we arrived, you know, barefoot, walking. I had my diploma, because the Romanians, you know, took off everything, something. First, my jacket, they tried also. We arrived like gypsies, finally, in the afternoon. I remember they were so happy to see me, you know, Bella's parents, when I walked in. 

But I had in Chernovitz at that time already still two sisters, married by that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They were in Chernovitz? 

SUBJECT 2: They were in Cherno, yes. My both sisters were. And the other, the third sister, was already also in Cherno. You see, in Serit you grew up as a girl. You didn't have ought to do at a certain age. They had to send you to Cherno. It was the big city, to vocational school, or go to school, because Serit had nothing really to offer. You sit there. 

So my third sister was there in Chernovitz, and was I think some kind of a vocational school she was going to, and living with my other sister. And my youngest sister, who is in Israel now, stayed home. She really stayed at the older age with my parents. She probably knows my pants better than I do, I'm sure. 

And so this is what happened. Then the Russians-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you describe what that was like? 

SUBJECT 2: That was a terrible walk. That was absolutely a terrible walk. I think that I came, walked in probably in that house in the afternoon, I must have looked probably gray, because they looked at me and they-- you know, we really didn't know what's going to happen any minute. Because we saw them mad and nervous, retreating. And here the Jews are going away from them, towards the Russians, to their enemies. 

And the Russians didn't really bother us. When we finally at the outskirts of Chernovitz we met finally the Russians. But the walk would usually take only four or five hours, let's say. It took us-- we started out, it was June. So 4:00. It was already daylight. And we came. We arrived at 5:00 in the afternoon, which was quite a walk, because we had to, you know, hide until we finally arrived. 

But I had my diploma with me. I put it in my pocket. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. You said the soldiers took your-- some clothing? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. Yeah, I had a coat with me. And I gave him this, instead of, you know, doing something else. I know what they took from the others, but I think I had my shoes. So why did you walk barefoot through the city? I was so embarrassed, I remember. Not meet anybody who knows me to walk through Chernovitz barefoot. I think I just couldn't walk anymore. I wasn't used to walk that-- and it was that all this-- all this happened in 24 hours. This really was my first bad experience, you know, leaving from a happy life in a university city in Iasi, you know, where we really had a good time. 

But this train, and seeing all that was going on on that train, people trying to save themselves, making a decision where to go. Stay there? Go to the Russians? You know, the decision I had to make, it was quite a-- but we started right away to try to get our parents over the border into-- to be with us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: And they let them go. They took up everything. We waited at a border town in a village, where I had an uncle. Also on the site, a village called-- a small village-- Volchnitz. And they finally came. Now with the city, Serit, if you told them you have children on the other side, they let you go. And we finally brought them, brought my parents over to be with us in Chernovitz. Chernovitz. And then the Russians were there. And I got there, had to get a job. 

As a doctor, you could not as a young doctor stay in the city. So they gave me a choice two or three places. One of the places that gave me a choice. It's Zvenachyn from where, regardless, my family really comes. It's on the Dniester. Zalischiki is on the other side. 

And so I thought I might as well go where the route of the-- there's still some gottesman The route of the gottesman says you know, take this city, take this town. And I went there. I was not married yet. This was-- this is 1940. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you had been engaged for-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, I'd been engaged. My wife was probably 16 when we were engaged. Because I was 21 or 20. And I was there, so I got quite a district. You know, 10 villages or whatever with a horse and carriage. And worked there. I lived, and I took an apartment. And my mother-in-law would come over once and while or send over some food. And I would go in whenever I could. Take the train and go into Chernovitz for a weekend. 

First of all, I had my parents there. I used to stay with my parents when I came in by myself. And then, around February, January, we planned to get married. Because I felt that, you know, the Russians are there and already here. That's what's going to be. We thought they're going to stay forever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It felt relatively safe. 

SUBJECT 2: More or less. I mean, you had-- you had to live on that salary. I couldn't do anything with it, but-- so my mother-in-law, she bought some furnished-- furnished-- this. We lived also-- a relative-- a relative of ours, a cousin somehow related, had this house in that town. They were really relatives. Gottesman, gottesman. 

And he gave us to live in his house, because he was happy to have somebody. Besides, he had to bring somebody in. Otherwise the Russians would take it away. You need one family have a big house. So then I-- we got married in 1941, February 9th. I better don't forget our anniversary day. 

And so we-- we had this apartment. We came to live in that village. There was another doctor there, who was before that. He was there with the Romanians. You know, like a district physician for that area. 

So he was put into a factory nearby, in a village called on the Dniester, on the river, called Kashatik, where they made sugar from-- Reem, what do you call burikes? 

REEM: Beet. Sugar beet. 

SUBJECT 2: Beet. Sugar beet, yeah. And they had quite a bit of employees. He was there, and I took over the district, with all these villages. So every day, I would go to another. And I had an ambulance, ambulatorium, we used to call that. You know, like a first unit of care. 

And he was very good to us. He knew the area, and he helped me to settle down. We had a house, where I had to-- you know, the Russians, right away that everybody, you know, you take peasants. Everybody had to deliver not at home. You know, it was not easy to do that. They wouldn't do it anyway. But we have-- they were forced to come into that [? [SPEAKING RUSSIAN] ?] it's called, I think, in Russian. 

INTERVIEWER 2: An infirmary. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like an infirmary? 

SUBJECT 2: Especially for obstetrics. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh. 

SUBJECT 2: To be there. And as a matter of fact, this Dr. Rauch, we met him now in Suceava, on our trip to Romania we met. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh. 

SUBJECT 2: He and we, we were the only two families who survived that village, by the way. And it was quite an emotional meeting now in Suceava. So we were there. This was February. And we were getting settled. My wife liked this, you know. 

I used to get on the peasants, something for the horse. And there was one woman who would say in Yiddish I should do something for her husband. And she was saying Yiddish, "Befriedigen ayer ferd." "Satisfy your horse." I'd advise you to get some food for your horse. "Befriedigen ayer ferd." I say because this word stayed with us, "befriedigen ayer ferd." 

And then things started-- you know, started to change. The war started, and my mother-in-law and her son Morter, he was still I think 12 years old or less. He is today, he is a guy who is a professor at Columbia. And he-- they moved. They came over to us. 

Because in the meantime, they arrested Bella's, my wife's, father, the Russians, as a bourgeois. Sent him away for jail to Siberia, where he really died. You know. 

So-- so they were-- they came over to stay with us in the village. And when the war started, we really didn't know what to do. Again, we had to decide. We already knew that with the Germans it's very bad. We had an idea at that time that the Germans are going to come. Or even the Romanians are going to ask me, why did you stay as a doctor here? Or ask the other doctor why did you stay? 

And we were afraid to face this reality. And we have-- so we decided. We have-- each one of us had a horse and a wagon. Take something we have and go over to the Russians. The Russians retreated, go with them. And this-- these few days, you know, the retreat could be written in a book of 1,000 pages. Of course, I don't want to go into details in here. 

We retreated to through these villages. And you know, still with Jews, Zalischiki. And we came, finally after two days I'd gone with this carriage. Horse and carriage broke down a wheel in the meantime or something. With the soldiers, with the Russians hurrying. 

And every time they saw a horse, they saw a good horse, they would change the horse and give us a less good horse. So we ended up with practically-- we finally came to a city called Borshchiv, which is on the other side of Kamianets-Podilskyi. Kamianets-Podilskyi is on the other side. And by that time, the Germans were ahead of us. They already had broken the bridge there and followed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me. Could you tell us some of the incidents that happened on that retreat? 

SUBJECT 2: On the retreat? On the retreat? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you give us a flavor of what that was like? 

SUBJECT 2: We-- we were looked very bad by the people, by-- even by the peasants, who saw here are the Jews. You know, there was with us, for instance, Dr. Rauch's father. He was a religious Jew with a beard. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: So there was no question that they knew that he's a Jew. And Dr. Rauch had a little kid with him, a little child. We had no children, Bella and I. But he had his daughter, who today is a-- is a doctor in Suceava, by the way. Already has two children herself. And-- and we-- you know, for me to manage-- you know, I knew how to handle, you know, a horse and a wagon, but it was loaded. And they-- they had tanks and everything was coming, you know, hill down, hill up. 

And so we finally-- OK, it was very hard. Most of the time, we had to walk and push the horse and the wagon. We finally arrived. Starting to get dark in a small village. I forgot-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know where you were going? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, we wanted to go with the Russians into Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But did you have a goal? Or just wanted to get into the deepest part of Russia you could get to? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, we wanted to get away from the Germans. This was really ours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you got there, you say that they had ready anticipated. They were ahead of you. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, no, but-- yeah, but the lady asked me to go before I came to this village something. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh yes, I'm sorry. I got mixed up. Right. 

SUBJECT 2: So it was, we came there. And you know, right away the Jews came out. They didn't know that people are running from the Germans. So we told them, we're running away from the Germans. And they looked at us like a little bit-- you know, you're a little bit crazy. This shows you the mentality of the people who were then killed. All of them, nobody survived. 

They really did not believe. Well, look, people, a doctor, two doctors settled in the city give up everything and run? To where? To the Russians? Because some of them were happy to get rid of the Russians. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-huh. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, you got rid of one thing, you got the worst one. So we tried the whole night. We talked to them, and we told them that what we know about what the Germans are doing and what's going to happen, and we were afraid for them. We were of both, the Romanians and the Germans. But they-- I forgot what the village name was. They were not convinced at all. 

They sent over the guy, the [INAUDIBLE] you know, the guy who was from the community, Jewish community, that talked to us. Tried to convince us, really, to go back or stay there. We-- they didn't believe us. They just-- just couldn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: So in the morning, we kept on going. And we finally came to this place. In the meantime, it got quiet, a little bit quieter out, because the Russians had, most of them, retreated. And they were still going, some of them, on patrols. Like. When we came to a abandoned house in Borshchiv. We went in. We were so tired, exhausted. 

When I say "we," it was my wife, I, my mother-in-law, and her son Morter, and her son, and the other family. We were four people, and they were four people, Dr. Rauch, his wife, the child, father. We went into an empty room, and my mother went out. My mother-in-law went out to see whether she can get some milk or something for the kid and for us something to eat. We haven't eaten anything in a long time. 

So she was a very, you know, popular person, my mother-in-law. She knew Yiddish. She knew right away where to meet friends. And she knew Polish. So she went in right away. And it doesn't take long. She comes back with a man, a gottesman, who is the community leader of that city. Borshchiv. 

And this man-- that's another thing I won't forget-- sat down with us the whole night. Everybody was asleep, except my mother-in-law and I and this man, this gottesman. And he says to me, "Where are you going? You're not going to make it. They're already killing. They're bombarding on the other side the trains and everything. And the bridges are not over-- you know, in Kamianets-Podilskyi It's still time for you to turn around and go back." 

The whole night, this was some night again for decision. And early morning, we decided we'll turn around. We'll go back. He said there's no chance to really make it. The way we were set up with the families. So we turned around, and we went back. And the trip back was worse than the trip to. Because the last-- you know, when you retreat an army, you always let the-- leave soldiers to destroy everything. I know there's a special name in the army. 

These were the guys who met us going back now, to the Germans. With the two [INAUDIBLE]. So we-- this was a very bad time, but they only changed the horses. We already had horses hardly walking. Even this took away and whatever they could from-- from the carriages. 

And it was a Friday again. Everything happens on a Friday. And we really didn't know. It started to get dark. We got going on that road. And where are we going to go? We were afraid. And then I had to note already, they were already so quiet. We knew that they were locking all the windows already. The Ukrainians, they had a vote, you know, just to go out and kill. So we-- as we go along, I look down on our route, down on one of these farms there and I see lights. 

I say, this must be a Jewish family. These are candles, Friday candles. So we go in with the carriages, and that's what it was. A Jewish family, who just God sent, you know. And that meant that they really took us in, gave us food, and kept us until the last of the Russians and the Hungarians. 

That part, the Hungarian Army came first from the Germans. The Germans sent in that part of the country the Hungarians. The Hungarians, they still used even Jews in the army, by the way. And they kept us hidden in the-- what do you call it? Where you keep the straw? A big-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hay-- hayloft? 

SUBJECT 2: In the hayloft. Yeah. No, but a big-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Barn? A barn? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. Yes, we were there, all of us, during the day. And he would send down food, send in food. So he was afraid the neighbors, all these Gentiles, he was one, would find out that he hides Jews. Then, when it quieted down, we had to-- we wanted to go back to Zvenyachyn, where came, on the other side of the Dniester. He volunteered to go with us and show us the way, this man. 

And he took his horse to help us. He took only a horse. That's right, because we had our carriage. And he left his family. He had a wife and kids. And came with us. And they were already on the road. We already had these mixed German-Hungarian armies. 

They stopped us several times to search what we had. You could already see that people on the streets and so on. But mostly soldiers from the bombardments from the German Russian soldiers. 

And we-- it was a very frightening trip, this. You know, because you were really exposed to the whole thing. We finally arrived in Zalischiki in the evening. And all this I'm talking about, from the morning and evening, all this is probably 25 or 30 kilometers, the whole distance. But this is all the end. 

There were several details, which, on the way where they stopped us, but I'm sure that my wife told this already. They wanted to search. And there was one Jewish soldier in a Hungarian uniform who would come over and say pokhed zach nisht. Imagine with the Germans, "Don't be afraid. Don't be afraid," he told us. 

So we came to Zalischiki, and we had family in Zalischiki. Not really our family, but an aunt of mine. Yeah, it was my uncle. They lived in Vienna. He had his sister still living in Zalischiki. So we went in there. We stayed overnight. And we looked at this hill, and the other side is Zvenyachyn, where I was working. And the bridge was gone. 

But you-- you know. So Bella and I decided to go back and have a look what's going on on the other side. So we left my mother-in-law and her son and the other family here. And we went-- 

You know, we could go, you know, with the broken bridge, but it still had parts up and down, up and down. And we came over the other side. And we went over to see our apartment. Parts were already gone, but the Lindborns were the landlords. 

All right, but within minutes-- in Romanian, it's called plutonier, the sergeant of the gendarmes. They already was over there. "Ah," he says. "So you're the doctor. You ran away with the Russians. So you're a Communist?" 

I don't know what he took, a watch away? Anyway, yes, but then he came again, and I was afraid. And I-- and I went out under-- under the building was built-- this house was built on some pillars, so I was hiding there, and I left Bella alone. And what she went to is another story while I was hiding with all this. 

But there was one peasant with these gendarmes who was from the community. They all liked me very much. They really-- this is what saved us. I was very good to them during this year. And he says something in the ear to that gendarme. He says, "You know, he's a good man," probably he said. "He's a doctor. Leave him alone." 

So he left. And he decided. He said, tomorrow morning, everybody, every Jew-- this village had 50 or 60 families, Jewish families. Was a little, little-- big village, little town. With a shochet. You know, a guy who-- you know what a shochet is. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A slaughterer. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, a slaughterer. A kosher slaughterer, a kosher lenen and a schul, a shiur. Everybody five pounds and come. You're going to go to someplace. 

So we stayed there overnight. And during the night, a storm came. Such a storm. That was unbelievable. And pulled away the pieces of the bridge there on the Dniester. So in the morning, we couldn't get back and tell the other people what's going on. We were just cut off from the whole thing. 

So a-- one of these-- well, actually this girl who came with us here, one girl came. She went-- they had a boat there. Somebody-- paid somebody-- 