INTERVIEWER: Giving us the town you were born in, your full name, and your date of birth. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: My name is Rachel Greenstein. This is my married name, of course. My name was Rachel Engelstein. I was born with in Brussels, Belgium on January 8, '34. And I had a very happy childhood until the Nazis came in. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe your family and your childhood and what you remember about Brussels in those earlier days. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I remember just happiness, just a beautiful family, beautiful mother and father doing anything other parents would do for their child, going to school very happily. And then one day, I had to come home from school with a note that I had to show my parents, and that's when the whole thing started. 

The note said-- I will never forget; my mother cried so reading it-- that the Jewish children could not go to school anymore. We had start wearing the yellow star, and children were starting to taking away from the streets-- weren't playing. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't think-- children were taken-- 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Were taken while playing in the streets. 

INTERVIEWER: Someone took them away? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: The gestapo was there already. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes, I saw this. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: And one day, when I came back with a note to my mother, it said no more school for you child. No more Jewish children in school. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back a little bit. Was there any discussion of being Jewish when you were in school before the Germans came? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: No, I do not remember that. I knew I was Jewish, but nothing was done we weren't religious or anything like that. We didn't keep a kosher home or anything like that. We knew just that we were Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: You had non-Jewish friends in school? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes, absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER: When you started to wear the yellow star, did people change towards you? What were your friends like then? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, first you could not go out after 7 o'clock in the evening. You could not go out. That was the first sign, really. And then the note came. 

INTERVIEWER: The star. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: The star. Everyone was wearing a star. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your non-Jewish friends-- 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: And everybody was looking at us, of course. And when I wanted to have a good time and play with the other kids, I would take off the star. And my mother would yell and scream. And she says, you cannot do this. You cannot do this. You are a Jewish little girl, and you must wear the star. That's what they want. That's what they want. I remember just she telling me that. And I said, but the kids don't want to play with me if I wear this. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: And she said? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: And she says, well, keep on-- I want you to wear this. I want you to wear this. You must. That's the law. That's the new law. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she, uh, say what would happen to you if you didn't wear it? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, yes. They would say, you know, you would be punished. You wouldn't be doing this. It's not right. It was in the paper and everywhere that the Jewish people had to wear this yellow star. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother wore it? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, yes. My mother wore it. My father-- everybody, you know, that we knew was Jewish was wearing it. 

INTERVIEWER: How could you take it off? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: It was sewed. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: It was sewed on, and I would just rip it and sew it back when I was going to school, like in the morning. And at night, if I wanted to go play, I would take it off and just go out for an hour or so, and then my mother would scream and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were about-- 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Or she would sew it back, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: You were about six years old? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Right. And because my father [INAUDIBLE] was a tailor. He had a shop in Brussels. So very young, I knew how to hold the needle. And, um, and until that note came from the school that we could not go to school-- that's when, really, the whole thing started. 

And my mother, right away where we live, the landlady had a nephew who was a priest in a little town outside Brussels. And she contacted the landlady, and she said, they're taking away the children. All Rachel's Jewish friends are going. Can you do something about my daughter? Can you take her, hide her somewhere? 

And the lady says, yes, I have this nephew who's a priest. Yeah. I will ask him. And that was the arrangement. Now the priest came to take me. His niece and nephew came to take me to the tramway. The tramway was, like, a block away from the house-- where the apartment, where we live. And my mother could not take me to those people. My father took me. My mother was crying, crying so. And my father took me to the tramway. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have brothers and sisters? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: No, I never had brothers and sisters. 

INTERVIEWER: An only child? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Until-- well, that's another story. 

INTERVIEWER: They took away your mother's only child? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you-- 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, like-- 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Just like I told you, I remember the tramway. I remember my father crying like a baby in the middle of the street while he was taking me to those people-- and to strangers. And he explained to me-- don't forget, you're Jewish, little girl. We're going to see you again. 

But you must do that, and you must go away. And we're doing this for your best. Because of course, I couldn't understand. My mother was crying, and only my father could take me. And he explained to me, you've got to go. This is for your good. This is for your good. This is the best for you. 

So I went out to the tramway with those people. And this was just before my birthday. And the last time I saw my father was on my birthday. He took the chance and went to the priest's house to see me. And he had sewed a better suit for me. As I told you, it was a potato. And he came in. And I was hiding behind the door. I wanted to surprise him. 

And the priest said, oh, yes, I changed my name. My name was not Rachel, of course. It was Rosa Le Fleur. That was my first name. I had about three other names. It was Rosa Le Fleur. And the priest, Theodore Kunsch. I see him right in front of me. I love him. He says, Rosa, Rosa, come on. I have a surprise for you. 

And I say, well, really? And I was scared. I thought maybe something would happen. And I hide behind the door. I didn't know it was my father. Then I heard this voice, and there he was. And the last time I saw my father, he had the suit for me, and he had a little watch on the suit. It was green. 

I will never forget it. And my mother couldn't have come, because they were arresting people all over. And if they came as a couple, they would have arrested them together. But they were arrested the week after. And they were sent to Malines. 

And how they were arrested, I have to tell you the story. As I told you, the landlady who got the priest to save me, could not take the pressure. And she went to the Gestapo. Yes? This is a fact. And she went to the Gestapo. And she said, you must come to my house. I'm hiding Jews. Come and get it. And she's the one-- the aunt of the priest who saved me. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you know this? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I will tell you how I know this. It's a fact. And they came. And my parents were sent to Malines. This was before they were sent to concentration camp. It was a place where they were transport to Auschwitz from Malines. That was the waiting room, kind of. 

Of course, me, I was already in the convent, so I didn't know anything about that. How did I find out? It was Valentine's Day. That's why Valentine's Day is very difficult for me. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: '43. It was Valentine's Day. And in the Catholic religion-- I was in the convent by now. In the Catholic religion, it's a big holiday, of course. And all the children are supposed to walk and have a good time together. And you choose a mate for the day, kind of. And you have this big basket. And everybody grabs a name from the basket. And that's who you're supposed to go the whole day with, to play with and to go with. 

And in the middle of this happy affair, the priest came in the home, and he called me over. He says, Rosa, Rosa, don't tell anyone, but I must take you away. Don't tell anyone where you're going, who you're going with. Don't say a word. Just come with me. 

And I said, I want to have a good time. What are you-- I don't want to go with you. I'm having a good time. Well, you must come. You must come. And of course, I went. And I went in that little home, one of the homes in the convent. And he explained to me-- now, we are going on a little trip. But we're not going to take a cab. We're not going to take a train. We're just going to walk. 

And what you're supposed to do-- you just walk behind me. And there's going to be two other little girls. Don't pay attention. Don't pay attention to anybody, just to me. And you are supposed to follow me, day and night. If I stop, you will stop. Done stop unless I don't stop. 

And that's what happened. I just left the party. I just followed the priest. I remember two other little girls. I don't know their names. I don't know where they came from. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know his name? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes, Theodore Kunsch. Reverend Theodore Kunsch. Oh, can I ever forget? Never. 

And he took me to Mons. That was another town. And we walked. We walked day and night. We would stop in farms at night and sleep on the floor, wherever. And there would be always someone to give us food. 

And that's where he told me that my parents had been taken, that I will not hear from my parents for a while. And then I just had to do what he said to me to do. He will take me to another convent, to another-- where there will be other children and all. Not to tell anyone. 

So we got to Mons walking. I don't know how we got there. But we were walking, walking, walking constantly. 

INTERVIEWER: How far? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I really don't know how far it is Brussels to Mons. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, approximately? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I could not say. It was a few days and a few nights. 

And we got there. The first thing the nun did-- he changed my name again. There I was Genevieve Le Brun. And I said, why do I have to change names like this? But that's what it was, Genevieve Le Brun. 

That's where first I went to church. I went to mass. I went to communion. I went to confession. They told me to be a little girl in the convent, to forget what was the past. That's what you are now. And you are hidden. You are hiding. And you must be like the other children. 

And I was. I went to mass. And I loved it, by the way, because it was a life with other people. I wasn't running anymore. I was settled a little bit. And I really liked that, I must say. I was very happy there. 

But then, for some reason, it started all over. And I had to keep on going from one place to another. Now, why they wanted a seven-year-old child, I will never understand, never-- and other children, of course, also. And many children, as a matter of fact, went back on weekends. Their parents wanted to take them on weekends. They never came back. We never saw them. Probably they were arrested. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they Jewish? Did you know? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yeah, oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew? How did you know? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Well, there was something that we knew for some reason. We didn't want to tell openly, but we knew. We had a feel, kind of. It's difficult to explain. We didn't know exactly what to do in church. We were not like the other children. We didn't know when to go on our knees and things like that. 

So we knew. This little girl said she wanted a piece of chocolate. She didn't have chocolate for a long time. And I said, gee, me too. How come we don't get chocolate and we don't get visitors on weekends? And that's how we find out. Nobody came to see us on Sunday. All the other children, their parents came to see. And we had nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you dare speak that you were Jewish? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: No, we didn't say the word. We did not say the word. But we kind of say. Where were you before? And we didn't want to say because we were at former-- the nuns said never talk about it. Don't say. You are now a Catholic little girl in our convent, and that is what you are. And that was it. 

And then I went to another convent and many other places, always walking during the night, following people who will take us to those places until we hit Leuven. Leuven is a seminar. It's a very big convent. It's a seminar. They teach the priests to become priests. And they have six nuns who cook for them, and have this little house on the side who cook for them, make the laundry and all that. And that's where I was-- with those nuns. 

And one day, the Gestapo came in. And Carmelite-- they were Carmelite nuns. And as you know, the men can go there. It's one of the rules. They can not see men. And they knock on the door with the guns and all. We want that Jewish child. We know you have a Jew child there. And the nuns say, absolutely not. We don't have anybody here. And they broke the door. 

And what I will never forget is that the six nuns, their big basket of laundry that they carry, three on the side-- because it was a lot of laundry for all these priests. And they push me in that laundry to hide me. And they put all the linen on top. That happened, like, in one second. 

And that's how I was saved-- in that basket. And they carried me again. They would carry the laundry. And the Gestapo was looking all over. And I was in that basket with the laundry on top of me. And that's one way I escaped that time. And I was very, very lucky. 

Until then, after Leuven-- Leuven was very bombarded. That was already when the Americans tried to save the country, I suppose. And the bombs came in, the regular bombard. And I was in Leuven then. And the wing of one side of the convent was all in flame and all that. Again, another priest took me to this other house. 

And then I wind up in the Ardennes, all the way. And always walking. I remember walking at night with different people. Don't ask me their names because I do not know. And I wind up in Verdon, which is in the Ardennes. There, I was sent to this marvelous family. A man-- his name is Mr. Agnus, Achilis Agnus, and his wife, Juliette. There I came in there. They never had children before, never. 

The minute I walk in there, I felt like I was one of them. The feel I have for those people is absolutely incredible. Of course, I always kept touch with them. My children saw them, met them. We were many times at their house. My husband, who happened to be from the Bronx, understood my feelings for those people. And he took us all over. And my husband knows exactly wherever I was hidden, whoever I was with. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they know you were Jewish? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes. This man was with resistance, the Belgian resistance. In his youth, he was a colonial in the Congo. He had seen a lot of danger in his youth. And when the Nazis came into Belgium, he was one of the resistance. He used to blow up bridges and do whatever he could do. 

And when he heard there was need to a child, he took me in. There also, I changed my name again. In Virton, I was Marie Rose DuPont. The whole thing is so absolutely incredible. And as I grow older, it's getting worse. It's absolutely getting worse. 

INTERVIEWER: What's getting worse? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: To this day he writes to me Marie Rose DuPont sometimes. And I begged him, call me Rachel. Call me Rached. This is a long time. Call me Rachel. And I still get letters-- Mary Rose, m'y cher petite Mary Rose, like I was a child of his. 

INTERVIEWER: What gets worse? You said it gets worse. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: The thought of what happened to me. I can't believe this happened, that people let this happen-- the whole thing. Not only my life. My life is nothing compared to my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother-- what did your mother see? What did you know? Were you looking for your parents? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Well, I didn't look for my parents. When the Americans came, I was still in Virton with that family. But there was a rule that said that after 10 months, the gentile family could adopt the child they had hidden if they wanted to do so. Because of course, [INAUDIBLE] was working, and all kinds of organizations start to come and take the Jewish children away and whatever. They were taking them to Palestine. 

I have a few friends who went to Palestine. But then came this rule, that 10 months. You had to wait 10 months to adopt the child to see if any of the parents would come back. And also, the child-- it would be brought back at the first place where the child had been. And that's what happened. They sent me back to the first convent. 

And one day, after nine months-- the war was over nine months. I'm sitting there in the classroom, and this nun walks in. And without a word, she just looked at me. And I just knew my mother was right there. For two weeks before, I had made such a life. I could not sleep. I was screaming-- my mother, my mother. And for three years, I never even thought of them. 

To me, my parents left me, and I was very mad at my parents. Because I didn't understand. To me, I was their only child, and they had left me to all these strangers. And it was hurting me very much. 

And what I remember-- I didn't want to see my mother, because to me she had left me. Little did I know, if I had gone with her, we would have been both in the oven. Because that's what they would do. They would do the mother and the child right in the oven. But those days, all what I knew-- as a child, she had left me. 

And when I saw her, I didn't even want to go to her. She was there in the principal office from the convent, and emaciated. I didn't even know it was my mother. Only they told me it was my mother. And it took me a long time to understand that she saved my life, that if she didn't hide me, I wouldn't be here to tell you the story. I just wouldn't. 

So it took me a long, long time to get to thank her for done that, a long time. And my mother was in Auschwitz three years. My father didn't come back. 

And you asked me how did I know about Mrs. Malenos, about that landlady. After my mother took me from the convent, there were a few friends who took that room the Red Cross had given them because they had nothing. And the Red Cross was taking care of them, giving them clothing and all that. And we slept on the floor, I must say-- three, four women a night, all friends of my mother, also from Auschwitz. 

And one day, my mother says, we have to go back to see Mrs. Malenos. Because Papa and I, we hid a few things there. We had a big valise. And I know I had some furs and some jewels-- not much, but you know. And I'd like to see what happened to that. And let's go. And one day, we did that. We went back, and we rang the bell. 

The lady opened the door. She looked at us like we were ghosts. She fell on the floor. She kissed my mother's feet. She didn't know what to say. She says, I did that to you. I did that to you. I am the one who denounced you. Will God ever forgive me? 

I will never forget that scene-- never, never. And then when my mother said, I know it's you who gave us in. Because one of the Gestapo said we know you are Jews because the landlady told us so. But when she fell on the-- when she saw, she could not believe we were alive. She couldn't believe it. And she admitted she did that. 

And then when my mother said what happened to the valise that my husband and I left you, and the few things-- because you see I have nothing. This coat is from the Red Cross. The dress is from the Red Cross. My daughter's dress is a convent dress. I was in a uniform, a blue little dress from the convent. And she said, where are the things? She said, oh, I'm so sorry. We sold everything to save Rachel. We gave the nuns-- we gave things to the priest to help them hiding and feed your daughter. 

And that is not so. Nobody ever got anything. All these people who saved me did it from the goodness of their heart. They never got a penny for it. And she never gave us anything back. 

We left that house. We got nothing. My mother cried. She said, there was pictures there. There were souvenirs there. I know we left things there. It was a big valise, she explained. And you can't say you gave-- why did you give the pictures away? Why? They had a big fight. That woman was crying. As a matter of fact-- it's not nice to say, but she died two weeks after. And I think the shock of seeing my mother was just too much for her. 

INTERVIEWER: What had happened to your mother in the camp? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: My mother was in a concentration camp. She was sent to Auschwitz. And as I told you, she came back nine months after because she was in a recuperation camp in Czechoslovakia. That's why she could not come right away. And it was just the month before these other people were ready to adopt me. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother say to you later? Could she forgive that woman? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: No, she could never forgive her. She could never forgive her. To this day, when we talk about it, we-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother is here? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: My mother is here. And that is the miracle of the whole thing. Because after the war, as I told you, the Red Cross helped all these people. [INAUDIBLE] and all these organizations came about. And my mother met her second husband, who also came out from Auschwitz and lost his wife in Auschwitz, on the line to get food, in the Red Cross place where they would get food. And that's where she met her second husband. 

And they married. And a few years later, they had a son, which I think is absolutely incredible. Because the two of them with a number, and coming from hell, and they have this beautiful boy. After that, I think I believe in God when I think about my brother. I really that it's really-- they both came out from hell. And they have this continuation there, this beautiful boy. It's amazing. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel now? What has it left you with? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: With completely not understanding how the whole thing happened. How on Earth did this happen? It's beyond me. I cannot understand how people went that far to denounce other people, to hurt other people, to build-- actually build things to destroy a human race. 

And by the way, not only Jewish people suffered. I can tell you, nuns were shot. And the mother of my priest-- I call him my priest-- she was ironing my clothing one day. And the Gestapo came in, and they said, we know you're hiding a Jewish child. And she says, absolutely not. I am not. You can look all over. I am not hiding a Jewish child. They put her in front of the hearth, and six Nazis were-- I saw it with my own eyes because I was down in the cellar. 

And she said, no, you can shoot me. I don't have a Jewish child here. And this was the mother of the priest. So there were people that were so courageous, so marvelous. And yet the contrary is so absolutely disgusting that it's too much of a difference a human beings. I don't understand how you can call the whole thing a human race. It's monsters, and then there's the human beings. 

It's weird. I feel very weird sometimes. I feel weird because I say to myself, why did I come out of it. If my mother had said let's hide together, I wouldn't be here. It's so strange. It's just absolutely very strange to be sitting and telling the story. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were brought up, really, for a good part of your young life as a Catholic. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, yes. I know the Catholic religion better than my own. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel now about being Jewish? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: That's a very good question. Every time I see a priest, I feel like kissing him. That's one thing. Or a nun, for that matter. I remember things, very tender moments with nuns who came at night to cover me. And said, Genevieve, ne pleurs pas, ne pleurs pas. 

And I remember they would teach me in the dark how to go to mass because I didn't know what to do. And they would say, you must learn, because all the other children will find out that you don't know how to do this. And you must know how to do this because you're here now. 

And I loved them all. I have moments-- beautiful moments. I don't know if I should say this on the camera. I didn't know what being menstruated was. And one day, it happened. I was in the convent. And I was scared. I didn't know what it was. I was just scared. And I didn't know them to know. Was I sick or something? I didn't know what happened. 

And I was hiding the linens. I didn't know what to do. And after a week of that, the nuns called all the children together, and they said, there's linen missing, and nightgowns are missing. And what's happening? And towels are missing. Because I didn't know what to do, as you understand. 

And I was the one. And then I broke up, and I just started crying. And I said, I don't know what's happening to me. I'm sick. Something is happening to me. And to this day, that-- the older nun, the superior-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember her name? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: The mother superior, Mother Theresa. She kissed me and hugged me. It was-- and she said, my god, we never thought that-- to tell you. We never thought. And I will never forget-- she cried with me. The whole convent cried. And she said, now we know. That's one of the incidents that is always so vivid. 

INTERVIEWER: I asked you about your Jewishness. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: My Jewishness. I know that after going-- I guess when I see my mother is really what it's all about. I am a little confused, I must admit-- not a little, a lot. Because what I found out is there's good and bad in all of us. 

And there were a lot of gentile. Because of course, if there were more gentiles who saved my life, this couldn't have happened. This could not have happened. So those people were very unusual people, very unusual. By the way, this gentleman that I was telling you, Monsieur Achilis Agnus, was very Catholic. They were raised-- they came from Belgium from generation to generation. 

And Belguim is a very Catholic country-- and crosses all over, very Catholic. When I came to their house, I was so used to going to mass in the morning, the six o'clock in the morning mass, that I would beg them to wake me up and send me to mass at 6 o'clock in the morning. Because I was used to it in the convent. And I loved it. And I would cry if they did not wake me 6 o'clock in the morning. 

Now, something happened to him in the Congo. When he came back as a colonial, he didn't want to be-- he was no religion. He was an atheist. They both became atheists. 

Now, I hope to see him this year. And finally, I will ask him why. Because he also must have seen something that made him feel that way. 

INTERVIEWER: You haven't answered my question. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: It's very difficult to answer that question, very difficult. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you identify as a Jew? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I do, and I don't. It's very confusing. It's a very difficult question. I thought of it many, many times. I identify more as a human being, I would say. I think I'm a good person, and I help people. And that's what I want to do. I don't care if I'm Catholic, Jewish, or whatever. I want to finish my life as a good person and help people the way I can. 

INTERVIEWER: Children? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Children, yes, I work a lot with children. 

INTERVIEWER: You have children? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I have children. I have three beautiful children. 

INTERVIEWER: Are they raised Jewish? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes, they are, but they know all about the past. They know about the beautiful people who saved my life. And one problem with that-- they are confused also. And that's the truth. And I can see why. I really can see why. 

It's a very difficult question. 

INTERVIEWER: Israel? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: I love Israel. I feel that if I want to be really safe, I should be there. Because that is the miracle of the whole thing is Israel, that we didn't have a land before and that now we have somewhere to go. That is the place, really. I feel very, very strongly about that. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else you want to tell us? Is there anything else that you've thought of about your mother and her adjustment? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: When I think of my mother, it is really a little bit too much. Because when I think that she was on the experiment human table four times-- on the experiment table-- 

INTERVIEWER: What does that mean? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: They were making experiment. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Well, she was extremely lucky. Always something would happen-- the electricity would break down or something would happen. She never told me. This lady friend of hers told me about it. She never told me. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of experiments were they going to do? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Well, they were trying-- with women complication, with women diseases, with women-- they were tyring-- my mother was very young. My mother was only 30 years old. And she was a beautiful woman. She still is. And that is-- how a person can see so much and be still happy sometimes-- she has sad eyes. And she's not in good health, of course. But how can a person like that go back to life after seeing such horrors has always been very intriguing to me. And she made very nicely, I must say, the adjustment. 

INTERVIEWER: That's why you say it's a miracle that she had a child? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER: But they never did do-- 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Oh, no, she never was touched. She was just on the table ready to be touched when something happened-- four times. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she ever share with you her thoughts at those times? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Never. Never. The only time-- a few months ago, she-- my parents live in Los Angeles. And my mother came in to visit me two months ago, and a very strange thing happened. As you know, in Boca Raton, we have those trains passing very often. And it hit me many times also-- gee, that's how they went-- the trains, how they were shipped to Auschwitz. And I was scared for her when she was here. I was scared not to go on the railroad. It was on my mind. 

But one time, I could not help her. And there I was with my mother sitting next to me in the car, and the train was going, passing. And she made a remark-- which after all these years, she never said anything. And she just said, so bluntly, so matter of fact-- she said, you know, Rachel-- because we speak French together. She says, you know, Rachel, that's how they took us. That's exactly how they took us. 

And I felt like nothing, because I-- I was there next to her, and she had to revive this moment. It was awful. It was awful. It was just awful. And after all these years, that she should-- just matter-of-fact. And I knew it, but I didn't want-- back of my mind, I had hoped that she would not remark. But she did. 

And it's always in the back of her mind. I am the first one to have a good time. Believe me. I love to have a good time. But there's always something that gets you off, that you know you are a little different. People say to you, oh, Mrs. Greenstein. Oh, you're French. How come you marry a Jewish boy? Do you know what I mean? 

I say, what do you mean? I'm more Jewish than my husband will ever be if anything. They cannot put the two together, the accent. And you get very strange comments until they know that you are Jewish and that you name happened to be Mrs. Greenstein with a French accent. 

But it's very weird that people really don't know, in many cases, what happened, and especially about Belgium. Very few people know people were arrested right in Brussels, in Antwerp. But my parents were arrested right in Brussels, sent to Malines. And that's the thing. 

INTERVIEWER: I stopped because you were so perfect. 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Ferley Drive, Ferley. F-E-R-L-E-Y. 35. 

INTERVIEWER: 35? 

RACHEL GREENSTEIN: Yes. Do you need a phone number? 33446. 

INTERVIEWER: It says that you, the undersigned, release a Holocaust Survivor's Film Project, its committee, executive, directors, all persons associated with said project, and the respective signers have been assigned the rights to publish or display copyright, use likeness, transfer, reproduce, dispose of, and/or exposure of and the use of photography containing my image, name, voice, and the materials spoken by me, any consequences thereof, in whole or in part, for any public purpose whatsoever, including advertising, trade, and [Inaudible], with or without my name or my other identification, or the name or names of any real or fictitious person or persons, and all the above may be done without first submitting to me first for approval. 

I hereby release the Holocaust Survivors Film Project, its respective committee, executive director, its associates, its employees, and the respective signs from any and all claims for damage for libel, slander, and invasion of rights of privacy or any other-- 