[EXTENDED CABLE TONE] INTERVIEWER: Would you tell us about-- 

SUBJECT 1: It's-- it's just the same, like a German soldier was walking with the dog and give him a piece of sugar. And-- and the people were starving for a piece of sugar. They didn't give it to him. They brought them a big load of potatoes and showed them that they have potatoes. But instead of give it to us, they put it in a big hole in the ground, and they put some-- like I told you from to cleaned up the toilets and Clorox on the top, and not to give it to the people. 

But six months later, somebody told us, you know, in this place you can find potatoes. So believe it, my mother-- was 4:00 o'clock in the morning-- we took a little sack and something to dig out. And this potato was small like a-- I can tell you like this, because for laying around six months in the ground and after this-- and my mother washed it and washed it. And neighbor for my mother said don't eat it. 

You're going to get died in a minute. Because it's poison, laying so long. So if you're hungry, you don't care-- you don't care about anything. So she washed them and washed them and washed them. 

Then she put them in the grind and made pancakes. And the pancakes was-- do you remember the coffee what we get? It's straw, the-- made straw. 

SUBJECT 2: Made straw. 

SUBJECT 1: And they burned it, make it like coffee. 

SUBJECT 2: Made it brown, and they'd give you coffee. The Germans-- 

SUBJECT 1: The Germans give us coffee. But the coffee was plain straw. 

SUBJECT 2: They make that, you know. They make believe they give you coffee. And they make it by straw. You know, the bran made it brown, you know. 

SUBJECT 1: And so my mother put this coffee for the potatoes, mixed together and put a couple of [INAUDIBLE]. And she made pancakes. Honest to God, I closed my nose and I closed mine eyes, and this way I was eating. And I didn't die. So if I didn't die from those camp potatoes laying around so long, I don't know if I can get ever sick. 

INTERVIEWER: They put these potatoes in this pit and covered them with waste from the latrines. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: They did this to show the people what? 

SUBJECT 1: That's it. They don't want to give it to us. They'd rather bury them. 

SUBJECT 2: They bury them-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say when they did this? 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't say nothing. 

SUBJECT 1: They said nothing. They just brought in a load of potatoes, and they don't want to give it to us. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, liberation is for you people. Then they buried it, you know, they put everything in the top. And that's all. 

SUBJECT 1: That's what happened. 

SUBJECT 2: To make believe they give it to you. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did many people see this happen? 

SUBJECT 1: Somebody must seen it, because how did we know that after six months or some way there's potatoes there? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know about it? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, I know it. I remember the buried, never meant for this. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see them doing it? 

SUBJECT 2: No, I didn't se them, because I know people, they told me what's going on. But mostly it was-- 

SUBJECT 1: Because I'll tell you, people used to live not far from this place. They saw it. I ask somebody told. So everyone and we got the potatoes out from this. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the coffee or whatever it was, taste like the burned straw coffee? 

SUBJECT 2: Because what can I tell you? It was bitter. You couldn't taste it. That's all. 

SUBJECT 1: Just make believe coffee. 

SUBJECT 2: If you're hungry, you think this is going to help you, this is going to help you. 

SUBJECT 1: I start to fill up the stomach with something. 

SUBJECT 2: You tried everything. 

INTERVIEWER: [EXHALE] After your father died, what happened to your family, Mrs. Stadtlender? 

SUBJECT 1: After my father died, me with my mother and brother, we remained till they sent us out to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Before they sent you to Auschwitz though, you had many problems. You talked about swollen feet. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, this was my father before he died. He got very swollen feet. So we went to our doctor and told him to drink the water from the peels of the potatoes. So we didn't have potatoes to peel, so we went in with a little slip from the doctor to the kitchen for the cook and-- 

SUBJECT 2: They give you one meal a day, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: --then I did. So we-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT 1: In a big kitchen. Where we worked. So if I worked in a place from the making shirts, so they give you one meal a day. But in the place was a big kitchen. They cooked for everyone. 

And everyone got one meal a day. So he worked in salt from the fires. So he got a different kitchen. So when with the slip, and ask him to give me at least a little bit the peels from the potatoes. 

So I took it home, and my mother cooked it. And he was drinking the water. And the swelling went off. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the swelling from? 

SUBJECT 1: From hunger, from hunger, plain hunger. He was never sick. 

SUBJECT 2: The doctors, they find out, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, the doctors told us this is from hunger. So the swellness went away from the water that he was drinking. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the organization of the ghetto, Mr. Stadtlender? For example, who was in charge of the ghetto? Not just the Germans, but who were the-- 

SUBJECT 1: Rumkowski. 

SUBJECT 2: Rumkowski was a Jew, but the name Rumkowski. 

INTERVIEWER: And who was he? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: Who was he? 

SUBJECT 2: He was a Jew. He was a-- a president. He was a president from-- from a home, a home for small children, for orphans, before. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, he was president of an orphanage. 

SUBJECT 2: Then they too-- the Germans, they gave him you know, the name. He was the big man from the ghetto, the Jews. The Jew. 

SUBJECT 1: He was in charge of the ghetto Jew. 

SUBJECT 2: --had its own police, everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me something about that, the police, the Jewish police, and the organization of the ghetto, Mr. Rumkowski? 

SUBJECT 2: With the police? From the police? What can I tell you? They have to listen to him. And he was very bad, a very bad man. 

INTERVIEWER: He was a bad man. 

SUBJECT 2: A very bad man. He gave them all of this, and they have to listen to him. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they-- why did the Germans choose him to be the head of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 2: Because they wanted-- wanted to show the people, you know, other people-- 

SUBJECT 1: You got to have somebody to be a leader. 

SUBJECT 2: How the Jews you know how to handle themself. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he known to be a bad man? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: The Germans knew he was a bad man? 

SUBJECT 2: No, the Germans didn't know. He became you know, maybe he wasn't before. He became after that, you know? Because he became a big man. 

SUBJECT 1: He wants to save his own skin. So he ended very bad for the rest of the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Why is it that none of the other people in the ghetto-- why did they accept him? Why did they accept his-- 

SUBJECT 2: What could they do? We cannot go against the Germans. You're not supposed to say anything. 

SUBJECT 1: What the Germans said this is-- he kept us whatever they told him to do. 

SUBJECT 2: Has to be done. You Carnot say no. There isn't such a-- it wasn't such a thing to say no. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said he was a bad man. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did any of the people in the ghetto want to get rid of him, or-- 

SUBJECT 1: You can't. 

SUBJECT 2: How could they? He had his own police. Like an army. His own Army. 

SUBJECT 1: But one at least, they burned him alive, like my mother and everybody else. Somebody told me they left the 28 September. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] I didn't even remember. September. 

So a day after, they told us that the brought Rumkowski to Auschwitz-- you saw him? --and they burned him alive. At least my mother was killed from the gas. But him, they throw him alive in the oven. 

Because so many people got angry at him. What he did for us. Of course, the Germans told him what to do, but not everything-- he could avoid a lot of things. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there anyone else helping him that you remember? Any other name? 

SUBJECT 2: Let me see-- I mean, sure, naturally he has men surround him, you know, I couldn't remember the names of them, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the names of any of the Germans who were in charge of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 2: No. I cannot remember. So many years. 

SUBJECT 1: I don't remember either. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the Germans look like? How did they act in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 2: First of all, you didn't he didn't see them in the ghetto. When they have an order to come to the ghetto, they were in [INAUDIBLE]. Like I told you before, Rumkowski, you know, the men from [INAUDIBLE], you know, from the ghetto-- 

SUBJECT 1: He was in charge. 

SUBJECT 2: He had to show he was in charge. He has his own police. He's in charge there. 

INTERVIEWER: They just dealt with him? They didn't-- you never saw the Germans in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 1: We did see them a lot. 

SUBJECT 2: See them very, very seldom. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, when you saw them, what were they-- what were they doing? 

SUBJECT 1: I'll tell you when they saw when I saw them. They came was I think in 1943. They came in our yard, was a big, you know, like, a lot of people used to live there. And they said everybody arouse. Everybody to go out from the houses. 

So I hide my mother. I put it-- used to have Europe wooden closets. And we got two rooms. So I put the closet between the room, and put my mother over there. So then I don't know if somebody told them, or if they knew about it. So they knocked everything down. 

And it-- all the people-- so they came about 10 soldiers, 10 Germans. And they came-- everybody out and put them in a truck to send them out. But I didn't know, it was a miracle that mine-- I got my mother back. I don't know how that happened. I'll never find out, because I don't know what happened. 

And I was hollering, my mother, mother. Till now, my finger was broken. Because I was holding like this, and it was hit with the gun. And this finger was all broken. 

As a matter of fact, it's displaced. But this is a minor thing. And I think, I don't know if somebody pushed my mother out from a corner, and she hided in a different place. And she was survived for another year. This was 1943. 

And then in 1944, we went to Auschwitz. I couldn't save her. And this was a tragics moment in my life. I didn't know this right, left, right, left business. And I ask the people where is my mother going? 

They said don't worry. She'll take care of the small children. But wasn't true. They put her right in the gas chambers. What I heard later on, smoke was going on and everything. 

But since then, I know the Germans came to our back yard and they called everybody out. This was I saw a lot of Germans then. But then [INAUDIBLE] 

They took everybody. And one thing what I saw-- 

SUBJECT 2: Sperre. 

SUBJECT 1: Sperre. Then one thing that I saw like, mothers with their small children. They didn't want to give it away. So they got the truck with small children. 

You remember this, what happened? So then everyone-- if they don't want to give the child away, they just took it and they throw them from the third floor from the second floor, and the truck, alive. Kids from-- from the mother's breast. 

INTERVIEWER: The Germans took-- 

SUBJECT 1: The Germans took them. 

SUBJECT 2: I saw it with mine own eyes. 

SUBJECT 1: That's what I saw too. In the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: My youngest child-- it was in '42 at, fell sick. So they had a Jewish hospital, special, you know. And so they took it to the hospital. And I have a nurse there, but I know her, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: How old was the child? 

SUBJECT 2: The child was at that time, the child was almost two years old. So the nurse told me it's going to be something wrong. You better come and take your child out from the hospital. So I said to them, my wife did. We both did. 

We went there. We came there, it was closed. The whole hospital was closed, you know, you cannot come in. The soldiers were outside in big autos, you know, the trucks, the big trucks. You know what they did? All the sick people, old, young ones and old ones they threw them from the third floor alive. 

SUBJECT 1: And the truck. 

SUBJECT 2: They threw them down through the windows. 

INTERVIEWER: And your child? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, I have seen that. And after they went away you know, by hiding with my wife, after they went away I went inside there and the nurse what I know-- 

SUBJECT 1: She saved it. 

SUBJECT 2: She saved the child. She put that away, you know? In a little bun, you know? So she says don't worry. Your child is still alive. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

So a few-- I think about three months later you know, they made a Sperre again. They called everybody down with all the children. They went into each house. 

They were each all together, and they took down. I had my small children left in the house. They brought them down. They put them in the truck. 

SUBJECT 1: And that's it. 

SUBJECT 2: And that's it. They took them away. You couldn't do nothing. You know, the-- the military was there. You can't go even to the child. 

My eldest she was but that time about four, after four, she said don't cry. I'm going to take care of my little sister. I didn't see them anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: That was the last time you saw your children? 

SUBJECT 2: That's the last time I saw them. It was in '42. It was in the first day-- this is-- I remember it, on Rosh Hashanah. The first day from Rosh Hashanah. They did it especially on the Jewish holiday. 

INTERVIEWER: They-- What did your wife do? What did she say? What happened? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? What can I do? You cannot do nothing. You cannot do a thing. 

Nobody can believe it. You cannot, except kill yourself. That's all you can do. 

SUBJECT 1: That's it. 

INTERVIEWER: They-- the German soldiers came into the house and took your child? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, yes. They came to-- they went down. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember-- 

SUBJECT 2: Each of them there was-- But, you know, we lived in a big apartment house. You know, about 60 tenants. You never did live-- you know, one room was enough for six people used to live. You know, a big family. 

SUBJECT 1: That's how they used to live. One room, six people. 

INTERVIEWER: And the Germans themselves, the German soldiers came into the house? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, and they looked over the house because I put the children-- I left the children you know, underneath the bed. 

INTERVIEWER: You had hidden the children? 

SUBJECT 2: And they took them out. They brought them down and put them on the truck. 

INTERVIEWER: They walked into your apartment, and did they ask you? What happened? 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't ask nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were standing-- 

SUBJECT 2: They looked over, they looked over of it. They didn't believe you, you know. You have a family or not? They went to each room separately, and they looked over. 

SUBJECT 1: They picked up the bedding to see if somebody was hidden there. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, the elderly people, they took down put them on the truck. They disappeared. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the children cry? Or did they just-- 

SUBJECT 2: They cried. The youngest one cried. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that how they found them? 

SUBJECT 2: No, no. They didn't cry, because I told them from the beginning to be quiet. I told the older child you better watch your sister. She shouldn't say nothing, not a single word. She says don't worry. I'm going to take care. 

So they came right in front of me and they looked all over, every corner. And they found them and they pulled them down. 

INTERVIEWER: And you stayed in the apartment? 

SUBJECT 2: No, I stayed in-- they kept us down there. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I see. You were in the courtyard and they went up to the apartment and they found the children. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. Not only mine. A lot of children with them. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think at that moment? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? What did you feel when you saw them bringing your children? 

SUBJECT 2: I'm going to ask you something. What could you feel? I feel to kill myself. I can not kill myself. It didn't work out. 

How could you? I didn't think it's going to be like this. It's going to happen like this. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think was happening? 

SUBJECT 2: I was thinking maybe they going to bring to somewhere else. You know, later they're going to come back. I will be able to go to see them. Since then, didn't see them. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there are a lot of mothers crying? Screaming? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, they were-- they were screaming. Couldn't help it. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the Germans do with the mothers who were screaming and crying? 

SUBJECT 2: Nothing, nothing. They didn't-- they were laughing. 

INTERVIEWER: They were. 

SUBJECT 2: They were laughing. They didn't care about nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember this, Mrs. Stadtlender? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, I remember across the street from my us on the third floor was a mother nursing the child. And the Germans came to take away. She didn't want to give them. So they killed her. And they threw the child in and they threw her down. 

This happened across from our house. And because we didn't have small children, that's why. And she was, oh! She didn't want to give away the child! She-- And then they killed her first. 

She wasn't the only one. There was a lot of mothers like that. But some of them, they give away. Some, they didn't want to give away. This was in the ghetto of [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 2: It was in '42. 

SUBJECT 1: In '42. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't know each other then, but did you-- you both leave the ghetto the same time? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT 1: I left the 28th of September. When you left the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 2: In Sept-- when they closed the ghettos altogether, he emptied the ghettos for that time. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, that was long before they cleaned up all the ghettos. I went with my mother, with my brother. And then, they says, why the lady? The men goes in a different section. My brother was 16 by that time. And I went with my mother. 

And then they separated us at the line going off on the train. And they say right and left, right and left. If I just knew-- if somebody give them a little clue, because my mother was 42 but she looked very old. 

Five years ghetto, she was suffering a lot. And she looked really old. And then the sep-- I never saw her again. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that train ride? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, we was all together. And they told us were going to work in a factory. That's what the told us. They take you, whatever you want, and a loaf of bread, and your clothes. And then as soon as we walked off in the train, leave this here, leave this here. 

You walked, and then when my mother was separate from me, I don't know what I'm doing. I keep asking, what is sent the people, on the right side or the left side? 

They told me don't worry about. The older people are going to take care of the small children. This was the answer. 

INTERVIEWER: Who told you this? 

SUBJECT 1: The people when we walked out from the train, the unterscharfuhrers, whatever girls. German girls or Jewish girls. I don't even know-- I don't even know who they are. 

INTERVIEWER: Other prisoners, or what? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah and they told me don't worry, that all the people are going to take of the small-- and then I saw the smoke. And it was a smelly smoke. And they said, oh, it's nothing. It's nothing. Don't worry about. 

And then when I came in, they took everything away from me, everything, even my clothes. They gave me to change. They give me-- I'm-- I'm not-- I'm a short person. 

They give me a long shirt up to here. And told people to give us short shirts. So I cut off a piece of the shirt. Because they cut me off my hair, I look like a monkey. So I took a piece from the shirt, and I covered my head. Shoot, I got beaten by that time. Should not be on your head. Just like you are. 

So they took away the piece of cloth and that's it. And then was going in Auschwitz. We were standing 15-- 5 people in a row in a big, big long line of people. They give us own pot of soup and it's so hot. It was so hot outside. 

We were standing without shoes and little tiny stones. And 15 people with own top of soup. And everyone tried to have something with my hands of course. And I burned my hand trying to get something to my mouth. 

And what I'm going to tell you was terrible. There was three days in Auschwitz, three miserable horrible days. We were standing again. Then they told us they're going to send us someplace else. So they did send those thousand women to camp-- not a camp, a factory for ammunition in Freiberg Sachsen. 

They was there for the rest of the time until they was liberated. There were three days in Auschwitz was-- I don't know how to describe you. It was impossible! 

You see people walking around-- walking around, people naked, walking around people crazy. Some people run over the gate and they get electrocuted. It's unbelievable, unbelievable! And so many people. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you wait just a moment, because there's something going on. Yes, John. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

I'm holding. 

I hope, Mr. Stadtlender, that this won't be-- all right. Perhaps we can go back to the point you were talking about. You were sent to Auschwitz. 

I don't know whether we're going to be able to survive the interference right now, but I thought we could try and recreate that period of time for you, painful as that may be. You were called down from your home. And how-- how did the deportation take place? 

SUBJECT 1: This was-- we were almost closing together. So they sent remaining people what still was there to-- they told us a different place. Of course, they didn't tell us we're going to Auschwitz to be killed or to work. 

They just said we're sending you in a different place to work. This was the answer from them. And we came to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you ever heard about Auschwitz before? If they had said to you, were taking you to Auschwitz, would you-- 

SUBJECT 1: Didn't say Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. But had they said that to you, would that have upset-- upset you? Did you know about Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 1: We know a little bit because a lot the clothes came back to the factories. And of some of them, there was little notes. Don't go. It's bad. They're killing. 

Like, people work in the factory from clothing. And they came a lot of coats or suits to remodel for-- I don't know for whom. But in the pockets, some of them find little notes. Don't go. They're going to kill you, or something. 

But they couldn't avoid anything against the Germans. They sent us, they put us on the train, and that's what it is. We couldn't-- if we haven't got guns to be against them. 

Not revolutionaries, we're just people, plain people. And we have no other choice. They put us in the trains and we came to this Auschwitz place. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that train ride? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. At least I was with my mother with my brother, together, a lot of people what we know from the ghetto. And wasn't too long after I think a few hours ride. 

I don't remember. How long was it from Lodz to Auschwitz? A day. 

SUBJECT 2: It took us two days. 

SUBJECT 1: Two days. 

SUBJECT 2: Two days and two nights. 

SUBJECT 1: See? And we came to the place. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- Perhaps your trip was shorter than-- 

SUBJECT 1: It's the same place from the ghetto to Auschwitz. But I went a different kind people. I didn't know him. Maybe he went on the same train, but I didn't even know him. 

SUBJECT 2: When I went to Auschwitz it was in '45. 

SUBJECT 1: In '44. 

SUBJECT 2: But the end of '44. 

SUBJECT 1: In September '44. We went from the eighth of September. 

SUBJECT 2: You went from the eighth. Not all of them went together. 

SUBJECT 1: 1945-- No. '45 was liberated. 

SUBJECT 2: Ours was the last one that they closed. 

SUBJECT 1: We went a day before. And they took us. And some of them came to Auschwitz. Of course, was together as a family. And we went to Auschwitz. 

Like I said, they separate my brother was on the other side for the men. Just me with my mother. We was holding hands close. And then they said you got to go right and left. 

And this was my biggest mistake in my life. I didn't go together with my mother. Or I should pull my mother to me. But we didn't know what to do it. And it was like everybody was duped and they didn't know what's going to happen. 

If I had a little clue they're going to send a mother for the gas chamber, I would go together. Or at least if I would try to pull my mother here. But I didn't know what's going to be and what happened there. And I was little too late, so they separate us was too late. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened in Auschwitz? How long were you there. 

SUBJECT 1: In Auschwitz I was there three days. The first day, they took us, they took all the clothes away. Like, I got the earrings. 

They pull that through it through the ear. Of course I got little blood. But this is minor thing. And if somebody has gold teeth, they pulled it out. I didn't have any. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You mean they pulled the tooth out right while the person-- 

SUBJECT 1: Right together when they took us in a separate room. They took off all the clothes. They checked if you had jewelry, rings, earrings, and gold teeth, everything. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean a dentist was there? 

SUBJECT 1: It can't be a dentist, just a soldier. 

SUBJECT 2: And they didn't care about people at all. 

SUBJECT 1: No! They didn't care. Somebody has gold teeth. Most people have gold teeth in Europe. So they pull it out with the-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER: A pliers? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: They just-- 

SUBJECT 1: They didn't care if they dead because they're going to be dead anyway. And they got a bowl, a big bowl and they threw all the golds in there. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't people screaming? 

SUBJECT 1: Of course! Didn't it hurt when you pull out a good tooth with a gold filling, or gold on the top, whatever it is? 

INTERVIEWER: How did they do this? Didn't they have to hold people down? I mean-- 

SUBJECT 1: They just sit down or stand up. And first they shaved off the hair. They took all the clothes off. Men did it, but all of them of us naked. And then checked the ears or rings or everything. 

And they pulled out a tooth, they ripped off the earrings if they didn't come out easy. If they didn't come out easy, they pulled it to get it through the ear. But the ear of course, was bleeding. 

And it opens up. And they throw in a big bowl. And then all golds went in inside. You never heard from people talking-- 

INTERVIEWER: I never heard that people's teeth were pulled out of their mouths. 

SUBJECT 1: Everything. Teeth and earrings, and everything what you have something can you. Just like it, like-- 

SUBJECT 2: Everything you have in your possession. They looked you over. They taking everything. 

SUBJECT 1: You can't hide anything because-- 

SUBJECT 2: You were naked. How can you hide something? 

SUBJECT 1: You couldn't hide anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Men were doing this to-- and women were there naked? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, all of them. How many men you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover. 

SUBJECT 2: When I-- when I came to Auschwitz and I saw the women, you know, I passed through the camp, from the women camp. They were all separated. I was looking at the people. They're running around naked. They're all naked. 

And I was talking to somebody. He says, what do you talk about? They're crazy. I didn't know by that time what's going to happen. I just went down from the train. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean, laying out from the train, you thought that those people were crazy? 

SUBJECT 2: --you know, in Auschwitz. You know, so the women, you know. It was, you know, with wire, the electric wires, you know. What are they doing? 

That woman naked. And he says what are you talking about? They're crazy, the woman. 

They're taking off their clothes by themselves. They don't know nothing. When I've went in to the camp, and I saw what's going to happen. 

SUBJECT 1: It's true. And then when I was there, three days, like I said, the second day, I saw a big truck with bodies. I don't know, man a woman, just hands and feet was hanging down. And I said, what's that? 

I said don't talk too much. Might happen to you too. But you know, trucks with human bodies. After the gas chamber, rolling down all away. And we just-- we saw it. 

And nothing what you can do. Like I told you, we was watching from all the sides. You can't move. You got to stand like this for another two hours without moving in little tiny stones. 

And the heat was so terrible. No food, just a pot soup for 15 people. One pot soup with no spoons. And then we saw trucks going by with bodies. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you eat it? 

SUBJECT 1: I couldn't! I told you. I took the hand in the pot and I got burned. And I was want to take something in my mouth. And then all of them said let's wait. 

15 people, one pot of soup. Let's wait it will cool off. But they give us such a certain time to finish, and they will take it away. So we tried to put-- we couldn't find anything to grab little bit soup. They took away anything. 

It was hard. We couldn't eat. And that's how they treated us. That's what-- it's stories-- it was unbelievable if one person can do this to another. 

And if somebody was with me in Auschwitz right now-- my girlfriend from Pennsylvania, she was in the same line. She always reminds me. Remember the hot pot soup we couldn't eat? And were starving. And that's-- 

INTERVIEWER: Could you lift the pot? 

SUBJECT 1: The pot was there on the floor. And said eat. We give you a half an hour's time. And we couldn't eat because it was hot and they give us no spoons! 

INTERVIEWER: How did they think that you would eat it? How did they-- 

SUBJECT 1: They said this is the food what you're going to get. And they've never give us a piece of bread, they give us something. OK, they give us a hot pot of soup with no spoons. And that's-- they want us to eat the, to burn. They did a lot of things that was crazy. 

INTERVIEWER: What else? 

SUBJECT 1: No, like I said, I mean, this one and cutting of the hair. I was they'd give me a slip up to here. And people told to give you up to here to look like crazy, to look like monkeys to look like anybody else. One day, I don't know how I find a piece of glass. And I looked and I said oh. I close mine eye. 

Look at that woman without anything naked. So many people. There was no shame at all. We was walking like we was, I don't know, like in the jungle. I don't know what to say to you. 

SUBJECT 2: They were walking like crazy. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

--the thing. We did see only the woman. We didn't see the me, because the men-- the woman, they walk around naked. Near the electric wire. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, but some of them didn't want to live. 

SUBJECT 2: We were thinking ourself, they are crazy. They were talking to themselves. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, because maybe the people that was walking a long time there, maybe they was longer than three days. See, I was three days and I saw those things. But maybe a lot of people was two weeks, three weeks till they find for them a place to go. And then they picked up thousand and sent us to Freiberg Sachsen. And on the train was so terrible. 

They didn't give us anything. And one day it was raining. And I took a little pot to get a little bit of water from the roof in the train. 

And I was drinking. Oh! It was-- smelled like tar in it. But if you're thirsty you're hungry, you drink. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you get the pot? 

SUBJECT 1: We got a little one. Everyone get a little pot to go to the camp. So they give you a little small one. So I got it. And maybe I got it from Auschwitz. 

I don't know how I got this little pot, but I was so thirsty. And then it was raining kind of ways, so I stick up my hand to get a little bit of water. And I have to share with next to me because that's all of the water that we can get was from the rain. And I'm telling-- oh. But it was a hard time. 

What can I tell you? Till we get to the place. Then we got to the place. Everyone get you know, a bed with straw because not a regular bed. But a bed, one on the top on the other, and one blanket. 

And we went to work. For the went to work was also a funny thing. They woke us up 5 o'clock in the morning. We have to stay two hours straight. They counting us like-- like gangsters. 

Like, I don't know. Like, not to run away. And then we went to the factory from 7:00 o'clock. So 12:00 they brought us the soup. They give us soup to eat. 

And then we stayed another three or four hours. And again, they counted us. They counted us every couple hours if not anybody is going to missing from the place. And we worked in an ammunition factory. And we worked I think till almost a month before we was liberated. 

And then they came back to Mauthausen. And Mauthausen-- I got to tell you this. With all this on my mind, after we came back from Freiberg Sachsen, we went to Mauthausen. And this was also a camp, a death camp. Where people got burned and killed. 

They sent us away in a camp with gypsies took care of us. Gypsies. There was always a lot of them. And I don't know, thousands of seven or whatever is left from the camp there. 

And on a woman next to me, there was laying four people in one place. There's no room. There was four people laying in a little spot. Nothing, no covers, no nothing. One of them was hollering oh, my stomach turns over. 

And the gypsy came up with a candle and a stick. I said who hollers? I said nobody. But she couldn't help it. And she hollers oh, my stomach turns over. 

So then she got a light next to her. She said, what happened to you? And she saw that that woman didn't know she was pregnant. And she had a little tiny baby. Of course, dead but that big. 

And she was laying next to me. And then she-- she took her away from this four place sitting. And she took it to, I don't know, different place and cut off the whatever. 

INTERVIEWER: Umbilical cord? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, and I don't know how she survived. She didn't know for nine months. If she would know that she's pregnant, she might be get an extra piece of bread, because somebody ask if somebody is pregnant, tell us. We'll give an extra portion of bread. 

But she didn't know it, I told you, till the last minute. And then she had to cut it and that's how she had a baby. And this is unreal! How could it happen? 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep yourself clean? How did you keep yourself-- 

SUBJECT 1: They let us wash once a week. Take off everything what you have. They give you warm water. Everyday they give you cold water to wash. 

Once a week, they let us have warm water. I'm talking about Freiberg Saxon. But in this place, in the gypsy place, we was lucky if we was alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they ever put a number on your arm? 

SUBJECT 1: No, I came the last when they got no time. Because so many people came, the last-- the last days, they had enough time, they didn't want to even spend time with us. 

They didn't give you a number. Him too. He came from the last ones. He doesn't have a number either. We came in-- 

SUBJECT 2: I have a number, a written number not on my hand, because I didn't have time to-- 

SUBJECT 1: I remember my number a long, long time. So I forgot even my number. They wouldn't call you by name. They'd call you the numbers when you go to eat or they need something. 

Like, we worked in on the place in the ammunition. They didn't call you like, my name is. They called me number so and so and so, come over here. That's-- that's-- we was the numbers. 

INTERVIEWER: You worked in this factory for how long? 

SUBJECT 1: I think we worked nine months. We came in October because September we came to Auschwitz. From October-- and I was liberated in May. So till April I worked. In one month, I was traveling for them to Mauthausen, and Auschwitz was liberated to Mauthausen. 

INTERVIEWER: When you-- after you were liberated, you went back to Poland? 

SUBJECT 1: Not right away. I want to get little best friend. I went to go to get some food from the people used to live there. They gave me-- and I got a little bit more strength. I said, I want to go see if I got some people alive in Poland. 

I got cousins, uncles, aunts, my mother, sister, brother. And I came one day, but I couldn't find anybody. I went to the Jewish [INAUDIBLE]. I call it like-- 

INTERVIEWER: Community center? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, and nobody was listed and nobody knew about it. Because all of the people that alive, they put their names on the wall. And I couldn't find anybody. 

So then I asked to send me back to Germany. That's the only place. Of course, it was not too legal because if you go to Poland, you cannot come back. But somebody else took me along. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you want to go back to Germany? 

SUBJECT 1: Because I think that maybe somebody in Germany will find somebody at least. Maybe they sent them to a different place. I still had this feeling in my head maybe-- I couldn't believe that my mother was went to the gas chambers and was killed. And I figure maybe, maybe. Miracles happen. 

Maybe the center where to I came to work. Maybe I still going to find her there. Maybe she was too weak to go to Poland to look for somebody. Same like I went to look, maybe she couldn't. And I was thinking in my mind maybe my sister, maybe my brother. 

But I couldn't find anybody. And then in Germany, I was there for a while till they get registrations to go to United States or to Israel. In the meantime, I met my husband. And we got married. 

And he told me his trade isn't too good for Israel, [INAUDIBLE]. So he had a cousin in Meriden. And they sent papers for us. And we came to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Stadtlender, you have-- well, first Mrs. Stadtlender, you have no relatives left? No one? 

SUBJECT 1: No one in here. Except before the war, I have two aunts in Israel. This is my father's two step-sisters. 

That's the only relatives what I have. From the hundreds, cousins, uncles, aunts, my god. Maybe-- maybe more hundred-- more than hundred. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel like? You were a young girl. You were 20 years old and you were alone in the world. 

SUBJECT 1: Was terrible. The only thing that kept me-- the girl that I worked with her, I call her sister. And she's now in Pennsylvania. 

She was my only hope through all this together. And together after the war, in the war. And until now we keep in very close. 

INTERVIEWER: She helped you? You helped her? 

SUBJECT 1: She-- we both helped one another. 

INTERVIEWER: How old was she? 

SUBJECT 1: She's a little bit-- two years older than me, or three years. And we always was together. Worked together even at the same factory in Freiberg. We came together to Mauthausen. Always together. 

The only thing is I went to Poland looking for somebody. And she couldn't even go. She was very sick. 

So she remained in Germany. And that's why I came to see her. I call her sister because she is the only close person to me. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Stadtlender, when you went to Auschwitz, you stayed there. How did you get to Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT 2: I mean, they took me. They closed up the ghetto. I was the last one. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember going to the railroad station? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, they took me to the-- took me to the railroad. It was me and my brother. I have an eldest brother that is still living here. 

INTERVIEWER: And your wife? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: And your wife? 

SUBJECT 1: No. 

SUBJECT 2: No, my wife-- she got shot in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: By whom? 

SUBJECT 2: By the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT 2: Because I'm are going to tell you. In 1942, you know, when I went down to work, I have a little pass because I worked in a parlor in a fryzjer shop, you know? So I can move around in the ghetto. I worked you know, for the Germans, for the soldiers. So I went down one day and I took my wife with me. 

I want to have it because the children I lost. They took away the children from me. So I said, to them, you better come get me to the shop, and you stay with me. So some went with me. One day we went down, that was in August or in September-- I can't say exactly. 

And when I went down the street, I saw, you know, those big trucks, the military trucks. I said to my wife, you better come with me. Because she had a sister and mine brother you know, living there across the street. Said, well, you better come with you because like, the trucks, we're going to-- because I know the military trucks you know, it's no good. She said no, you're going to stay there for a couple of hours. 

And then you come back. And then soon I went up there, to the-- you know, to the shop, they closed the whole section all around. And I couldn't go down, at first. When I came back, it was about five o'clock, you know, everything was cleaned up. When I came down, nothing was there, not my brother, my sister-in-law, not my wife. 

Till I met somebody and he told me the story, my wife got shot. I took her in a place, you know, when they accumulate all the people. And she said to somebody you know, I have-- I have to go home. 

I have to see what's going to happen, because my husband wouldn't where I am disappeared all of a sudden. And she tried to go. And they shot her right on the place there. 

INTERVIEWER: They shot her? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, she got shot. I didn't know it before, you know, until you know, I got liberated and somebody told me. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your brother and sister-in-law? 

SUBJECT 2: My brother was with me. He took-- they took him with me. Same thing on the train. 

He had two children with him, two young children. They took away the children. He went with me together. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you at Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you at Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: I was there-- what happening, we suffered there for five days only. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, he was five. I was three. 

SUBJECT 2: For five days. We're going to tell you something that one day I went out. You know, they took me to the kitchen you know, to help do something. 

INTERVIEWER: For what? Do you remember what they wanted you to help do? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: What did they want you to help with? 

SUBJECT 2: To bring the kettle, you you, bring the kettle food. So I passed by. And oh, look at that. Moved around, take a look. I saw a mountain with people like a third floor. 

This, I will never forget my life. And I looked. They were laying like-- like wood, you know. One on top of the under, like this. One, two, three. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was this? 

SUBJECT 2: In Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: Where? You said in the kitchen? 

SUBJECT 2: No, not in the kitchen. You know, in a piece of field, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: In a field? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, an empty place, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. And you were-- you passed by-- 

SUBJECT 2: We passed by, you know, mostly carrying a kettle, you know, with me, somebody else. All of a sudden I lifted up my eyes and I said-- 

What's the matter with you? 

SUBJECT 1: It meant food. 

SUBJECT 2: It's far away. And take a look. Some people open their mouth. They were still alive. They're laying on top of the other. 

There was girl. They have a girl. You know, some of them were still alive. And then made a mountain out of them. And after they burned them. 

SUBJECT 1: I saw them too. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think when your saw that? 

SUBJECT 2: What could-- what could you think? I can't say to nobody what was happening to me. I felt in a life, I would dig a grave and put myself in. 

SUBJECT 1: It's terrible. 

SUBJECT 2: I was there for five days only. And I said when they give an order, who wants to go to work? I said to myself, I'm going. I don't care what's going to happen to me. 

I'm going to die. I can't take it anymore. This is-- My eldest brother-- I have an eldest brother too that was there with a son. And they took away my eldest brother. And my-- the son, his son, started to-- wanted to make an organization there against the Germans, and they killed him. 

He got shot dead. In-- And so after, they send me to a camp, slavery camp to work in Bavaria. I went there to Bavaria. 

INTERVIEWER: To Bavaria? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, Landsberg. Landsberg, Landsberg am Lech, they called it. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did you do there? 

SUBJECT 2: I was working slavery work. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you live? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you live? How did you live? 

SUBJECT 2: I left at camp, a slavery camp. Were there about 500 people, 500 people let's say. And we had a little room under the ground, you know, like a cellar. Not with wood. So only the ground was. 

On the top you know, was a little three boards. And this side three boards. About 120 people in a cellar like this. 

SUBJECT 1: It's a lot of other people what was cutting over piece of meat? 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT 2: Do you have to say everything? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What? Tell us. What? Tell us. 

SUBJECT 2: So that's where we were living. And we went every day we went to work. You come back in the evening. 

INTERVIEWER: What is it you're reluctant to tell? I mean-- 

SUBJECT 2: One day, I passed by you know, they had a little like-- a room outside, you know. And I passed by. And I didn't-- I did not nothing you know, that was in the camp. All of a sudden I saw some people walking down there. And the dead people were laying there. 

This was what's special for dead people, you know, was a little room. One man was standing there and was cutting a piece of meat. Excuse for the expression, from behind, to eat. 

SUBJECT 1: He was hungry. 

SUBJECT 2: He was hungry. 

INTERVIEWER: He was eating a dead person. 

SUBJECT 2: I didn't see him eating. He was cutting off. And somebody told me he was going to eat it. It was no use to cut off from dead people this meat. 

SUBJECT 1: He was hungry. 

SUBJECT 2: He was hungry. One day I went out for you know, from the camp, you know, from the little room. And I was hungry too. It was-- grass was going you know, under that little-- little, because it was under the ground. And I tried. 

I want to, you know, to take a little bit grass to eat. The watchman on the top, the soldier said if you not going to disappear back inside, I'm going to kill you. He took the gun and want to shoot me. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you wanted to eat grass? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: This place that you lived in underground, 150 people lived in this room? 

SUBJECT 2: One. It was a ladder. A lot of cellars like this, you know, not only for me alone. A lot of cellars. 

INTERVIEWER: And they had no beds, just brick? 

SUBJECT 2: No, there was no beds. No beds. 

SUBJECT 1: That's why he's so sick for the sciatica. 

SUBJECT 2: No beds. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there a-- was there a latrine? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: A latrine? A bathroom? 

SUBJECT 2: A bathroom? Yes. You have to go outside. That wasn't a bathroom. It wasn't a latrine. There was a big hole, you know, like a grave. 

And on the top of one board, one board, you know, a long board. And all the people used to do something. 

They have to sit there and that's all. I don't know how it was. But the woman that was-- That was their life. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any privacy? 

SUBJECT 2: No privacy at all. There wasn't such a thing. 

INTERVIEWER: What would-- what was your mind doing-- 

SUBJECT 2: No mind. You don't have any-- you didn't have any mind at all. You live like-- like an animal. 

You see something, you don't care about it, because that was-- that was life. Given one thing, you want to go out alive if you can. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel about the man that was-- you know, about cannibalism? Did you-- Did you-- 

SUBJECT 2: I feel bad about it. I couldn't help it. I felt very bad. And I couldn't help it. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any feeling that you also could do that? 

SUBJECT 2: No, never. Never. 

SUBJECT 1: Everyone like to survive, but through a different way. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in this hole in the ground? In this underground room? 

SUBJECT 2: I was there for I think '44 or '45. I was there for six months. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was guarding you? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: Who was guarding you? 

SUBJECT 2: The German soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you working? Were you working underground also? 

SUBJECT 2: No, not underground. They took us several day some where else, to Munich. You know, somewhere else with the train. 4 o'clock in the morning. 

4 o'clock in the morning. Get down, we have to walk about six, seven miles. We have to walk, you know, like to the working place, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: When you left there, where did you go? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: When you left that place, that factory, where did you go? 

SUBJECT 2: The Americans liberated. What do you mean factory? 

SUBJECT 1: He wasn't working in the factory. 

SUBJECT 2: When I was there, they didn't work in the factory, only in-- when I was in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in Bavaria. You went to work in a factory. You were living in these tunnels. 

SUBJECT 2: --in a factory. I worked in a factory. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you working in? 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you working? 

SUBJECT 2: Outside! Open work and I was digging in, you know, holes like this. Except in Poland, when I was working in a factory before, a factory, otherwise. 

INTERVIEWER: So in other words, in this place in Bavaria, they took you to Munich, or wherever they took you every day, you don't know where they took you? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: You don't know where you went every day? 

SUBJECT 2: No, nobody knew. 

SUBJECT 1: Was this discovered? 

SUBJECT 2: Around Landsberg am Lech. I don't know the place. We were digging places. We were digging holes. That's all that we knew. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the purpose of your digging? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't know what the purpose was. Who knows? 

INTERVIEWER: They gave you shovels? 

SUBJECT 2: Sure, they-- sure, they give you each one a shovel. I have to give it back when we're done with work. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there dogs guarding you also, or just soldiers? 

SUBJECT 2: Soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. Did they feed you while you were working? Did they give you a meal? 

SUBJECT 2: No, not while we were working. Once a day, if you got a little soup. And that's all. 

INTERVIEWER: That's all? 

SUBJECT 2: And if the soldier was watching you, he didn't do nothing the work he wants you to do, he took away the soup from you too. You don't get it. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you drink the soup with? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: How did you drink the soup? How did they give it to you? In what? 

SUBJECT 2: We had-- each one has a little dish, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Were you worried about losing that dish? 

SUBJECT 2: Sure. Without-- you got to watch it. If you lose it, good bye. No more. 

INTERVIEWER: Did many people lose them? 

SUBJECT 2: No, no they didn't. A lot of people used to, you know, used to steal from one another, you know. Get a piece of bread a day, used to steal it. You got to watch it. 

We used to sleep many of us, with 50, 60 people in a row. If somebody wants to, you know, to turn around, everyone else has to turn around. Otherwise it was impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: 60 people had to turn? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, at once, yes. You couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER: But at night? 

SUBJECT 2: Every day, every day. I'm not telling you a lie. Every day after they drag away, you know, somebody else was dead, you had falling dead in the sleep, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: When one is sleeping at night, one turns without knowing it. How could you-- how could you turn if-- 

SUBJECT 2: He could not tell me. It's hard to make noise, you know, to move back and forth, but everyone now has to wake up one another. It was awful, I'm telling you. 

INTERVIEWER: Did people cry out at night? Did they-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, a lot of people were crying. A lot of people were crying. It didn't-- it didn't make anything for you, because you-- you suffered so much, you know, you didn't care about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think that you would ever be able to leave or get out? Or be free? 

SUBJECT 2: No, no. I didn't think I was going to get freed. 

INTERVIEWER: You had no hope? 

SUBJECT 2: No hope at all. It came suddenly. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you think you were able to survive with no hope? You must have had some hope. 

SUBJECT 2: Sometimes we were thinking about something otherwise. I'm telling you, you lose your hope. I cannot describe to you the way it was happening. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you at all sick? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: Were you sick? 

SUBJECT 2: No. I was not sick. In the camp, I was not sick. If you feel sick, you know-- you know-- you-- you-- your end to come. That's all. Even if you are sick, you do not say nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Living underground like that, did your skin have-- did you have problems with your skin or with rash? 

SUBJECT 2: No, I didn't have any problem with the skin at the time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did other people? 

SUBJECT 2: Some people. I don't know, sure, a lot of people had sick skin. Some people, they got [INAUDIBLE], you know. They swell up. 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] lice. 

SUBJECT 2: That's different. This is the lice. This is nothing. I think this is, you know, from-- from the lice. I have somebody damaged, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Lice? 

SUBJECT 2: Lice. You know, the same thing, the same camp. So the lice eat them up. 

SUBJECT 1: A hole in his feet. 

SUBJECT 2: A hole in his feet all the way down. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this man. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, I saw it. I was in camp with him together. 

SUBJECT 1: He just died a few years ago. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't get infested with-- you didn't have lice? 

SUBJECT 2: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER: You did not have the lice? 

SUBJECT 2: Each one had it. Each one had it. There isn't such a thing. 

You know that some people, you know makes an effect. You tried to do your best. I can prescribe to you. You try to do your best. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that when you were in Auschwitz, saw the leader of the Lodz ghetto killed? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, he came. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw him? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you-- can you tell-- 

SUBJECT 2: I didn't talk to him. You couldn't talk to him. You saw him, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to him? Did you see what happened to him? 

SUBJECT 2: They said they burned him alive. 

SUBJECT 1: I didn't see them, that's what they talking about. 

SUBJECT 2: No, that's what people were saying. I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were freed, what did you think? What did you do 

SUBJECT 2: I couldn't believe it myself. It's going to happen to me, a thing like this. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

SUBJECT 2: We were in the camp, they want to-- they had an idea to take it out the next day to kill us, to shot us. This, we know it. We're [INAUDIBLE] ahead. And during the night, the Americans came in. That was in '45 in April, by the end of April, April 27. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened? 

SUBJECT 2: And the-- the German soldiers disappeared from the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to you? 

SUBJECT 2: And we went out, you know, in the street, and the Germans, and the Americans came to us. And they gave us, you know, stuff. They gave us something food. And a lot of people they died. We didn't-- we got used to no food. Start to eat fat stuff, and they died. 

SUBJECT 1: It's happened to-- in my place too. 

SUBJECT 2: There are a lot of people. 

SUBJECT 1: After-- When the-- we was liberated from the Germans. So the American came and they brought big trucks with a lot of food, fat food. 

SUBJECT 2: They had bread, you know, and butter. Everything. 

SUBJECT 1: Fat food. And we got 60 people dead the following day because of the swelling for the soup and the stomach was empty. And there was nothing that was eating for-- for more than years. And right away, the 60 people dead. 

SUBJECT 2: They're not supposed to eat, you know. I have a friend-- had a friend. And I told him, don't go there. Don't eat. It's too fat. 

Because you're not used to it. And he said, I don't care. I'm hungry. 

I'm hungry. And he eat everything that he saw, you know, that they gave to him. And the next day-- 

SUBJECT 1: Dead, yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: And the doctor said, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you then, Mr. Stadtlender? 

SUBJECT 2: At that time I tell you, I was about that time I was about 37 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: You were 37. So you understood everything that was happening to you. 

SUBJECT 2: Sure, I understood. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there many people your age in the camp with you? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, older too. 

INTERVIEWER: Older too. Did they survive? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, a lot of them survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that it was harder on you because you were older? 

SUBJECT 2: At that time I didn't think about it, you know. At that time, I didn't think about it. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it left you with? 

SUBJECT 2: When I was liberated. 

INTERVIEWER: What has it left you with now? What-- what do you think about it, feel about-- 

SUBJECT 2: Let me tell you something, you wouldn't believe it. There isn't an hour in the day what I don't remember things. I can laugh, you know. And I can do everything, dance and everything. Still it's everything it's come to mind. 

You cannot-- this, you cannot forget. Especially during the night where I go to sleep, you know, and I can't fell sleep, you know. It's-- you know, the whole story goes by again and again and again. And nothing you can do about it. 

SUBJECT 1: How many times I cry in the sleep. And I holler the Germans, the Germans. And he pushes me. And I'm OK again. 

But you'll never forget something happened to us. And how can you forget things like this? 

SUBJECT 2: It's not that. It's a thing that we'll never forget. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that it's important that you got together? In other words, you married someone, you each married someone who had had a similar experience? Has that been helpful to you? 

SUBJECT 2: Really, we understand each other, and you know how it is. She got through something, and I've been through, so-- 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel about telling other people about it? Other people that you meet? 

SUBJECT 2: It's very hard. 

SUBJECT 1: Some, they believe. Some, they say it is hard to believe this happened to you. I mean, if you tell-- I'm telling you the story. Of course, you have a lot of interviews. You hear from all of them similar to this. 

SUBJECT 2: So you can believe something. 

SUBJECT 1: For everything was true, what I just said it. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that you were hurt by-- they beat you? Or you have a bad back? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. I was work. I was at work. They took me to Munich every day to work with the rain. And one day, you know, I was working with the, how you call it-- tracks. So I couldn't lift-- I couldn't lift the hammer. 

It was so heavy, you know. I couldn't lift it. And the soldier was you know, behind me. I didn't realize it. And I lift the hammer. It took me too long, a little bit. He gave me, you know, with the rifle right here. 