INTERVIEWER 1: I would move back. OK. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: My name is Lucy Weinstein. Before I was married, I was Lucy [? Krebs. ?] I was born in Berleburg in Germany in 1924. And Berleburg is a small town. 

And during the Nazi period, in the beginning, there weren't many Nazis there. My father often used to say if there had been more in the beginning, and if they had beaten us up, not so many of us would have gotten killed. As it was in the town, there were about 11 Jewish families there. Practically everybody got killed with just-- one old man, in fact, survived. the concentration camps. And we were the last family to get out of the town, which was in 1941. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How big was the town? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: The town at that time was about 3,000 inhabitants. Today, it's about 10,000. And, um, we, uh-- I come from a middle-class family. My father was a cattle dealer. And I'm the oldest of, uh, three children that my parents had. And we went to the local school. 

And actually, my first encounter with, um-- personal encounter with Nazism was one day when, uh, the kids came to school-- there had been, I guess, the Nazi meeting. And I came into the classroom, and they had put caricatures onto the blackboard with Jews with big noses. And they said that the Jews were going to bring down Germany and whatnot. And then, they all called me "dirty Jew" and [INAUDIBLE] they used to call me. And I remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jordan? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Hm? Jordan splasher. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why Jordan-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, because Jews belonged to Palestine. And the Jordan was in Palestine, that we weren't really Germans. And up until that time, I had grown up to believe that I was a German by nationality and a Jew by religion. And I never considered myself as anything else. 

And I was horrified. And they all yelled at me, and I ran out of the classroom and grabbed my coat and ran. And they had put a dead mouse into my coat. 

However, to show you the, uh-- what kind of a town it was. A few days later, a lot of the kids who had participated in this had apparently mentioned this to their parents. And some of the parents had written letters of apologies to my parents because this was a small town. And, uh, my father was born there. And my grandfather had been born there. And so my parents were well-known. And people were embarrassed about that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your parents had been generations-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: In Berleburg, Yes. They certainly were there. In fact, I was back last summer, and I checked. They were there as far as the records went, which the records for Jews didn't go back any further than around 1800. And they were there already at that time. 

They were-- they had been farmers in that, uh, town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like any other German farmer? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, they had a small farm, I suppose. Yes. How different? I don't know. But they had been farmers. And, um-- so not much happened. My-- we would have left, actually, earlier. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year were you born? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: I was born in 1924. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '24. And the incident with the caricature? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Maybe '36. But then it was quiet again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean that between '33 and '36, you-- there was nothing? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: In my school, not much, no. Children belonged to the Hitler Youth Movements. And we didn't. And I always had playmates. The parents insisted that the children continue to play with me. Certain parents, certainly, did. 

And then, um, after-- after that or perhaps even before that, another encounter was during religious lessons. During when they taught Christianity, religion. I did not participate. And I and another girl who was Catholic never participated in the religion. 

And one day, we sat outside. And they had brought in-- I think it must've been around 1936 that they brought in other teachers to indoctrinate people, especially in towns like Berleburg where the Nazis weren't very strong. They wanted to accelerate Nazism, and they brought in Nazi teachers to teach us, to teach the children. 

And during this religious session, this Catholic girl-- her name was Hilda-- and myself sat outside. We came a little bit early. And we heard this teacher tell the students that they shouldn't buy in Jewish stores, and which were the Jewish stores, and the Jews were traders, and all that sort of thing. 

But nothing happened. Nothing particular happened. And I continued to go to school there until 1938. November 9, during the Kristallnacht, that was really the first time we suffered. We were-- our windows were smashed. The synagogues were burnt. 

My father at that time, luckily, was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Synagogue? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: The synagogue, I beg your-- I beg your pardon. It was only one in our town. And a small one at that. 

My father had-- was hospitalized at that time, luckily so. Because we wanted to go to America at that time. And they had a rather high number. And he had heard that he had to be in good health to come over here. And he had a hernia and wanted to have it operated on. And so he was in the hospital 

and when they came that night to arrest him, he wasn't there. They had smashed all of our windows. And I still remember my mother screaming, get under the blankets. And-- which we did. And when we looked out, there was a sea of people outside. It's-- um, the whole town seemed to be out there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Local neighbors? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Local people. Mm-hmm, yes. 

Well, neighbors. We couldn't recognize who was there. You know, it was at night. We looked out of the window and there they were. And they asked for my father. And, uh, we said he was in the house in the hospital. Whereupon, they left. 

And I remember my mother screaming, they're going in the direction of the hospital. They're going to arrest him. And we were petrified. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The town with 3,000 inhabitants, that in '36 sent letters of apology. In '39, there were-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: '38. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In '38, there were crowds of people-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --smashing your windows. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Asking for your father? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The same people? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, yes. Well, you see, there were probably-- there was probably an undercurrent of Nazism there all the time, but we didn't feel it because at school, there were sufficient people who were not Nazis who would play with us. From the point of view of a child I'm telling this now, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And from point of view of a child, you also were learning about the new biology? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: No, we didn't learn that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They weren't teaching Rassenkunde? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: No. Not in my school. We only-- literature was restricted. I remember we weren't allowed to read Goethe and various other authors that were-- supposedly had been friendly with the Jews. Those, we weren't allowed to read. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was the explanation that Goethe was forbidden because he was friendly with the Jews? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: That's what I heard when I was a child. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was Schiller permitted? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Schiller was permitted, because Schiller was-- especially, there was an anti-Semitic poem, I remember, that we read. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: In school. Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Schiller. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Schiller, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about Heine? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Heine? Oh, Heine we never read in school. Heine was Jewish. Converted , but I mean-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Converted. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You sounded really shocked at this idea of-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You sounded really shocked at the idea of reading Heine in school. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yeah. No, we didn't read. I read Heine by myself, but I was an avid reader. But I, uh-- not in school. Anyway, so the following day, my mother always insisted that we go to school, no matter what. She sent us to school. We didn't realize at the time, November 10, that this was a nationwide thing because Jews were not allowed to have radios. So we didn't know. We thought it was a local thing, because we had heard from other towns that people's windows had been smashed. 

I remember my uncle-- I had an uncle who lived in a small town near Giesen, Giesen in Hessin. And he wanted us to, uh, come to America with him. This was already in 1934. And it was because all the Jews were taken out on the street in the middle of the night and beaten up in that town. 

And my father, at that time, didn't want to go to America because he felt it was too difficult. He couldn't speak English and he had three small children. And he thought that that was just that town, that this would not happen in his town. And of course, local people, all of his friends whom he had grown up with, assured him that Hitler would be overthrown and that we shouldn't leave. And Jewish friends, too, told him the same thing. And quite a few of those, of course, were killed then in concentration camps later on. 

And so we thought that finally, it had gotten to Berleburg. That this was a local thing, we thought. But-- and so the following day, I went to school. And that's the first time that pe-- nobody spoke to me in school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in what grade then? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: I was-- huh. That is-- I was in the -- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Junior in high school. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Junior in high school. Eighth? Ninth grade. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Something like that. Eighth grade, yeah. I guess so Eighth grade. And I remember, I walked in. I came an hour late for some reason, I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was the day following the Kristallnacht? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. Was that the 9th or the 10th of-- the 10th, wasn't it? Yeah, the 10th. Anyways, the night following the Kristallnacht, I went to school. And I will never forget that day. 

I walked in, and my class had an exam in mathematics. And, uh, when I walked in, they all laughed. And I stood there, and then the teacher, who was a very polite man, told me to sit down, and gave me my exam book, and told me to do my exam, which I did. 

And then when that was over, they started teasing me that I looked so pale. And that the synagogue had been operated on an appendix. I knew nothing about the synagogue at the time yet. I didn't know. But I heard these remarks from children. And nobody spoke to me. And they all ran away from me. Some of them sort of smiled and laughed shyly. And I didn't know what happened. 

So finally, the director of the school called me in and said that I should go home. And that I would hear from them. So I went home. And then later on, I heard that we had been expelled from school and what had happened to the synagogue. And I ran over there. And I remember that they were knocking down whatever was left with an ax and with various things. And I saw on the street-- I remember, a flag I had mad-- made because we had had a festival on Simhat Torah before, where all the children had made flags. And I saw my flag with the 10 commandments of Moses lying on the ground. And, uh, so that was that. 

But then in the meantime, my mother was terribly frightened about my father. And she was afraid to go to the hospital, and sent my brother over there to see if my father had been arrested because they were going in that direction. And finally, my brother came back and said that he was still there. And then, that evening we went to the hospital. And my father was beside himself because some farmer had walked in and had said that all the Jews had been arrested, and had told him the horrible story. 

And my brother, who was four years younger than I was at the time-- he was 10. Uh, he said, I just wanted to see that you are all right and you are OK. Fine. And he ran off. And so my father was in a terrible state. He knew something went-- was going wrong. And he didn't have the full picture of the situation. 

At any rate, when we went there that night, my mother spoke to the doctor, who was in charge. And the doctor said, yes, they came here. And he said, I will not let him go. Only over my dead body. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a German doctor? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: German doctor, yes. Dr. Hammer was his name. And he, uh, protected my father. And they came back after a week, and he said-- and the nurses supported him-- that my-- complications had set in and this man was unfit to go home. And he kept him there for three weeks until the wave had passed, and they sort of let him come home. 

However, my grandfather was arrested. And my uncle was arrested. And the whole town, everybody from the age of 14 up until 80, or whatever. Everybody. All males were arrested during this period. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: There weren't all that many. There were only about 10, 11 families at that time in that town. So, uh-- but they all were sent to concentration camps. 

But I do remember that we put sack cloth over our windows because they were throwing stones at night through the broken windows. And of course, nobody would fix our windows. And we put sack cloths there. And one night, we heard somebody tapping on the window, and we all shuttered, you know? We didn't know who it was. And then finally, he called and it was my grandfather. And apparently, the local policeman, who also knew him ever since he was a child, had let him go. He sort of got him out and saw to it that he wasn't sent away with the others. But the others were sent to concentration camps, my uncle and other Jewish men. 

So anyway, a week after that-- I think it was about in December, in the middle of December. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mmm. The, the-- out of the 10 Jewish families, 9 were sent off to camp? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, they didn't all have men in them. There was, for instance, one family consisted only of two elderly women. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Took care even for-- with this small population to send the men-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --to camps. Where? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Uranienborg, I think at that time, some of them went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For how long? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, I left, in the meantime, so-- before they got back. So uh, I couldn't tell you. Some never returned, others got out. My uncle, for instance, who went to Uranienborg, later on got to England. He went to England. 

And uh, in the middle of December, my brother and my sister and I went with a children's transport to Belgium. At that time, all the children who had been expelled from school tried to go abroad. And the surrounding countries did take children. And the rea-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That is December 19-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: 1938. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '38. And your parents? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: My parents could not go because we all wanted to go to America. And by the time my father got ready to go to America, which I think was in 1936, he decided to go, because he was no longer allowed to conduct any business at all at that time. And there was the, uh, quota system was so low, that they had to have a number. And my parents got a number to come to the American Consulate, which would get them there on May 10, 1940. 

I remember the date exactly. I'll tell you in a little while why. So we couldn't wait for that. 

And in the meantime, we thought that, uh-- my parents thought that the children should go to Belgium, where my mother's sister was. She had emigrated to Belgium with her husband and her daughter. And, uh, that we could go to school there in Belgium. And we would wait then until my parents would get their visa, and they would then join us in Belgium, they thought. And we would go to America from there, you see? 

And-- but then when my father got back out of the hospital, and after we left for Belgium, he had to-- he was taken away and had to do slave labor, work on a railroad since he hadn't been in a concentration camp and that wave sort of was over. So he did slave labor for-- I don't know for how long. But I think for about two years. 

So in the meantime, we went to Belgium-- I was the oldest-- with this children's transport. And we were met by my aunt. And we lived in Malines, Mechelen, in Flanders for two years. And, uh, with my aunt. We all went to Catholic schools there and were under considerable pressure to convert to Catholicism. Actually. We were the only Jews there in Belgium. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were still free Belgium? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Oh, yes. That's the next chapter. So, uh, we went to school from, uh-- after Christmas 1939. We arrived before Christmas. And after vacation was over, we went to school. We learned Flemish. We went to a Flemish school there. 

And then in 1940-- oh, yeah. In the meantime, we were called to the American Consulate in Antwer-- Antwerp, the children. And we all got our visa to go to the United States subject to my parents' visa because we were all under 16 and we did not have a sponsorship that would permit us to go without our parents, you see? So it was this technicality. And they kept our visa there in the embassy. 

Then, on May 10, 1940, the day my parents were called to Stuttgart, to the American Embassy in Stuttgart, to get their visa, that was the day the Germans invaded Belgium, and the war broke out. And we lost contact with them. 

And of course, nobody thought that Hitler would just march through and be in Paris three weeks later, you know? But the bombarding was horrendous. And all of our-- and then in Belgium-- by that time, I spoke Flemish without an accent. So strangers never thought even that I was German. 

However, my uncle, who spoke with a heavy accent, he was constantly arrested as a German spy because he had this accent. So finally, the police chief in Mechelen said, I better keep you here because they're going to kill you until this wave is over. So he was arrested and stayed with the police, and was subsequently sent-- as the Germans invaded, he was sent to France. 

And my aunt-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The police sent him? Who sent him? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yeah. Well, I don't know. Together with other people whom they had arrested. They were all sent on a transport to France into safety, supposedly. At that time, nobody thought Paris was going to fall, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: So the Belgians tried to save their lives? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. Oh, yes. And then, uh, my aunt and her daughter, who was 17, and 5-- and 5 refugees she had taken in. We all went. We were alone together. And then, the neighbor said, we must flee because the bombardments, the nightly bombardments, were so terrible. The blitzkrieg. The Germans were bombarding that-- we just couldn't stand it. We had to leave. So everybody left. 

And we packed whatever we could take on bicycles and had knapsacks. And we marched with all of Belgium toward France. And we walked for three weeks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Pardon. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The war has begun. There are German bombardments and you're in a march towards France-- France. Can you describe that? People? Crowds? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Enormous crowds. I mean, I'm sure that has been shown on television quite often and regularly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your memories. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: My memories? Well, I pushed-- since I was the oldest of three, and I was the strongest, and the most athletic-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old? How old? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: 15. I pushed the bicycle with whatever food we could take and a few things that we had. I don't know. And we slept at night. Sometimes, in barns. Sometimes, in schools. 

I remember one night sleeping on a school bench. And sometimes, in gut-- in the gutter. And sometimes, not at all. 

I remember we were so tired my sister once was walking in front of me. And she stood still and she hit me. And I fell back. And a whole row of us fell over because we were sleepwalking, which we weren't aware of. And, uh, the bomb-- as the bombing went on, you know? And we would fall on the ground. And the Ger-- we went, actually, straight through the German lines. You know, they were taking us over. 

One night-- one day, I remember we had slept-- we had slept in a barn. That's right. We had gone into a barn. My cousin-- my cousin was also there-- was sleeping next to me. And, um, we woke up in the morning and she was kicking me. I said, what are you kicking me for? And all of a sudden, I hear this voice in French, and there was a soldier sleeping under us. Neither he nor we were aware of this because they had come back from a battle, a French soldier. And there were only a few left in the battle. All the others had been killed. And the dying horses were lying outside the barn. 

And as we walked out, the bombardments were horrendous. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, on what territory were you at that moment? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Belgium. It was toward the French border. But we were-- the Germans overtook us in a small town called Menen It was right on the French border. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you describe this barn incident, had you already been-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Was near there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --overtaken by the Germans or not? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: No, that was before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Still, you were under Allied? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: We were still-- yes, with the allies. And I remember, we got up in the morning and the soldiers who were there, they wanted to wash. And I was pumping water for them. And we were all working wildly for the war effort. We felt we had to do any-- everything possible to help wherever we could. And we didn't believe that this was happening. 

And then, this continuous bombardment, some people went hysterical. And I remember some Belgium women, all of a sudden, jumped up as the German airplanes came through the air like that with their rosaries up in the air, and screaming for a miracle to happen. And they were just all mowed down. 

And then, in Menen where we were in Menen they-- in the meantime, they were dropping leaflets that we should give ourselves up. And that, uh-- that Paris had fallen. And we didn't-- just didn't believe it until-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Paris had fallen? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: It had, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The way you describe it-- 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Or it was about to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The way you describe it, it sounds that the people fleeing didn't quite realize the-- the defeat? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: No, we didn't. Nobody realized the defeat until it happened. And I remember when it happened. We were in a barn in Menen And this farm woman came and said that there were Germans all around. And, um-- so we all said we would hide. We were afraid, you know, that they would-- the Belgians, too. 

Most of the people in our group were Belgians. We were with about 40 people, all Belgians. And we were in a barn behind a kind of wall that was as high as a person. 

And, um, then we hear this woman walking in, this farm woman, with a German soldier. And she doesn't understand much German, but we understood it. I understood it. 

And the German soldier asked, are you hiding any refugees? And she said, no, no. We were all behind that wall. And, uh, asked various questions if she had bicycles. That they wanted to confiscate all the bicycles. And she denied everything and said she didn't understand and all sorts of things. 

And then finally, when, uh, he left-- the Belgian sent out some scouts to see if there were, in fact, taking all the bicycles. But they weren't taking them all. Then finally, we decided, we had better go back. And it was really true. 

Oh, yeah. The war was over, they said. This man said the-- the German said the war was over. And that, in fact, he was right. The war was over. The scouts who had gone out found out. And that we might as well go back. And, uh-- so we went back. 

And I remember at first, we were in such a state of shock that we couldn't understand it. Some of the Germans tried to be quite nice to us. And I remember, they had-- when we came out, there were some soldiers who were trying to give us coffee and cake. And we were all in this line. And I remember, I had the arrogance to say to him, I don't drink German coffee. He could have arrested me, but I got through. Was an arrogant kid. 

So, um, after that, we took-- I remember, I had the bicycle. So as we came closer to Malines, I got on my bicycle to see if our house was still there. And I got there. I was the first one to get back. And, uh, it was there. 

So then, we lived under German occupation. But actually, I forgot to mention this earlier. It was quite horrendous. When I told you about my uncle being constantly arrested. Well, we were very lucky because we could have been easily arrested by the French and the Belgians, who were hysterical against anybody who was German. 

I mean, there you were no longer a Jew. You were a German. And we had German passports in those days. German identification cards, we had. 

And I remember as we were walking, the sleepwalking as we were escaping, we-- the thing that we dreaded was that we should be asked to show our identity card. And they only did spot checks, you see? 

And at one point, I was spotted. And a Frenchman said to me that I should show my identity card. And, uh, I was so scared. I didn't know what to do. I said, if you want it, you have to take it yourself. It's in my knapsack. I'm too tired. And with that, I fell on the floor. I was-- I mean, it wasn't much of an act. We were exhausted. He said, go on. He-- he just thought I was a Belgian. And we weren't caught. 

If we had been caught, we would have been sent to Gurs. That's where they sent Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was Gurs? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Gurs was a camp in the south of France. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the south of France? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yeah. In, um-- yeah. It was first in unoccupied, France, wasn't it? And then it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mmm. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: --occupied. Huh? Yeah, I had an uncle who died there. Anyway. Anyway, we came back. And then, a week or so later my uncle arrived back, miraculously. They had-- they had been sent to France. And the Germans then had invaded, and they quickly ran away, he and another man. And when they realized the Germans were everywhere, somehow they made their way back. And they were back at home with us. 

Now in the meantime, my-- my parents tried to contact us and couldn't. All communication had been interrupted with Belgium, you know? And their visa were only good for three months. They had gotten their visa in May. And by the time they were able to make contact with us, it was August, and their visa had expired. 

And in the meantime, they frantically had tried to book passages. They always thought they would find us. They had booked passages via Russia, and Vladivostok, into the Dominican Republic, and lost everything. 

And my father said he's not leaving without us because he felt that if he left and left us behind, we would-- that would be the end. We would never make it. And so he decided to let his visa expire and try to find-- find us. So, um, in August, they found us through the Red Cross. And then, they tried to get us out of Belgium. 

This was very difficult, because our visa that had been in the embassy in Antwerp no longer existed because that embassy had been bombed. And so the only way we could get out was via Germany. And, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your visa to the US you mean was bombed? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes, the embassy had been bombed so it didn't exist anymore. So in the meantime, from Germany, my father tried to get new papers for all of us because his-- theirs had expired, too. And through my relatives and Jewish organizations, like the Jewish Joint Refugee Organization. What was it called? They-- they got the ball rolling. And he-- and he got a new appointment for us to go to the consulate in Stuttgart in-- when was it? In February of 1941. 

However, by the time all of this was arranged, it was already Fall 1940. And in the meantime, I had-- I was 16. I had become 16. And there was a law that Jews over 16 were not allowed to enter Germany. And, uh, we had to go back to Germany in order to get out. And-- 

So my brother and my sister, and another cousin of mine who was also with us, and another boy, who was also a refugee, who stayed there, they all left. And I was the only one who stayed behind. 

And I really thought they were going to get out and I was-- I was ready to runaway and do-- kill myself. Do all sorts of things in those days because there was-- it seemed there was no hope. But, uh, they-- so they went back to my parents. 

And my father, in the meantime, who had done slave labor for a couple of years, I think. Maybe a year and a half or two years, I don't remember exactly. But he had gotten time off to arrange for the Immigration. And he was at home then when my brother and my sister came. 

And so finally, my mother at that time tried one more trick. And that was to go to the mayor of our town and to ask-- and to speak to him. And to say that in order for Germany to get rid of one more Jew, they would have to let me re-enter for a couple of months, so that I could pick up my visa to go to America. And uh, then leave. 

And he-- he wrote that. He wrote a letter to the [INAUDIBLE] commandant in [INAUDIBLE], in Malines, to this effect. And, um, they-- they granted me entry into Germany. They gave me the papers. And so, um, I went back to Germany in, uh, February of 1941. 

And that was a period when that-- that was very difficult to arrange because there were terrible curfews on. I couldn't go through to Berleburg in one day from Belgium, because I would be breaking the law. 

We were only allowed on the street for two hours or three hours a day, I don't remember what it was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What hours? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: I don't remember that, really. But I know that my parents and my uncle made arrangements that-- for me to travel on the train. I had to go via Aachen, cross the border in Aachen. And I was to go to Cologne, and then stay in the Jewish orphanage in Cologne, where they had made arrangements for me. 

And then, the next day, when-- whatever the time was when I was allowed out, I could continue. And then, my father would meet me in Siegen, which was close to Berleburg. That was where I changed train, and then took a little local train to Berleburg. So anyway, all these elaborate arrangements were made. 

And when I got to Aachen, however, I remember for the first time, they all dressed me up. I have a feeling they didn't think I was going to make it. They bought me a new outfit with a big, blue hat and slightly elevated shoes, which I wore for the first time. I was very proud. And I had my heavy-- I had two heavy suitcases. What on earth I had in two heavy suitcases, I don't know. But anyway. And they pushed me onto the train. 

When I got to Aachen, two SS men came and helped me out of the car and carried my suitcases to the-- to the place where we had to show the passports. 

And, uh, I pulled out my passport. And at that point, my passport had a big J in it, of course. And the moment they saw that, of course, the suitcases were dropped. And, uh, the whole tone changed. And they were beside themselves, apparently. And they felt I had to be interrogated. And, uh, a big commotion started to go around in Aachen. And everybody was alerted that there was a Jew on the train and all of that. 

So then, they-- there was a nurse there. And they made me go to the nurse. And I had to undress and be examined. They thought I might carry weapons and all sorts of things. I don't know. It was ghastly. 

And then finally, after I was dressed again, they called me into a room and they started to interrogate me, what I was-- that I-- whether I knew that I was breaking the law. And I showed them the letter. 

And since that didn't work, they said-- they tried to get me to make a statement that my father had made anti-Hitler remarks. And then, my uncle. And they knew for certain that my uncle had spoken against Hitler. And the whole thing lasted for two hours. During which time I said I didn't-- we never talked politics at home. We were told to say all these things. Children were told to say these things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the interrogation? Who were the interrogators? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they ask questions? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: Well, they were very rude. They had whips and they hit themselves on their boots constantly as they spoke like that. They didn't do anything to me, but I was terrified. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were they? What did they look like? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: SS men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What age? 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: That I don't remember. I couldn't remember what they looked like. They looked the same to me, the two SS men. I don't remember what they looked like. But I think they were young. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They were all young. 

LUCY WEINSTEIN: They were all young. I think so, too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape. We are changing the tape. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

