[TEST PATTERN TONE] INTERVIEWER: You on my tape, too? 

CREW: We're rolling audio, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, ready? Did you-- you said you went to [? Hader, ?] you lived mostly among non-Jewish people. 

SUBJECT: That's correct. 

INTERVIEWER: And so, what made it evident to you that you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Well, when the Germans came in, things changed. And we found that our Gentile friends' neighborhood were kind of looking at us in a different light than they did before September '39. 

And then, the Germans made it very unpleasant. You know, that the Jews should not fraternize with the Gentiles. And there was just this cut line, you know? It's like you had friends, all of a sudden, like you had a disease. And that-- that's-- that's as far as I can remember. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your parents tell you? You had a close family. What did your parents tell you about why it changed so suddenly? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't think my parents themselves realized what was going on in those days, '38, '39, 1940. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your father do? What business was he in? 

SUBJECT: My father was in the transportation business. Freight handling from the railroad stations to the merchants. 

INTERVIEWER: And Were you comfortable? I mean-- 

SUBJECT: I was comfortable, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe what your house looked like, what the town looked like? 

SUBJECT: Well, we lived on the outskirts of town. Downtown there was a very modern city. Railroad car-- railroad station was more modern than New Haven Station was when I came here in 1945. The City Hall was immaculate, clean, very modern. 

Post office, very, very beautiful. Very-- from what I remember in those days. And we had theaters in town, movies. We had, of course, a modern railroad station. I mentioned that before. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- you had-- did you have many friends, young boys, that you played with that were non-Jewish as well as Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Of course, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of things did you do with them? 

SUBJECT: What do you do when you're 8, 9 years old, you know? You-- I remember we used to play what's compared to our baseball here. They used to call it palant. Instead of hitting a ball, we had a stick with a-- with a-- with a bat. And we used to play baseball that way. And there was a lot of soccer, which, you know, we used to call-- I forgot the Polish word for it. 

INTERVIEWER: What percentage of your friends would you say were Polish versus Jewish? 

SUBJECT: I would say 80% non-Jews, 20% Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: And you never felt that you were any different than anyone else? 

SUBJECT: Not until 1939. Late '39, early '40s. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean suddenly, one day, the Germans came in and things changed? 

SUBJECT: Well, not-- was maybe that same day. I would say within a period of-- by Christmas of that year. It was September through December. I would say within a period of three months. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe what you saw and what you felt, what you were told during those three months. 

SUBJECT: Well, what I saw-- I have to backtrack a little bit. One day in September '39-- and I don't remember the date-- we woke up and there were airplanes overhead. You know, fighter planes. And they were maneuvering all-- maneuvering all over the sky. 

And we got what you would call in the United States an air horn. And you know, it was the neighborhood air horn. And we says, what's that? He says, oh, don't worry. Those are our planes, Polish planes, you know? And before we know it, there were a couple bombs dropped, you know, not too far away from us. And we realized they weren't Polish planes. 

So everybody went into, you know, wherever they could hide for the time being. And shortly thereafter, we saw the Polish army started to retreat. Don't forget, we are about 15, 20 miles away from the German border. It was the main retreating avenue from Germany to Poland. 

So we see, you know, the Polish army in those days, I don't remember too many motorized vehicles. You know, horses? Some were pulled by soldiers. And that went on for a few days. I don't know, three or four days, maybe a week. And then there was a lull, like nothing, you know, neither here nor there. 

So we-- my mother and my father took us all children. I had a brother that was born in '38. So he was only a little baby, just about one, one-year-old. So we went to hide in the bunker about, oh, a mile away from my home, you know? 

And we sat there for two or three days. And then we heard motor-- motorized loud noises, either from engines-- I didn't realize what a tanker, you know, sounded like until then. And we sat there, sat there. 

Finally, somebody went out of the bunker. There must have been about 40, 50 people. The bunker was really a cellar in a big apartment house. And that's what we-- you know, this is the same bunker that I was hiding when I was in the ghetto. 

And finally, somebody went out like a scout almost, you know? And he come back and says, the Germans are in town. And we might as well come out and see what's-- what's happening. So we went ahead and went back to our little house that we had. And things were relatively not that bad in those days. 

Winter was coming, I told you. Christmas. And the lines were getting bigger and bigger in bread lines. I think by then they issued coupons, ration coupons. I'm not-- I'm not really sure. But I used to get up early in the morning. And we used to take lines at the bakery. 

And the lines were stretched maybe three, four kilometers or miles, whichever you want to compare them to. And so, we used to take turns in the line, you know? Somebody would start at the end and they progressed. We knew that within 10, 15 minutes, somebody else should go and relieve them. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you feel-- was there any special fear because you were Jewish? I mean, at that time. 

SUBJECT: The fear came. And I'll tell you, one day, my father came from downtown. And must have been by 1940 already, right after. And he saw a trainload of German Jews that were exiled from Germany. 

And-- no, actually I wasn't too concerned. You know, I think I was too stupid or too naive at-- at that age to realize what could really happen. So I overheard a conversation he had. And it kind of started sinking into me, little by little, that things are not what they should be. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was the conversation? 

SUBJECT: Well, I guess he also overheard-- and don't forget, those days-- like and that. You know, there's rumors. A lot of rumors, you know? And most those rumors incidentally turned out to be the truth later on, as I lived through it. 

And the-- the German-- the German Jewish refugees or the exiles that came from Germany, they wound up downtown. And that was-- downtown was the center of Jewish life, incidentally. You know, there were about six square blocks where all the Jewish merchants lived and did business for years. 

And as I said, my father used to deliver freight To them. And he was looking for some work in those days. And he came home and-- this-- I can't verbatim tell you what he said, you know? But it wasn't kosher. 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, we've lived-- we continued living there. Then my father went to work one day and never came home. 

INTERVIEWER: He just disappeared? He just disappeared? 

SUBJECT: No, evidently they had a roundup. Oh, thank you. A roundup of people that they were looking for labor. And he was one of them that was swept off the street and was sent to what they called a labor camp in Germany. Which was in Lower Silesia, which is the Breslau area. And the name of the camp was [? Annenberg. ?] And we used to correspond. They were-- they were able to write to us. We would send them the little things that we could. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened with you and your mother and the other children? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry, didn't hear you. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you and your mother and the other children? 

SUBJECT: All of a sudden, I became the head of the household. 

INTERVIEWER: You were the oldest? 

SUBJECT: No, I was the oldest boy. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, tell me about the family. 

SUBJECT: I have two older sisters. I was in the middle. I had a younger sister than myself. And my younger brother was born in 1938, I think '38, maybe. 

INTERVIEWER: And you became the head of the household. What did that mean? 

SUBJECT: It meant that-- well, food was very scarce in those days, as you can-- you know, the rationing and so on. But I was able to get by pretty good, because I didn't look Jewish. I spoke Polish perfect. 

So I was able to integrate with the other kids, you know? And I used to go around, you know, see where the potatoes were. I used to bring them home. Sometimes they were frozen. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't go to school anymore? 

SUBJECT: No. When the war started, I was in the first grade. I was ready to go to second grade. And that was in September. I think we started school late. You know, I'm not-- you know. But I never started second grade. And so, I was already living in the streets, trying to scavenge whatever I could for the family. 

INTERVIEWER: And so, what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, we lived that way for, you know-- for, I don't know, close to a year, maybe. You know? And then they-- one day the Germans post notices and made announcements that all the Jews will assemble at a-- at the stadium. And they should be there by certain, certain hour in the morning. 

And again, a lot of rumors, you know. And, you know, by then, we've heard of Auschwitz. Which, we're incidentally about 20 miles away from Auschwitz, my hometown was. And I should-- you know, wartime. You know, a lot of-- lot of rumors. No one ever came back from Auschwitz that we knew of. 

And there were very persistent rumors that some of them said, well, they're going to take us to resettle us someplace. Maybe into Russia or maybe into, you know, whatever place. But-- but the deception was that they actually never said they're going to resettle us. They just said they want to issue us new passports or new identification cards. 

So my mother packed the whole family and we marched down to the stadium. There were thousands of people there. I don't know-- I don't know what the Jewish population of-- New Haven-- of Sosnowiec was. But I know that was a large stadium. I would almost compare it to the Yale bowl, with the seats going up this way. Not as high as the Yale Bowl. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: All Jews in there? All Jews? 

SUBJECT: All-- well, as far as I knew, they were all supposed to have come. But maybe the smart ones were smart and they didn't go and hid someplace that I didn't know. Have no way of knowing. And we-- the process was supposed to be fast. Go in, they check in, you know? Maybe fingerprinted and get your identification card and be on your way. 

Well, we sat there from early morning. Night came and we're out there in the field. The rain started to come. Everybody starts screaming, this [INAUDIBLE] it. Everybody's asking questions. No-- no-- no one had the real answer. Again, a lot of rumors start-- started. 

And some people were-- I know I was-- there was such a [INAUDIBLE] excuse the expression. Most people didn't know whether they were coming or going. And I really don't know whether we were there two days or three days. 

INTERVIEWER: In the stadium. 

SUBJECT: In that stadium. 

INTERVIEWER: In the stadium outdoors-- 

SUBJECT: Outdoors. 

INTERVIEWER: --for two or three days? 

SUBJECT: No toilet facilities. No sanitary facilities. No food. And finally-- and again, I-- you know, chronologically, I don't know, you know, how long it was. And they started marching us towards our old neighborhood, not too far away from where we lived. 

And they cleared out a four or five block area of apartment houses. And they packed everybody. And the area was surrounded by the gestapo. The SS, really, and gestapo. And incidentally, that area that they cleared out was not too far from the freight railroads. 

We had 2 railroad stations in Sosnowiec. One was the passenger, and-- and one was a freight station, which was large. That was the main junction point, incidentally, Sosnowiec was. The main trunk line or the main line that all the trunk lines ran off from Germany. In other words, if they wanted to go to Russia, they had to go through them if they-- you know, all the other. 

And I was able, on the way over, to escape. And from-- as they were marching us, it was late at night. There was a tunnel that we had to go on, a railroad tunnel. I was young and so on. And I was able to sneak away from the marching-- 

INTERVIEWER: You left your family? 

SUBJECT: I left my family. And I-- as I say, I was familiar where they were marching. Because I followed the march. And there were a lot of people, you know, a lot of Gentiles. They stayed there the sideline-- on the sidewalks. I can even remember the expressions on their faces, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Like what? 

SUBJECT: Well, some of them were, you know, saying, good for you, Jew. And the other ones maybe cried. That, I don't know. I haven't seen too many crying. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you remember those faces? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Yes. And I waited on the outside. And I've seen them the next morning. That was at night I went back, incidentally, to our house, and I slept over. I have no place to go. 

Next morning, I went back to where they-- where that whole section was. It wasn't even a ghetto at that point. It was just, you know, someplace where they could get people to get enough cattle wagons or cattle cars and-- to transport them. And I've seen them being loaded on the wagon. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you-- what did you say to your mother when you left her with the children? 

SUBJECT: I separated by then and went to the march. My mother always told somebody that somebody has to survive. So I was fortunate enough after that, after the transports were gone and everything else, that my sister was able to escape, too. 

INTERVIEWER: And you found her? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: We wound up in the same home. 

INTERVIEWER: She came back to-- 

SUBJECT: She came back, yeah. So we lived together, you know, for a while. Then they had another-- I would say at that point-- I don't know statistically, you know-- most of the Jews in Sosnowiec were captured on the first sweep. And that was, you know-- and then things kind of calmed down. You know, the dust settled. And, you know, we still-- no one heard from anybody. And again, a lot of rumors, as you can very well-- 

INTERVIEWER: And you were two young children alone. You're eight years old. How old was she? 

SUBJECT: My sister is four years older than I am. 

INTERVIEWER: A 12-year-old and an 8-year-old were alone-- 

SUBJECT: By then, I was 9 or 10. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. You were alone in this area. 

SUBJECT: Alone. And again, I went out on the streets again, scavenging, you know? My sister doesn't look Jewish either, what the-- what the Gentiles in Poland would describe as a black-- I mean, a dark-looking, you know? She was blond, speaks Polish perfect. 

INTERVIEWER: Can the neighbors give her away, you away? No? 

SUBJECT: Not by then. Not by then. Shortly thereafter, they had another punkt, what they call. Which is-- I don't know how to translate it into English. 

INTERVIEWER: Like a [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: A point-- no. An assembly point, OK, punkt is a German's point. But there was an assembly point. But this time we had to go to the local schools and register. And the registration was for the ghetto. And they were issuing two types of identity cards. One was, I think, blue. And another one may be red or white, I don't know. I couldn't really tell you. 

So we went to the school where I incidentally went one year in kindergarten. And we registered. And my sister and I were fortunate enough to get a blue pass, instead of a white pass or whatever the other color might have been. I don't know this. 

So they were going to establish two ghettos, one in the old city of Sosnowiec and one called Srodula. Which is-- to compare so you can understand it, Srodula was like a small village. And I don't like to compare it in the relationship of New Haven to Woodbridge, because, you know, it might give you the wrong picture Srodula. 

So we finally wound up in Srodula. We got our passes, we liquidated everything we had. You know, everything we could carry. And we went to the ghetto. We got assigned to quarters. I don't know how many there were in the one flat. There must have been 50 people. Maybe four rooms, I don't know. But just hectic. 

CREW: Excuse me, I'm going to change the tape. 

INTERVIEWER: You lived in Srodula, but you never saw your mother or your brother, your little brother-- 

SUBJECT: No, that was yesterday's newspaper. Never heard from them. We know their transport went to Auschwitz. And that was it. 

INTERVIEWER: So you went to-- 

SUBJECT: Srodula. 

INTERVIEWER: Srodula. 

SUBJECT: And we lived there for maybe-- there again, time. One day was like a year, and one minute like a day. And, you know, I have no recollection of how long it would have been there. Probably five-- related to seasons. And I don't think about it too often. I would say it's a year, maybe. OK? 

And Srodula was not a strict ghetto. They had the Jewish-- what they called a Jewish Judenrat, whatever you-- you know. And we had a Jewish police or milicja, you know? And everything, you know, from what I've seen-- you know, everything was, you know-- if that was the worst, I was-- you know, I would have accepted it. 

I was able to go out, outside the ghetto, incidentally. Sneak to-- it wasn't heavily guarded. The main gates had some, you know, but there were a lot of wheat fields around. You're out in the country, don't forget, you know? The open fields. And I was able to almost, you know-- and I don't know why. I'll tell you what. If I had to do it over again, never. 

Communicate-- I even became a courier for some of the people from the inside of the ghetto. Communicating with the outside of the ghetto, you know? And went on like this, as I said to you before, time wise, I don't know how long. Maybe a year, maybe a year and a half. 

One day, I woke up in the morning. And I just came back from [INAUDIBLE] incidentally the night before. And I got caught-- they announced Judenrein. And I don't know whether you know-- if you've heard the expression Judenrein. For those that don't know, it's to make the city clear or clean. 

INTERVIEWER: Meaning Jews. 

SUBJECT: Of the Jews, yeah. So [INAUDIBLE] I just know they surrounded the ghetto for the night. And there were a lot of commotions going on. There were SS coming into the ghetto, you know. There were assembly points. They were going through the house, dragging out people like they were cattle. Worse than that. And I'm trying to-- you know, I'm trying to think, honestly. Give me a minute. 

INTERVIEWER: It's OK. 

SUBJECT: Yes. We found an aunt-- which was my mother's sister-- that was still alive with her husband. And I think that three children were killed. I don't know what happened to the other two. And she told us if-- and everybody almost assumed that this was going to happen someday. The older people did, or people more mature than I was. 

And she said, if something should happen, you come and make sure we-- that you come and see us. Be with us, if it's going to happen. So this-- you know, there was all this commotion and so on. My sister said to me, let's-- let's go see our aunt. 

So we went out. We snuck over, you know, it was still early in the morning. We went out with them. Meanwhile, unbeknown to me at that point, that people-- as I said before-- was smarter than I was, and maybe knew what was going to happen. But building a lot of bunkers. You know what a bunker is? 

INTERVIEWER: Under the ground? 

SUBJECT: And attics and walls. Wherever they could find, where they thought they could maybe survive for a while, while-- you know, while these sweeps were going on. So my aunt's husband, my uncle [? Rudy ?] had foresight. He'd built one. 

And we were able to hide there for about-- I-- there again, I don't know. It could've been a week, ten days. Could've been three days. I really don't know. I know it was awful hot in there, hotter than this room. Much hotter, believe me. 

Then everything quiet down. Again, I think they took about 70% of the ghetto then. And we came out, they found a lot of bunkers. A lot of people we saw laying in the street, shot. People jumping off roofs, out of windows. Horrible. 

But the camp-- the camp. The ghetto was still surrounded at that point, but not as thickly with the SS. And then they said that all the remaining Jews in the ghetto will be used as details to clean the streets up, to clean the houses out of any remaining loading trucks and furniture. Whatever-- whatever they could get a hold of, you know? 

And they established another small-- there used to be a she factory that people from the ghetto used to work right below. OK, compare Woodbridge-- you know, I-- you know, I'm just doing it for your-- because-- 

INTERVIEWER: For the geography. 

SUBJECT: For the geography, not for the comfort of it. OK. Maybe Woodbridge to maybe the Village, west of Village, OK? 

INTERVIEWER: The distance, yes. 

SUBJECT: No, maybe the flats. I'm sorry. OK? And they had a shoe factory there they used the labor from the ghetto. I guess Sosnowiec had a lot of shoemakers and a lot of tailors. You know, Jewish tailors and shoemakers. 

And they established this factory down below. And they were sewing uniforms. You know, German uniforms for the German Wehrmacht or whoever had the need. They were making boots. So, you know, they used to wear those high. 

So I was able to, after that happened-- and I was a little too young, they were looking for young kids like no tomorrow-- I was able to sneak out with a labor group from the main ghetto into the small ghetto and escape from there. My sister was still in the ghetto. I went back again to my old neighborhood. Like a bad nickel keeps turning up, you know? 

I ran into a woman. Actually, not in my neighborhood, I was on my way there. And they had-- you could take trolleys. Took you about a half hour by trolley to get from-- from Srodula to the city of Sosnowiec, which you know. And I took the trolley, went into the city. 

And I was just on the way over to see what happened to-- to our house again. I ran into this woman, a neighbor, Gentile. And she looked at me. I said, uh-oh. Here comes. You couldn't trust anybody, incidentally, at that point. I didn't trust anybody. 

So she says, well, what are you doing here? So I said, well, I escaped from the ghetto. What happened to your mother? So I told her. Told her everybody went except my sister, she's still in the ghetto. She says, what are you going to do? What can I do, you know? Either go back there and be, you know-- or try to find something on the outside, hide someplace. She took me home. 

INTERVIEWER: She took you home? 

SUBJECT: And hid me for a while. Then I went back towards the ghetto. And how, I don't know. This is really fate, I don't know. My sister spotted me on the other side of the railroad tracks. She was working, incidentally, then, in the small ghetto. And she was-- it could've been 1,000 yards away, but like, our minds and our eyes met, you know? We were-- it meant. 

She saw I was safe. That was-- there again, I don't know. Could have been a week later, three days later, maybe the next day. I really don't know. You know, I just-- you know. And she was fortunate enough to be able to escape, too. 

It was going better almost every day. One day, she took me beyond the other side of the railroad track, going back to this woman's house. And she was hiding-- my sister, she was hiding in a closet. But not closet like we have here. They had closets on the outside. It's like a big cabinet, OK? Any neighbors came in, my sister used to go in there. 

She had-- [INAUDIBLE] a little animal shelter on the outside of her house, where she used to keep rabbits. And she has-- she was hiding me in the small barn. A rabbit's cage, really. And that went on for, I don't know, could have been a month, two months. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- 

SUBJECT: And by then, the ghetto-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like to be in a rabbit hut for hours at a time? How did you manage? How did you-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know myself. I get [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Hours? 

SUBJECT: At night, she used to let me go out so no one could see us, you know? There were a lot of people that-- who have turned. Turned and not telling. You have to give a lot of credit. The family, she had a daughter, husband at work. I don't know how she did it or why she did it. But I have to thank her. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? 

SUBJECT: After a while, they cleaned out the-- both ghettos. And that was-- that was it. You now, no Jews, unless they were fortunate enough to escape like I did, my sister. In hiding, with false papers, whatever. 

But there was nothing more left to stay for. We couldn't live the way we are, we're jeopardizing her. And as I said before, I-- I don't know. I don't know if-- all the misfortune, all of a sudden, you find an angel. Almost a miracle. 

So she was getting a little nervous, you know. Neighbors were who knows when or what. So she had a aunt that lived 50 kilometers-- maybe 20 clicks-- in the village. Small village, 400 people. 

So she went there and says-- you know, says, you got to do me a favor. I was able to repay a favor to a good old neighbor. And we have two children. They speak perfect Polish. They don't look Jewish. See what you can do. Keep them for a while. If things get hot, then we'll think of something else. 

So at night, you know, we went to this village. We stayed and we had a very-- I was so happy to be alive, be with my sister, that you almost have no more life, like. You know, like-- you know, often wondered what happened to my mother, you know. But we couldn't let on. You couldn't get yourself too down Because once you give up, forget it. You have nothing, really. 

There were a lot of threats and a lot-- you know, you always go out of your mind, you know? Even at that age, I remember. And I-- you know, I try to compare myself with my kids at that age. 

You know, not long ago, I had kids that age. And tried to think what they thinking, versus what I was thinking then. And I don't-- half the time I can't remember what I was thinking then. You know? It's just-- it's the oddest thing, you know? It's-- 

But anyways, let me continue for-- so again, I don't know how long we stayed with them. But it was-- you know, the pressure was off. There weren't the Germans coming around that way. You know, it was a-- almost a serene place, if that's-- if that's possible. 

And then they said that eventually, we're going to be discovered. There's no two ways about it. You can't get away with it. You know, we don't have-- first off, identity cards. Our cards were, you know, the blue pass from the ghetto. 

Then ration cards, of course. You know, the Poles were rationed, then, too. And you know, even though they were on a farm, that they were able to barter an egg for milk, maybe. Or vice versa, you know. 

An opportunity came, where about three or four Polish laborers-- that did not work voluntarily in Germany, but were all starved by a day's gold, you know. And they were almost like slave laborers, but not quite. But they gave them all out what they called vacations, believe it or not. 

And they came back to Poland on a vacation around Christmastime. So this good family, they had a daughter my sister's age. Gave her her passbook, our passbook, what they called a workbook or work papers, whatever. And these three guys took my sister back to Germany. And she lived the war out of Germany, working in a labor camp. 

A short time later, there's another group came. And they found a birth certificate for me. I was about two years older than birth certificate. And some working papers. The other group took me to Germany. And I was liberated in-- I worked in a tank factory as a Pole, as a Gentile. The liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel, living a second life? 

SUBJECT: Well, that's exactly the point. I'm glad you brought the point up. My biggest fear was being discovered of being Jewish because of circumcision. And I would say 99.4% of the Gentile boys in Poland were not circumcised. The factory I was in was really-- you know, we didn't get paid. It was like they fed us better than the concentration camp inmates. But it was meager, believe me. Also had French prisoners of war. And the only place I could go and wash myself and wash, you know, important parts of your body is to the French barracks. I used to sneak over at night and clean over there. I was afraid to do it. Because these people that took me to Germany did not know I was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. Why did they take you, then? 

SUBJECT: Well, you know, in Poland at that time, they-- people come from Germany. They went away for two years. They'd throw big parties, vodka and beer and all that. And on their-- she played on their sympathies. And that's how-- 

INTERVIEWER: They weren't suspicious of you? 

SUBJECT: Not that I know of. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they think you needed papers, then? 

SUBJECT: They got me-- the family got me the papers. Those people that took me thought I was legitimately the other name and the other birthday and everything else. 

INTERVIEWER: Why would they think anybody would want to go and be in a work camp? 

SUBJECT: Good question. Very good question. I don't know. But that's how I survived. That's how I survived. I've still got the papers home, got the birth certificate home, got the labor book home and everything else. 

INTERVIEWER: Did-- did your sister-- also was posing. But there was no problem, of course, for her. No, of course. No tell-tale. 

SUBJECT: I met my sister after the war, by the way. 

INTERVIEWER: You met your sister? What happened the day of liberation? Do you remember? 

CREW: Excuse me. Why don't we break and ask this question. 

INTERVIEWER: The big thing that is being said is that it didn't really happen, you know? I mean, that's what this project was-- will-- will put aside for all time. 

SUBJECT: Only a fool would say that. Come on, now. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, many fools. This Rebecca [? Mirkowski ?] thought it didn't happen. She thought it was made up. 

SUBJECT: Well. 

INTERVIEWER: When you're ready, we'll go. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, what I was asking you is, what happened the day of liberation? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, the camp we-- we were in-- or, you know, the factory and labor camp really was one compound. You know, we could see by the way the guards were talking. And you know, looked at that. And we see the Germans retreating. You know, there's a lot of commotion. You know, but three or four days before that, we can see-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? Where? 

SUBJECT: I was in Katzenfurt. 

INTERVIEWER: Which is? 

SUBJECT: Which is about, oh, 70 or 80 kilometers north of Frankfurt. You know, well, she should be familiar. Wetzlar? You know Wetzlar, where the Leica Camera is made? 

CREW: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: OK, just about 17 kilometers southwest of Wetzlar, all right? A lot of commotion. You know, a lot of routine. It almost reminded me of the day the Polish army was retreating from the front and to eastern-- back to back East. Because I was in Western Poland, don't forget, Northwestern Poland. Or Southwestern, now. 

And that's what it almost-- the same type of a commotion, you know? And one day, we-- they didn't march us to work. But we heard some awful sounds, you know-- like, almost next door, but could have been 50 miles away, you know-- of what I assumed motorized tanks. 

And there was a lull again. Nothing. The guards escaped, everybody went. And you know, we were mulling around the camp. No one knew what to do or where to go. Don't forget, this was not a concentration camp. There weren't people's skeletons, you know, like they-- like what you-- and you saw three tanks coming towards the compound. 

Big white star on it. I didn't realize what the white star meant. Remind me of the Star of David, tell you the truth. And they opened the gates. Everybody started hugging each other, kissing, you know, and anything else. Then a couple of trucks came in with infantry soldiers. Came in, you know, that was pretty late in the war already. 

I think it was April or May of 1945. I'm not certain. Probably April, because in May, my birthday, I remember. It was May 10. My real me, not the other me. And I remember that, you know, I was probably one of the youngest people in that camp. And the GIs kind of adopted me like a mascot. And they give me birthday party and everything else. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel now that you're, uh, you're here and you have these memories? You have lost a good portion of your family. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

What do you feel-- 

CREW: Probably because [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel now about-- about the memories that-- that you live with? About the experience you had? 

SUBJECT: How do I feel? There's nothing I can do about it. It hurts. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- do you feel-- 

SUBJECT: I miss my parents. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever told your story before? 

SUBJECT: In-- in briefness, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: To whom? 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, my wife knows a little about it. May I have another one, please? Thank you. All right. I'm not really a slob. At first, I didn't talk about it, really. I came here in 1945, '46. During of '46. I was 15 then. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think when you saw the-- the Holocaust dramatization, that 10 hour-- 

SUBJECT: That what? 

INTERVIEWER: The drama of the Holocaust that was on. 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't think that after the war, I was able to meet a lot of people. Incidentally, I traveled with the GIs for one year in Europe as a mascot and some interpreting. I picked up English. Very GI English, but picked it up pretty good. And I've gone into different DP camps, met some people from my hometown. I just don't want to think about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever told your children? 

SUBJECT: They hear. There's some people that know me from the ghetto. We meet them once in a while. They come over to the house, they already know. 

INTERVIEWER: I asked you-- I asked you before what you thought of the dramatization of the Holocaust. Remember that big 10 hour thing that was on television? 

SUBJECT: I watched it briefly. Sporadically, I watched it and I didn't watch it and I watched it. I, uh, from what I've experienced and what I've seen, this was a Hollywood production. 

INTERVIEWER: You think, though, it help changed people, in terms of their ability to at least hear the-- the truth? 

SUBJECT: Maybe that's all-- maybe that's all people are ready to accept, I think. Maybe the American people or people at large. I don't think-- I, from what I've seen, if they ever showed it on TV, people would say, that's the biggest propaganda movie that they ever made. Or they'd get sick. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean what really happened. 

SUBJECT: What really happened. Again, I don't know what the situation in Germany was. And I understand what it had to do with a German-- a Jewish-- of Jewish or Jewish religion doctor and a German lawyer or something like that, attorney. I don't know. 

You know, I was too young to know then. You know, maybe them better, then. But from what I know, from what I've seen, there's some experts that-- excerpts on it that almost could fit into some situations that I've experienced. But I don't think they showed enough. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what, in your mind, is the value of showing more? What-- what-- what do you hope to have happen, if people know more of what really went on? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think education. It shouldn't happen again. 

INTERVIEWER: You think by knowing, people won't let it happen again? 

SUBJECT: That might help. Might help. It might help. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you meet your wife in this country? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: In any way has this experience shaped your family life here? 

SUBJECT: I would say so, yes. I think my kids are very tolerant of-- I think maybe made better kids out of them, knowing what I went through. 

INTERVIEWER: How old are they? 

SUBJECT: 19, 17, and 15. 

INTERVIEWER: Boys? Girls? 

SUBJECT: Two boys and a girl. My oldest one is in college, 3.80 average. 

INTERVIEWER: When you-- when they ask you questions, what kind of questions do they ask you? 

SUBJECT: Well, at first they were afraid to ask, tell you the truth. I think, you know, they kind of knew and didn't know. And that, you know, they kind of explored it for a while. It's [INAUDIBLE] but through the years. And don't forget, they've been with me for 20 years, the oldest one, you know? Well, 19 years. Be 20 in November. 

And then they hear things, you know. You have people that you talk to or they overhear things, always eavesdropping, you know. And one day, they said, is all true what we hear? And I said, I guess you have to decide for yourself. I can't tell you that. 

One day, they wanted to engage me in a deep conversation-- my oldest one-- about it. And I said Alan, read all you can about it. But for me to tell you over again, it's painful. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you talk about it now. And I wondered what it was that made you feel that now was the time. And what you worry about as maybe you will feel after today, and after having talked about it. 

SUBJECT: Well, I just thought maybe I came out of a shell a little bit, too. Maybe at one time, I didn't have the command of the language to be able to re-tell it. Maybe a little shyness. Maybe also a little apprehension. Don't forget, I came here when I was 15. I didn't want the stigma. And I was very fortunate. I came to this country. 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister came, too? 

SUBJECT: My sister came three years later. I met some nice friends. They're still my friends today. Joey Adler, Bobby-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- do you see your sister? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, she lives in Brooklyn. Married, had two children. 

INTERVIEWER: Does she visit you here often? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. I make it a point to call her at least twice a week. 

INTERVIEWER: She's happy? Does she have difficulty in her life now that she's-- 

SUBJECT: No, they're very fortunate. They came from New Haven originally, in 1948. And they bought a-- he worked for a furniture place with Willie, by the way. And they bought a farm in Colchester, a chicken farm that went broke. Finally, they moved to Brooklyn. 

And they struggled for while. They bought themselves a grocery store. They had it for about-- until finally, about a year, year and a half ago, my brother-in-law sold it. Semi-retired. Now he bought a hotel in New York with some partners. He's going to be the operating-- the operating partner, the working partner, whatever you want to call it. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think knowing you has-- you mentioned Joe and Bob Adler. They're very active people in the community. I wondered if you had had an-- you think you've influenced them? Do they know about your story? 

SUBJECT: I would say if you ask Bobby Adler, Joey-- you know, Bobby was my fraternity brother, by the way, in high school. Joey or Bobby, or Stewie [? Grodd, ?] you know, I can go on and mention, you know. I would say Stewie made a statement to me when I first came out of the service and out of college. 

Stewie was very involved in the community. You know, he was-- I think he was even the president of the Jewish Community Council. And we met at the Colonial House-- I don't know if you've ever been to Colonial House-- one night after meeting. And he said, Stan, some day you're going to get up there. And you're going to tell them the story that I learned about-- what he learned about me. 

And I'll tell you, when I came here, I lived in West Haven. I don't know if I told you that or not. I was fortunate. I went to-- they put me in the seventh grade. I almost flunked out. I was, you know, 15, 16 years old. I had a very understanding superintendent of schools there. 

And through some little politicking-- and finally, he gave me an interview-- and he says well, Stan, I know what you went through. You know, from what your foster parents tell me, you know. And if you go to summer school and take up three subjects-- one is math, one is English, and history-- and if you make good progress, I'll put you into a high school. I'll bypass you the 8th grade. 

INTERVIEWER: Your foster parents? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you acquire your foster parents? 

SUBJECT: Through the Jewish Family Services in New Haven, through [INAUDIBLE]. I'm sure you're familiar with his-- he's like a second or third father to me. This is a very, very great human being. 

INTERVIEWER: And he found these people? Did they have other children? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I have three-- three foster sisters and one foster brother. They live-- some of them live-- they spread all over the country, yeah. My foster parents live in Arizona now. They're retired. 

INTERVIEWER: So you now have a family again. You have a big family again. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. I was never adopted, but they were like my parents? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you still see them? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: The parents, I mean. The foster parents. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they're getting on in age. You know, they-- they're probably your father's age, but they don't carry themselves the way your father does. God bless your father. He's a great guy. 

INTERVIEWER: That's right. Is there anything that you would like to tell us, in terms of what you want people to carry away with-- away once they have heard you? Is there anything-- 

SUBJECT: This was a fluke, OK? 

INTERVIEWER: It's all right. 

SUBJECT: Oh, my God. So many things to say. I mean, words of wisdom, I don't have. 

INTERVIEWER: Not words of wisdom, but in terms of people understanding. You know, believing that it really did happen. Doubts that-- 

SUBJECT: I had a similar problem. Graduated high school in 1950. Went away to the University of Arizona for one semester, got sick, came back home. Korean War was going on and I went into service for four years. In the service, I take basic training. 

Incidentally, Stewie [? Grodd ?] was at Syracuse then. And I was at Sampson Air Force Base in Geneva. And I'm just giving a little side story here. And Stewie heard I was at the basic training. And then after the fourth, the fifth week in basic, they let you out on a three day pass, provided comes-- someone comes and signs you out. 

So I went into service. I went through basic training, went to intelligence school. And they shipped me overseas. And I said, with my German, my Polish, I'm going to wind up in Korea for sure. So I went to Korea, guidance and all that. They shipped me back to Germany for three years. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that like for you? 

SUBJECT: That was-- it was almost a curse at that point. I came home to West Haven, the laying out, what they called, before I went overseas. And I cried. I went, you know, went to my foster parents. And-- and I just, I said, well, you know-- I just couldn't comprehend, you know? 

I didn't really want to go to Korea. But I-- I-- at that point, I really-- if I had the choice. And they said, those are your orders. You go where we send you. You know, we trained you. You're in for four years. And you got to do what we tell you to do, you know? I understood that. 

But I went back to Germany very, very bitter, very sour. Very, you know, with hate. And I used to talk to some of my service friends, you know. And I still had-- I have an accent now, but then I had a real thick one, you know? Maybe I still do today, too. I can hear myself, so. 

And they said, what did you do during the war? You know, [INAUDIBLE]. So I said, well, I was here doing the war. And these were intelligent people, you know? The intelligence service. They said, are you-- is these things that we hear about the Germans doing this to the Jews, is that the truth? I have many, many, many-- I had to wind up defending the truth! You know, there was a lie! 

INTERVIEWER: I understand. I understand. 

SUBJECT: So you asked me a question, you know? Who-- you know, I've had that happen in New Haven to me, by Jewish people! After they read some articles-- 

INTERVIEWER: --part of it when she tells you. I'm sorry, but it was too powerful to miss. This is the best interview we've done by far. Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: You know, why am I-- I found myself trying to defend the truth, you know? And many friends of mine, you know, in the service and people in New Haven-- Jewish people even-- said after they see something on TV or read something in the Ledger or wherever they might read a story, that pops up more often. 

Is that really the truth? How-- how did you survive? I have to justify why I survived or how I survived. Then they said, why couldn't you have fought? Didn't you people fight? That wouldn't happen to me, they said. Pick up a gun. Where are you going to get the gun? 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: That was perfect. Perfect! Wow. I'm just sorry. I'm sorry that, you know, you never know what's going to turn out to be. 

