INTERVIEWER: OK, Mrs. Wilson could you begin by telling your full name, and the name you were known by, and where you were in the late '30s or early '40s? 

SUBJECT 1: As a matter of fact, I was in Washington, DC, when the war broke out. My husband was very ill, and he died shortly after. And then we moved to New York. 

And I wanted something to do. And through a friend in the Congregational churches, which were just then organizing-- some were a relief effort-- I was asked to come and take hold of that. And so I worked there for about nine years through the early stages of the war, until it was in the reconstruction period. 

And during that time, I made a couple of trips, first to England while the war was on, and then later to Europe, when the war, the fighting had stopped, but there was a great deal of reconstruction work to be done. And, as you know, part of getting help for relief projects is being able to bring back pictures of what's actually going on and how funds that one contributes are being used. That was the purpose of my trips. 

We had, for instance-- one wouldn't think of it, since the Congregational churches are thought of as the early Plymouth output of independent Protestantism. You wouldn't think that we had 200 Congregational churches in the greater London area. A good many of them were bombed. A good many of them were mission churches. The people were very much in need of aid of various kinds. 

That was the first effort we could make. Then just a little later, we got to the continent, and we didn't-- it wasn't our idea to duplicate other efforts that were going on, so we worked through the American Friends Service Committee, which was early on the continent and, as time went on, the Unitarian Service Committee. And then we had our own effort in Italy because there were no other agency working there in the field of relief. 

And we saw only the leftovers of people, who, unfortunately, the people in the camps were the remainder of those who had been mishandled and mistreated. I remember one day from a train, for instance, seeing very shabby, open cars full of people. And we were told they were people who had been forced to work in the east, and they were just being shipped back to their homes. 

We were shown big army installations that were full of refugees. The common way of handling them, they are shipped in these enormous metal-- what would you call them? They made soup every day. And that was all the people had to eat. And they sat most of the day. Was nothing else for them to do. 

When it came time, they had a little container, a tin can or something they'd picked up, and they'd go over to these great soup kettles and get their ration of soup. Actually, they were-- the containers were as tall as you or me, just-- and it got so, in traveling from one camp to another, that one became really rather revolted by this soup's meal. It was good stuff, but you know, to think, to be realizing that people had-- were surviving on this food. 

A little later, we were able to get powdered milk in for the children. And that was a stroke of luck. And then a little later-- I don't know as you remember. I guess Marianne does the-- the shipment of heifers to Europe to provide milk for children. And as a form of service, I remember that the conscientious objectors were-- went over on these ships full of heifers to take care of the cattle on the way. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think the first time you saw these remnants, as you put it, remainders of concentration camps, of displaced persons camps? What did you think? What did you see, and what did you feel? 

SUBJECT 1: They came they came eagerly to, to greet us. I was not alone. There were several in my party. And anxious to-- if they knew anybody in the United States, to hope that we could link them up with whoever they might know in the United States. Or I had, of course, from '41, when this war started, till '44, late in '44, which was my first trip over there, had considerable, emotional response to the needs through material that came through to us. 

I was faced with that from day to day at my desk. I also was involved with various refugee committees and relief committees, the Catholic, the Jewish, as well as our Christian committees in this country. So I knew what to expect when I got there. And it didn't make it any the less tragic, but it was-- I don't-- won't say I was hardened to it, but I knew what to expect. So it didn't probably have the emotional toll, take the emotional toll that it might have if I hadn't had this. 

INTERVIEWER: I think it's fascinating that you say that you knew what to expect. Since 1941, you and others were getting information. You knew, and you were doing something about it. Yet we hear over and over again from our government that we didn't know. We didn't know what the concentration camps were. We didn't know how they were treating people. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, it would be tough for me to-- of course, of course we knew. We had the links in Britain. We had the links on the continent. We-- we sent people where we could, single individuals, to try to connect up with these links. There were people who went before me and reported back. 

And we had a very tragic loss of a fine young man, who was shot down in a plane when he was over to try to send word back to us about how things were going on. And, of course, Switzerland was a great refuge. And that was the head-- really the European headquarters of this work. 

And we heard all kinds of tales from people from Switzerland, who would take great risks to get into Germany, for example, to-- and bring back word of what was going on there. There was a very concerted effort on the part of churches. You see, there was no other national group in this country that could link up with other national groups abroad. There was no national service agency. 

And of course, our government had done a very bad job, as you know, in the West Coast, with the Japanese, in those camps. That was a horror. And somehow we had to avoid bringing hordes of people to this country. There was no way to get them here anyhow without a network set up to take care of them. And this was the beginning of arranging a network. 

And when the time did come that we could get refugees to this country, why they were spread through church groups. I said we worked through established agencies. It just happened to be the Unitarian Service Committee settled themselves in Lisbon and had a network across France and Spain and-- to rescue people. And it was, who should be rescued? That was the next question. 

And you just can't take people off a line. And so they decided that they should rescue intellectuals who might be able to go back and make a contribution toward the rebuilding of the countries. And my group provided funds for their service. And it was a very worthwhile project. We felt we brought some fine people to this country. 

Not all of them went back. They didn't want to go back into the abyss. But I-- they-- they were-- you mentioned Franz, didn't you? 

SUBJECT 2: Franz Schoenberger, who was-- I wish you'd talk a little bit about him. He was a-- [INAUDIBLE] was so special. 

SUBJECT 1: We never do hard-and-fast lines about the background of the people that we helped to bring out, what their religious affiliation was, or anything of the sort. It was wholly on a ground of would they-- I don't want to say were they worth rescuing. That wouldn't be right. But whether they were outstanding people who could contribute to the rebuilding of their countries. And Franz Schoenberger had been the editor of Simplicissimus. I don't know whether you know it. 

INTERVIEWER: It's a satirical magazine. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, and among other editorial efforts-- that was his final one. And the day his establishment was raided by the Nazis, he went out the back door and escaped, was hidden, eventually walked over the border into Switzerland, and then into southern France. And then France was occupied, and he was put into a-- in a concentration camp. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: He was a German national? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: A non-Jewish person? 

SUBJECT 1: A Jewish grandmother. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, he had a Jewish grandmother. 

SUBJECT 1: Um hm. And I think it was possibly more for his editorial eminence that he was considered material for a concentration camp. But he did have that Jewish background. And eventually was got out across France, across Spain to Lisbon, and brought to this country by the Unitarian Service Committee. When he got here, he landed in with us, and we took care of him and his wife from that point on. 

And he was-- lived in my neighborhood in New York, where I was then living. And we were very close friends until his death. As it happened, he left a large family in Germany. And I don't think any of them are living now, but I was able to visit thing in Berlin. I think it was in 1947, the first time we were able to get into Germany. 

And he had a nephew, Gerhard, who did a very complete research job on Nazi atrocities in Germany and wrote a book, a great thick book full of pictures about it. And I thought maybe you'd be interested in that book, and I'm trying to run it down for you. And now I've run out of steam for it. What occurs to you? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, let me just ask you one last question. Then I'll ask Marianne some questions about her experiences. But there you were. You knew from 1941, you knew because what was coming across your desk was giving you insights that perhaps few people had, but some people had. What was your reaction to the inactivity of our government in preventing or stopping some of the atrocities, which your links had told you about? 

SUBJECT 1: I saw the United States government strained in every way to carry on this war, to ship the necessary food, and well, the logistics of running an army in Europe, for instance. There wasn't the shipping being-- ships were being constantly bombed. I saw the government just, just strained to, to, to carry on 3,000 miles away. And again, the fact that there was no national social action agency in this country that could take on the burden of fighting over there-- how did you get in to these countries to handle these awful atrocities? 

It was-- even England [INAUDIBLE] was strained. England was blamed for not opening up its doors, so to speak, and taking in thousands. They didn't have any food themselves, just barely enough. Everybody was working on rations and clothing, everything else. When I landed there in '44, it was-- I was given ration tickets, which, of course, I turned over to someone else. But they, they were so, so depleted of resources of every sort. And I, I, I know our government's been blamed, but I-- it was all just too, too enormous, too-- 

SUBJECT 2: I remember, Mother, a sense of frustration about the individuals whom the New York-- people in New York knew about, who were available in the early '40s, trying to get out of Lisbon and the hunt for families in this country who were financially able to, I guess, sign a bond that these refugees would not become charges of the welfare system in this country. I remember a tremendous sense of frustration that we knew that people were waiting in Lisbon, or that you did, in particular, who-- and casting about among our friends who were sympathetic to these concerns about who could afford to take on the financial responsibility for a refugee family. It was a major thing to do when you were dealing with people who might not speak English and who might not have appropriate skills. 

INTERVIEWER: I think what your mother said about-- I mean, it's an interesting idea that I had never thought of is that we didn't have any place for these people to come. And people like your mother and her organization were concerned about our mishandling of the Japanese-Americans in this country. And were you implying that you were fearful that, should we bring refugees here from Europe who, without having a place to put them or send them or deal with them, that we might do the same thing? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, these were were people who'd been under tremendous strain, were underfed and in ill health. And would you take them out of one camp and put them in another camp in the, the slow process of finding a family who would take them in? We had many church groups in the, in the end who did find housing for a refugee family and would share their own furniture and their own food and get them started in some little tasks. 

I remember Franz Schoenberger only was able to have $15 a week when he first got here. And he made himself useful in various ways and established himself because he was a man of background. And as a matter of fact, he worked for the War Department. 

INTERVIEWER: But there's a difference, of course, between being in a camp and being killed, you know, being exterminated. The circumstances are bad, but they can be worse. And they were worse there. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, but I can't, I can't tell you more than I-- than that about what went on in terms of the machinery of, of, of handling all of this. But it was what we were forced to say. I went to countless meetings, where these things were discussed. But we could not-- we were not the government. We worked as best we could. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. It was valiant that you were doing what you were doing. But-- 

SUBJECT 1: I-- to go back to what Marianne was saying a minute ago about the individual cases. We heard of people who wanted to get their relatives out. And one Jewish girl, who happened to be living with a, with a family of friends of mine, that desperately wanted to get her father out. And I learned of it. She had given $400 to some theoretical agency who could handle that sort of a passage to this country, and nothing had happened. And that was all the money she had to put into rescuing her father. 

So when I heard about it, I went right in touch with the committee in Lisbon, the Unitarian Committee. And they set up the machinery to find him, and it was too late. He'd-- he was an older person, and he'd-- that-- that's-- those were the ones who were first made off with, as you know. So, there were many instances of that, of that sort that-- 

We didn't draw lines. We heard of people. And the awful thing that the government had to be concerned about, which I hadn't mentioned, is already there might be spies coming in. Who did we know who these people were? We had to have a system. We had to know who these people were. We had to have a connection of some sort. 

There was all kinds of possibilities of sabotage in this country. You had to be on the alert. 

INTERVIEWER: That's, that's fascinating. There's a whole other rationale for behavior that perhaps we're not aware of. You had, however, mentioned that information was coming across your desk. What kind of information? What was, what was being told? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, our own press, our own media carried a lot of information. Don't you recall that? And the things that we learned-- and that was horrible enough to disturb most people. But I really think that-- that we here, in this area, being nearer to Europe, felt the whole thing more keenly. It was something sort of far, far away the further you went in the middle of this country. 

And for that reason, we furnished this newsletter that Marianne spoke of. We sent posters to all our churches, as appealing as we could make them and tried to acquaint people as a whole with the awfulness of, of what was going on. You know, we live every day now without much thought about those hostages in [INAUDIBLE]. What-- you don't think of too many times a day. That thing can get away from you. 

But that, that was our effort. That's what we were set up to do. And we worked, we worked hard at it. And we raised a great deal of money, though we were a comparatively small group of churches, Congregational-- 