AGNES: When I was born-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

AGNES: --and how I was raised? But can you say-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm going to-- I'm going to ask you to start by saying, my name is-- 

AGNES: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --Agnes, whatever it was-- 

AGNES: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --your maiden name. 

AGNES: Yeah, yeah. 

CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: It's-- 

AGNES: I sh-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: We're rolling in two-- two seconds. 

INTERVIEWER: You start with your mai-- your maiden name and now your married name, and then where you were born, when you were born. [WHISPERING] Then we'll go from there. 

OK? 

CREW: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: [WHISPERING] All right. 

AGNES: My name is Agnes Sereni My maiden name was Agnes Freller I was born in Budapest, Hungary, 1925, 14th of May. 

Uh, I am a daughter of a upper middle class antique dealer. We lived in Budapest all the time. The life was very, very good to us till Hitler occupied Hungary 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing changed in your life during the war years? Life was still good? 

AGNES: The war years, after anti-Semitism, was exist naturally. 

INTERVIEWER: When did that begin? 

AGNES: The anti-Semitism uh, uh, was spreaded naturally when-- when Hitler became to power and spread it around us everywhere. It started with the Anschluss, when Austria was occupied by-- by Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to you in terms of anti-Jewish experience at that point? 

AGNES: Uh, when we used to go to school-- high school-- we used to go to public school, all of us. Uh, the lifestyle was different a little bit in Hungary, like in Poland or in Russia, because Poland and Russia and Lithuania, most of the Jewish people were put behind ghetto bars, and they didn't have the chance to assimilate. The assimilation was very great in Hungary. It was-- it was a little different lifestyle. 

But when I used to go to high school, we felt the anti-Semitic wave, uh, hit us, uh, in our way. Uh, it's very hard to explain, but, uh, we used to had A and B class. Anybody who-- who are Jewish weren't allowed to go to the B class. Uh, and those gentile children, whom rather, uh, not, uh, th-- they didn't have enough s-- place to be in the ble-- B class. They-- they were used to go with us. 

So we weren't actually completely separated by the gentiles. We used to go together with gentile children, but we were separated in a term of certain class. You understand what I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. I know what you're saying. I guess what I find confusing is that A sounds like it's better rather than-- 

AGNES: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: --no it wasn't. 

AGNES: That-- it was-- it-- that's the way they-- they-- 

INTERVIEWER: We can find it. 

AGNES: Mm, I don't know. I don't know what was the reason for it? Anyways, uh, I am personally, and my family wasn't, uh, touched very, uh, uh, uh, deeply for anti-- anti-Semitism because we knew, uh, uh, it is exist, the anti-Semitism, but my father was still in business, uh, nobody took the-- the license away from him. 

But in the middle of the war, uh, they didn't let a Jewish student enter to the university anymore. So many of them, if they had the opportunity, uh, moved to Italy. And it was the most interesting part of it Mussolini, the fascistic Mussolini, accepted that the Jew student from the Hungarian universities to transfer there, or whom wanted to enter from high school to university. That was one thing. 

And another thing, uh, many people who graduated from law school or from, uh, uh, medical school, they didn't have the permit, uh, to practice law or-- or-- or, uh, being a doctor. 

Um, and it-- it was amazing how flexible our Jewish people in Hungary were. Many of the doctors and lawyers became a tailor, or a-- a electrician, or whatever. Uh, that's the way we felt the anti-Semitism. 

Another thing, my mother was born in Czechoslovakia. And the Czechoslovakian Nazi occupation took place 1942. So basically, we were touched because my family from my mother's side was deported in 1942 already. They just disappeared. And we knew that something bad happened with them. 

Uh, but it was still a shock to us, 1944, when the Nazis occupied Hungary. Because we thought, we are almost the end of the war, we are going to avoid this kind of a possibility somehow, and we will-- we going to be survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the first time that you re-- realized the Nazis were there? 

AGNES: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was-- 

AGNES: It was 19th of March when they came here in 1944, and, uh, my father-- actually, my family from my father's side were born in Hungary generation after generation. So like I said before, the Hungarian-Jewish people were very much assimilated, and we didn't wanted to accept the fact we going to have the same experience that the rest of the Jewish people got before us. But unfortunately, the same thing happened to us. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? When the Nazis watched-- walked in on March 19, what did you-- 

AGNES: It was a Sunday. I saw a lot of airplanes. I saw-- I saw the German army marching in. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you afraid as a Jew? 

AGNES: Of course. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? What did your family do? 

AGNES: We didn't have too much to do. Within 24 hours, we got the word that my father wasn't allowed to open his store. Uh, we had to, uh, look for a place for ourselves because we weren't allowed to stay in our apartment. 

They put the Star of David in certain buildings, which was a-- a temporary ghetto. And they put everyone in the temporary ghetto. But the manpower were taken away pretty soon after the occupation. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't know of any men that were taken away prior to the occupation, Jewish men working in work camps? 

AGNES: Or before where they established labor camp in Ukraine in the 1940s, and young men was brought to Ukraine, and many of them were killed. Most of them actually. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know any young men who were forced to leave Hungary? 

AGNES: Forced to leave Hungary during the war time? 

INTERVIEWER: Then go to Ukraine. 

AGNES: My husband, he was among of those people. But, uh, uh, he escaped before they had the opportunity to kill him. Because during the night with his friend, he went outside from a-- from a place where they were sleeping and from a building. And, uh, he was listening the Hungarian soldiers, uh, when they were talking to each other, and they said, as long as there's one Jew alive, we are not going back home to Hungary. So they knew they are not having too much to lose anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know him then? 

AGNES: I knew my husband before, but I didn't know where he is, and he didn't know where I am. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew he was taken away? 

AGNES: I didn't know at that time. I just knew that later, after the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: Getting back to your experience-- the Germans came in, what happened to you and your family? 

AGNES: My father had to-- my heart-- my father was taken-- they took my father away. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

AGNES: And, uh, naturally our family was divided. Uh, my-- my brother-- my brother was, uh, sent to, uh, Red Cross building which took in young children. Later, I realized the fact Raoul Wallenberg, a Swedish diplomat, uh, paid to the Red Cross a large amount of money to save those young children. That day, we didn't know when my brother was put in that building. 

Uh, I was taken to a Hungarian concentration camp. I was carrying over 120 pound on my shoulder, backs, from early in the morning till late of the night. We-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get to this place, and can you describe it? 

AGNES: Yes. Uh, I knew one thing in Czechoslovakia. I remember-- that much I knew-- they separated the men, women, and children from each other before the deportation. And I knew they are going to take away the young women also, after the men. And, uh, uh, I was afraid they going to deportate me. So voluntarily, I went to a-- a-- a-- a labor camp, which was fairly good. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name? 

AGNES: Yes. But it's a Hungarian name. They called it [? [HUNGARIAN]. ?] I don't know how-- what is the, uh, uh, right, uh, uh, translation, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Was it near Budapest? 

AGNES: It was in Budapest. And they transferred me from there to a concentration camp. They-- they picked up I don't know how many young girls. I was in the age of 19 that time. And, uh, I don't know it was just plain-- plain luck who-- who can avoid that. But I-- I was a very unfortunate person. They-- they picked me also, and they put me in a mill-- mill, you know, where they make the flour? And I had to carry flour bags on my shoulder. It was a terrible experience. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was this? 

AGNES: That was also in Budapest. It was surrounded with a high, uh, brick fence. We weren't allowed to leave the-- the place-- the building. And if somebody tried to give us secretly food from outside, then we were punished who received the food. They did throw us in the basement between the rats for 24 hours. During the night we had to stay there too. 

INTERVIEWER: Did that happen to you? 

AGNES: It didn't happen to me because they didn't caught me, luckily. But it happened with many of my friends. 

INTERVIEWER: This labor camp that they took you to, how were you rounded up? Where was your family-- the rest of your family-- did you know? 

AGNES: My mother was put in that building what I previously mentioned. And, uh, my aunt was with her too. And, uh, like I said, my father was in a concentration camp-- a labor camp already. They took all the manpower away, so we didn't know where he is. We didn't know where about, you know, or how we can find him. 

Uh, they were organize this thing very well. They-- they-- they-- were masterminded. The recipe was the same all over-- all over in Europe. First they took away the mens. Then they-- they-- they put the young, uh, uh, girls and women in a concentration camp. They took away the children from women. 

I experienced that too. I mean, I didn't have it, not personally. I didn't have children because I wasn't married that time. But I experienced in a term to see that horrible scene. And they took away the children from the mother. And we don't know what happened with them. Some of the children were killed in the same promenade. But the rest of them, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? Where did you see this? 

AGNES: Uh, before-- before-- you know, I escaped a few times. I'm jumping from-- from one conclusion to the other. When the German occupied Hungary, that was during the springtime, March. And the time was very-- first to us in Budapest. In the villages, they took everybody. They deportated everyone during the summer. 

But Autumn-time, they got the Szálasi-- the Arrow Cross putsch-- took-- takeover. And that time, they-- they get wild. They knew they are losing the war. And they were frustrated. And, uh, we are victimized, the-- those Jewish people who remained to stay alive in Budapest, they were tortured, and anybody whom they can caught, uh, they-- they shot to death the Jewish people. Women-- many of them who were hided somewhere and they caughted them. 

Uh, some of the Swedish protect that house too that they were hided by Wallenberg, Raoul Wallenberg. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to talk about Wallenberg a little later. But first, I want to ask you. You said you saw a scene where children were wrested away from their parents. 

AGNES: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see and where? 

AGNES: They said-- the-- the Nazis-- Hungarian Nazis were screaming left and right. They said, women, uh, I don't care how much is my heart is broken-- I try-- try to translate it to English, the Hungarian words. Put your children down over here. And so no-- no one wanted to-- to leave their children behind. Then they grabbed their children. And the children were-- were crying. I don't want to talk too much about this experience because it's breaking my heart. I can't-- I can't-- I ca-- then I-- then I cannot talk-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you just tell-- 

AGNES: --too much about the rest. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you just tell us how it sounded in Hungarian, the order to put your children down. 

AGNES: How it sounded, the order? 

INTERVIEWER: In Hungarian, what-- how did it sound? 

AGNES: I should say the-- the Hungarian words? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, how they said it. 

AGNES: Hungarian? 

[? [SPEAKING HUNGARIAN] ?] 

That's the way it sounded. If anybody understand Hungarian, they know what I was saying before. It's terrible. It was a terrible experience. Let's talk about something else. 

When they-- when they took the children away, they brought us to a building, which located in a certain area-- should I mention the name? [? [HUNGARIAN] ?] 

A few building were occupied by the Nazis, emptied for the purpose of to put young women and girls to that particular building and [CLEARING THROAT] they deportated everyone from there. 

Uh, when I arrived, uh, I was with my mother. That was, I thought, the end of the line. I tried to escaped from the line. I pushed my mother out first. And I was carrying a heavy bag with the leftover thing what I owned and I wanted to throw away before I escaped from the line because I was figure if I'm going to uh, uh carry the bag, it's very much noticeable that I am escaping. 

The Hungarian police in Budapest, in our side. they were good, except they were scared from the Nazis. Why they were in our side, I explain that too. Because after the Nazi-- Hungarian Nazi putsch, the Szálasi regime, they took away their gun, and no one liked it when somebody take away the power from them. So they said, uh, they are in our side, but not openly-- not-- not face to face. 

But we knew, you know, what's going on. So when they-- they-- uh, when we were in line to go to that particular place what I mentioned before-- a long, long line, thousands and thousands of women were there-- we realize that we don't have any other alternative. And what we are risking anyways? They are going to deportate us anyways from that building. We knew this is the last stop, last line. So I ask the police-- because we were surrounded by Hungarian Nazis and policemens-- I ask one of the policemen to talk to the Nazis in the front so I can escape behind their back. And he did that to me. 

And I escaped from the line. I started to run. I had a place, a street, where I made a date with my mother, where I'm going to-- to meet her, around the [INAUDIBLE] place. 

So we-- eh, uh, I escaped. And unfortunately, the people in the street, they saw my escape, and they went, uh, calling the Nazis. They said look at the Jewish tramp-- they called us that name-- running there. And I was-- I was blind, and I didn't hear anything because I just so want go to see my mother and meet her. And I didn't-- I didn't hear anything. When I heard them screaming and-- and I realized the fact they are after me, it was too late. 

So we were caught by them. But, uh, I forget to mention that before we were put in the line, they said, anybody who escape will be killed by them. So we did-- like I said before, we didn't have any-- any-- any other alternative anyway. So what-- what-- what did we lose? I was figure, I'm going to escape anyways, which I did. And they didn't kill us. Why, I cannot explain. Because that was our destiny to live. 

We got a few, uh, uh, bump in our head because we were hit left and right by them. But they didn't kill us. They brought us in that particular building where 5,000 of us were squeezed together-- in a building that is just the place for a few hundred-- a hundred people, we were 5,000. 

It was during the evening when I realized that it's better if we are going to the, uh, top floor. I don't remember it was a fifth floor or sixth floor, whatever it was. And my mother said to me, why do you want to go there? I said, uh, I-- 

INTERVIEWER: You found your mother? 

AGNES: I was with my mother. I find my mother in that street. They caught both of us there. Uh, and, uh, I said to my mother, why I want to go to the top floor, I have a feeling they are going to empty the first floor or second floor. So she said to me, I'm not normal because what give me the idea why they can-- they can empty the floor and put them in the cattle car in the top floor, not in the first floor. I said, you just listen to my instinct. Let's go to the top floor. 

And we're there in our apartment, squeezed in, a small apartment. Uh, we didn't find a place, even to stand. In a standing position, it was hard to breathe there. It was wintertime. They were scared to open the window because it was a very harsh, cold winter. And actually they didn't heated the place for us. But it was anyways too warm there, because it's too many people were there, and they used up the oxygen. 

My mother-- somebody get up from one chair and walked out. And my mother took that place and sat down. And, uh, I walked out from that apartment, I looked down, and I heard during the night women are screaming. They were beating them. They took off their clothes, and they were chased to the cattle car with their underwear, during the winter, harsh winter night. 

They were beating them because they still believed that the Jew are hiding money. I don't know what gave them the idea. And those days, we used to wear dress with shoulder pad in it. So they took off the-- the clothes to looking for the shoulder pad, if it's got money hidden there. And, uh, naturally, they didn't find the money, so they were more frustrated. So those-- those-- those young women had-- had more beating. 

And I saw them, uh, and I saw the whole-- the whole scene the-- still front-- the front of my eyes. Uh, there were I don't know how many hundred, and hundreds, and hundreds. In that particular building, it was more exist like one building like that, were put in the cattle car-- they were all put in the cattle car in that particular night. 

Uh, then I was very tired already. I walked back to that room where my mother was sitting, and, uh, uh, I find a little crib. It sounds ridiculous. It was nothing in the crib but the steel, uh, base. It wasn't any mattress, anything in it. But I was so tired, and I was young, and I was wearing a suit, a black suit with a blouse. So I took off my jacket, and that-- I put that down under my head. And I said, whatever it will happen, I still have to rest a little bit, because I can think with a-- with-- with a clear mind after if I'm resting enough. 

So I lay down, and I fell asleep. During the night, The Hungarian Nazi women came up in those rooms, and with a flashlight they-- they turned the flashlight toward to my face, and they woke me up. They kicked me around, and they left the place. In the morning, when we woke up, the deportation was continuously going on, because they brought more people in. 

The-- the empty space-- the place in the first few floors were filled up again with victims. In that place where we were, we-- we-- we met friends. And now I should come to Wallenberg. 

INTERVIEWER: We're going to take a break. Before you go to Wallenberg, I'd like you to-- if you will excuse us. Stop taping, please. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

I'm ready when you are, Karen. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you rolling? 

CREW: No, not yet. We're not ready yet. Just about. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

AGNES: Uh, also, many people were, uh, brought to a big, uh, factory, uh, for the reason to stand them on their feet to a death march to Vienna from Budapest. Why they brought those people to the big factory, uh, with the purpose to walk, because they wanted to use many of the cattle car for their own purposes. So they wouldn't care one way or the other if the Jew dying in a way, uh, uh, to the last destination or are they going to die there. So they had to walk. 

INTERVIEWER: How far is it from Budapest? 

AGNES: Budapest to Vien-- Vienna, around, uh, over 200 kilometer. 

INTERVIEWER: Your uncle? 

AGNES: My uncle, my father brother, was also among of the marchers. And, uh, he got trouble with his heart, and he couldn't walk. So they shot him to death. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you know? 

AGNES: Someone who survived that death march came back and told us the story. My father, by the way, was deportated, and he had to-- he was deportated in the 20th of November with thousands and thousands of other men. And he-- he was deportated to Angara. Uh, and he had to dig his own grave-- 480 of them were shot to death there. 120 is in one grave. 

After deliberation, I find those mass graves. Because someone who also survived-- just a handful of them survived-- came back and-- and, uh, uh, told us where I can find the grave-- told to my mother and to me. 

Uh, I'm jumping from one conclusion to the other because I'm-- I'm-- I'm talking about the end. We-- we-- I was talking about deliberation, and we didn't get to the point yet. 

Uh, when we were in that, uh, that particular building what I mentioned previously, uh, and 5,000 people-- women-- were, uh, put constantly-- when they emptied the floor, they filled up the floors again, like I said it before. 

The following day, we got a miracle. Our messiah came. His name is Raoul Wallenberg, who is a Swedish diplomat, and he was sent to Budapest for the purpose of s-- to save the people-- Jewish people in Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't understand. The Swedish government sent somebody to save people, or he just did this? 

AGNES: He asked actually to be sent there, and they did send him. And with his own money, and also with American money, because he used to be a student in the United States, he bought buildings and also paid the Red Cross to-- to hide children in the Red Cross building. And he bought many, many of the building. They called the street name [? [HUNGARIAN] ?] in Budapest. 

Where the buildings were used for the purpose to put in people whom he saved. Also, uh, he went with trucks. With the trucks he drove, uh, toward to the Austrian border to try to bring back people who were in a death march. And successfully, he saved a few hundred. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you meet him? Did you see him? 

AGNES: Yes. Like I said before, we have 5,000 in the building, and 38 of us were saved by Wallenberg. I was saved, and my mother was saved. That was a miraculous thing. 

He came in with his-- his aide. I don't know who he was. And he, uh, he came with a book with names. Uh, he wanted to save people whom are having a Swedish passport that he previously furnished-- gave-- gave-- gave away for people. 

We didn't have the Swedish passport or protective paper. And my mother was begging him, and I begged him to save us. And somehow, he pushed my mother into another room. It was more-- more story to it, but I don't want to stretch my story. 

INTERVIEWER: No. Tell us. How-- 

AGNES: You want to heard the whole st-- 

INTERVIEWER: Exactly what you saw. 

AGNES: We went-- we-- we were in that, uh, uh, building. We were in one room. And, uh, they called names. The Hungarian Nazis were with him, and they called names. But the Nazis left him for a few minutes. I don't know that was that. He was giving the mummy-- money. They were bribed by Wallenberg or something else was involved. I don't know. 

But that few minutes were giving us enough time to memorize the name which was written on that book. Because none of them who were saved from that building had the Swedish passport. But he was giving us names. 

And I don't know. It-- with a miraculous way, we remembered the name. And he pushed my mother into the other room that people were selected already, uh, to-- to-- uh, uh, get out-- bring out from the building, you know. For life, they were selected out of it. The rest of them had the death sentence. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe him, as he walked in, as he-- 

AGNES: He walked in a young man, a young handsome man in age of 30s. Yeah, it's tall-- it's not-- eh, it wasn't a huge somebody, but tall. How I can memorize him because I saw him only once, but, uh, his-- he-- he-- his hair was, uh, uh, br-- dark brown, if I remember well. I don't remember his eyes color exactly. I-- I don't remember. He had a long face, uh. He was a very handsome fellow. 

But, uh, most of all, he had a-- he had a gorgeous, beautiful heart. Because single-handed, he saved directly or indirectly 15,000 Jewish life in Budapest. Among of the 15,000, I am, and my mother was the survivors. 

INTERVIEWER: When he walked into the room, what did he say? What did you hear him say? 

AGNES: Anybody who is having Swedish, uh, uh, document. If they don't have it with them in the end, because he went through so many, uh, stages, so nobody could have saved papers. But anyone whose name is in that book, uh, we tried to save them. But he had to announce that that way because the Nazis were sitting on his neck. They were with him. But after, he saved basically I-- he saved me, and my mother, and many other people who didn't have the Swedish, uh, passport or document. 

And is-- and it was a miraculous way how I survived. I was in one room, and the Nazis said they are going to account every individual person in the other room whom are allowed to leave the building. And 38 of them were accounted. And I didn't know what to do. My mother was pushed in among of that crowd, and I didn't want her to jeopardize the safety of the other people, the rest of them. 

So I didn't know. I was hesitant to-- to-- to-- to-- to, uh, uh, somehow push myself through and jump in if I can. Or if I-- if-- what should I do? I was hesitant. I was praying. And somehow, I don't know how, I find myself among of the crowd. This is not a makeup story. I was pushed in somehow. I don't know. I-- I-- I have much deeper faith toward to God. 

Some people, you know, we were all divided. Some became atheist, the other one have deep-- deeper faith. Why I have such a deep faith? Because I saw the miracle, and I experienced, not only once, but this was a particular event, you know, at-- at-- at that particular time. 

When they accounted the people of 38, and when-- this-- the Nazis said, if it's one or two more people will be in the crowd outside in the street, they are not-- not allowed, the 38, to survive either. So that's why I was so hesitant. And when we were out of the building, the Nazis accounted to the people two times. And they accounted 38 again. And I was the 39th person. 

Then Wallenberg, with his good heart, he brought us personally with policemen escort to a Swedish home-- house-- building that he bought. The building was occupied with many, many people. And he wanted to save practically everyone single-handed. He jeopardized his own life, his own safety. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened to you? You went to this house and what-- 

AGNES: We went to that house, and we were staying there overnight. And, uh, the following morning, uh, Jewish people who were standing guard outside said the Nazis are coming, the Hungarian Nazi party members, and they're going to check everybody's paper. And because we didn't have paper in our hand, they suggested to us, anyone who did-- didn't have the paper, we should run. 

So we were running out from the building, not to know where we going to eat, where we going to sleep, what we going to do during the daytime because we didn't have any identification paper. And it was written on our face, the fear. Because anybody who were caught, they were deportated or they were immediately shot to dead. 

Then we were remember, we had some, uh, friend in the, s-- uh, uh, Swiss consulate. And we tried to get in. We walked there with my mother. And they let us go in, but during the day time only. And they said during the evening, we have to leave the building. 

So we were there during the daytime. Evening came early the-- that time because it was winter. 4 o'clock in the afternoon, we were again out in the street, not to know where we going to sleep. And I had the uncle there from Czechoslovakia, who escaped from Czechoslovakia, and he got false document. And he was living in a particular place. He rented a-- a room. And, uh, every morning he had to leave the house, pretend he goes to work. 

So actually his life was jeopardized too, uh, as a younger man. And we-- we know we cannot find him during the day. So we had a few cents or [? [HUNGARIAN] ?] they call European terms, you know, Hungarian terms-- the money, the-- the currency was [? [HUNGARIAN]. ?] We-- we went to the movie. That I suggested to my mother to go to the movie because it's lot of Nazis in the movie, and they are not going to see-- uh, uh, looking for a Jew in the movie. Who have the-- the-- the idea? Who-- who thinks something like that? 

So it looked like that God was giving me the idea. This was another miracle. And we-- we-- we are sitting in the movie and watching the-- the Hitler documentary, beauty propaganda, uh, f-- films. And in the meantime, I-- my mind was working hard. Where are we going to survive? How are we-- how are we-- how are we going to sleep? Where are we going to sleep during the night? What are we going to eat? What are we going to do? 

After the movie-- the-- the-- the film was over, it was evening time. And-- and my uncle was standing the front of the building, because he was following us without our knowledge. And he knew where we were, but he didn't want yet to go into the movie. He was waiting for us. 

And he said, my aunt and my cousin is in a house, which having the Star of David on, and everybody was, uh, tooken away from that building. Everybody was deportated, so the janitor let them go in. So we should go into the building and we have a place where to sleep during the night. 

We went into that building, and we slept there in that particular night. We met my aunt and my cousin. And my uncle put together some food. So we survived in that night too. In the morning, somebody let the Hungarian Nazis where we are, let them know, and they picked us up again, and they brought us back where we were before. 

But anyways, indirectly, while I'm back, took us out a day before from that building-- uh, two days before-- uh, no-- a day-- two days before, right. So, uh, that was our luck. Because those days gaining time was everything. Gain time because we knew the Germans are running. And it was the end of the year of, uh, 1944, December, and they were running. 

So when they-- they brought us back to that building where we were before, they couldn't deportated us anymore, because the Russians surrounded Budapest completely. And they, uh, uh, picked us up and they threw us to the ghetto. They had a ghetto, which was surrounded with a wall, which we didn't know. The old people were there-- not too many young, because the youngs were all deportated. 

There, I was a voluntary nurse in the ghetto. Uh, I didn't have any-- any, uh, training as a nurse. But what kind of a training we were needed over there when people were dying like files. Anybody who was surviving there, older-- I called old people because I was 19 years old those days. And the old for me was about the 40s and the 50s. And anyone who were there, in my eyes, they were very old because they-- they had grew gray already, you know, and their face looked old. Everybody aged. 

And what can I do? I was figure I can do one thing, to watch them, because many of them had severe sickness, because we didn't have anything to eat. And only anyone who very young was able to do something and help them. 

The 18th of January, the Nazis put mined under the ghetto. No, uh,uh, excuse me 17th of January. And they said the 19th of January, the-- the, uh, ghetto will be exploded. They're going to kill us all. And, uh, 18th of January, we were survived. The-- the Russians marched in. 

Maybe I-- I-- I-- I mixed up the date. Maybe a few days before there were there to-- to mined the ghetto. Yeah, a week before, or two weeks before-- I don't know exactly. I'm a little bit confused with the date. But anyways, the police came in, and they let us know what they are doing over there. Because we saw the movement and all the Nazis, what they did there. The ghetto was mined. 

And because the Russians came in in the 18th-- not because they were so great, the Russians, you know, after we had to hide from them too-- but that particular time, they brought us the life anyways. The-- the first-- the first-- uh, army of the Russians were well-dressed. And they've had the liberated army, and they were giving us vitamin pills, because they knew our condition. Our condition was terrible. We were very much run down. As I said before, December, we were brought to the ghetto, and January 18, we were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go back home? Did you try? 

AGNES: No. I've never been back to Hungary, Why should I go back? 

INTERVIEWER: But you were still in Hungary. So where did you go when were liberated? 

AGNES: Oh, that time? Oh, you asked me if I went back home, my apartment. My apartment tooken from a-- a-- Hungarian Nazi. They took-- they took our apartment. They occupied our ah-- apartment. And, uh, we had some far relative, who, uh, had the connection to-- to let us have a apartment-- a Nazi apartment-- Hungarian Nazi who escaped from Hungary with the-- with the Germans, and we got that apartment. And with my aunt and my mother, we moved in. 

And Buda-- my brother was in the Buda part. We were in the Pest part. As you know, Budapest is divided by the river. And the-- the Nazis destroyed the bridges. So a month later, my brother showed up. Those days, my brother was only 13 years old. I was still expecting my father to come back. I didn't realize the fact, and I didn't want to realize that, he were not going to survive. He was deportated only six weeks before the liberation, the 28th of November. And we were still waiting for him. 

And, uh, that's why we were remained to stay there that long, because we-- we escaped finally in 1949. 

I was married January '46. And, uh, November-- January, November-- January '46, I was married, and November 1946, my son was born. And uh, my first son, firstborn. 

And, uh, we were waiting too long. We were-- we thought we are not going to have communism. The Russians were very, very tricky. They let us believe they are not established a communist government. It was a government there-- there in 1948-- which was, uh, uh, which was a government who let us build ourself up to a normal level financially and physically, and then when we thought we will be all right, then we realized that we were very wrong, because we had a communist putsch, a communist takeover 1948. 

INTERVIEWER: And you left? 

AGNES: We couldn't leave immediately. The Austrian border was mined. 

INTERVIEWER: So when did you leave? 

AGNES: And we went 19-- 1949, we left Hungary. Uh, we escaped toward to the Czechoslovakian border, and through Bratislava, with the [INAUDIBLE], which was a-- a-- a Jewish underground that was helping us unofficially to go through the Austrian border and gain our freedom to-- to emigrate to Canada. 

I lived for six years with my husband, with my mother, and with my firstborn ch-- child in Canada. And from Canada in 1956, we emigrated to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Sereni Agnes, what are you left with from all of this? What-- what is your attitude, your-- how has it affected your life, your-- 

AGNES: It's affected my life spiritually, physically, mentally. Because I don't have one day, one hour of the day-- [CRYING] excuse me, when I don't remember it was hard. 

They-- I didn't talk about Christmas Eve, when they tied together women and children in Budapest, and they shot them to the river. In springtime, when the ice was melted, the body's were strewn out, and the river was red from Jews' blood. 

Physically, I was hurt too. Because when I was-- I was in that hard labor camp, concentration camp-- because that was a Hungarian concentration camp too-- they damaged me, that horrible, heavy labor, my whole spine, I get two spinal fusion surgery. And recently, they removed one of my kidney. I had a malignant tumor in my left kidney. Every-- everything happened in my left side, because I was carrying on my left shoulder all those heavy things. 

INTERVIEWER: Spiritually? 

AGNES: Spiritually, how can you forget this thing? Seems like everything happened just today. [CRYING] Should I go on? 

INTERVIEWER: I'd like to ask you one last question. I'm sorry. 

AGNES: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't want to upset you. Some people who are critics of remembering the Holocaust say they don't understand how people can cry about something that happened to them 35, 40 years ago. I'd like you to answer that question if you will. 

AGNES: I think-- I cannot blame people if they ask that question. You know why? How can I expect from people to understand all this horror till they don't feel it on their own skin? And we pray to God these things should never happen again. Nowhere in the world, so they never, never should experience something like that. 

But this member is still bright in our heart and in our mind, so naturally we are crying. The-- these past 35 years, it's nothing, the life-- lifetime actually, maybe just about a life and desert-- 35 years flew away so fast, and the memory remained to stay bright in everybody's heart and everybody's mind. Sh-- naturally we are crying. 

Many people ask me other questions too. How come you didn't resisted to the Nazis. Number one, I try to explain something. If they took the manpower away, and we didn't have any weapon, and we didn't have underground in Hungary, how could we resist? That's one thing. 

Another thing-- try to visualize yourself staying in one building and they chase you everywhere, wherever you go-- the enemies, they are chasing you, and holding guns against you, and you are without a weapon. How can you resist? 

I have to say one thing. They used to call the Jew a coward. That's not true, because they killed millions and millions Jewish people. In the front of my eyes, they killed Jewish people. But none of them-- none of them, they're kneeling down and-- and begging to the Nazis for their life. They died with dignity. Even when they had to march to the gas chamber, they died with dignity. 

They were dying with prayers, because they couldn't resist. They couldn't kill Nazis. Anywhere that the Jew could re-- resist-- example, Wallenberg dressed up many Jewish boys with the Hungarian Nazi uniforms. I was happened to be-- I didn't want to tell all the details-- I was in a-- a particular place when I saw them. I thought that they are Nazis because they were wearing the-- the-- the-- the Arrow Cross. That was the Arrow Cross uh, uh, uh, uh wrist band. 

And later we find out, when we were, uh, took away from that building, they were fighting, the Germans, they were destroyed. We looked back. They were destroyed, because the-- the Germans overcome them with trucks, with the-- with-- with the-- with, uh, tanks I wanted to say-- not trucks, with tanks. And they-- they shot them to death. They didn't survived. But they resisted. Anyone who had a gun, who had the opportunity, they fighted. 

Those who didn't have-- because underground we didn't have. But if someone-- someone had a chance to-- to met Wallenberg or met, uh, some Zionist underground organization, that was the only underground. I'm not talking about the underground that was existing in the Warsaw ghetto, uh, so the Warsaw-- uh, in the ghetto the Jewish people got gun. The gun was smuggled into the ghetto. We didn't have that kind of underground. We didn't have any chance to fight against them. 

But we fighted our own way. Because what is this, if it's not fight, when I was running away each time, didn't care what will happening with me. I didn't give in my life so easily. So the others didn't. But some of them didn't have a chance to escape from the cattle car. Some of them didn't have Wallenberg. 

INTERVIEWER: You mentioned Wallenberg. That was one man who was able to do so much. Were there other people-- Hungarian Nationals-- who helped? Did you know of any Hungarians who tried to help? 

AGNES: Later, I find out one-- not too many, a handful. I tell you why. Not because other Hungarians were very bad. You'll find among of them nice people too. But they were scared from the others. They didn't know whom to trust. They didn't trust their own neighbors. 

Beside the point, many of our friends-- because we are associating with, uh, gentle people-- naturally, I grew up with gentiles. We used to live in a mixed neighborhood. I go to the re-- to the re-- to the regular public school. They've had all our friends. And many of them turned against us because they wanted to have our belongings. And it wasn't enough just to take away our belongings, but they took away our life-- I mean, our beloved one lifes too. 

So naturally, spiritually and mentally affect us-- how can I explain to my children when they were little and they ask me the question, they our neighbor grandparents are coming to visit them. They are not having grandparents. My mother was the only survivor. But my husband parents were killed instantly in-- in Auschwitz. My father was killed. And my children, when they were little, asked the question where they are? Explain that to little k-- kids, where they are. 

I tried to explain. I told to my, uh, uh, little babies, when they were little and they started to talk, they are in Heaven. How did they-- how come they are in heaven and the other grandparents are here. 

When they grew, I explained to them what was going on. And they grew up with that thought. I didn't want to spoil them in this period. And I'm very proud of myself, I didn't became an animal. I am not. I'm proud of myself, and I'm proud of the other survivor who didn't became a animal. Because what we went through, it wouldn't be surprising if we would become animal. 

After deliberation, Budapest was in war. You know, they were fighting from house to house. Guns were everywhere in underground. We didn't lift up one gun to think-- with the thought in my-- in our mind to kill somebody. No. We were grateful to God to saved our life, and we were hoping our beloved one will return. And we were waiting, and waiting, and waiting. 

Unfortunately, they didn't come back. Some of them came back, some survivors. And we were helping them how much we could, because we didn't have too much either. And anything which was hidden in some gentile-- gentile homes was-- some-- some people gave us something, gave us something. But most of the people kept everything. 

As I said previously, my father was antique dealer. And he had the chance and opportunity during the night-- the first night, when he realized that the following day he cannot open his store-- to smuggle out from the store a few antique, uh, uh, porcelain, you know, figurines, which were a-- a-- a-- a great value, and also a-- a few Persian rugs. And-- and he gave that to certain friends. 

We didn't get the Persian rugs back. We didn't get the figurines back. We didn't have other pieces back. But the person said the Russian took everything away from-- from them. And after a few months later, they opened a delicatessen store in the downtown Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER: Did that make you bitter? 

AGNES: That? Because they took away those things, and they didn't return it? No, I'm not materialistic. Except, I have to watch out whom I am associating with in the future. I have to be careful. 

I still have, uh, friends among of the gentiles. You cannot reject everyone. You cannot-- you cannot live in this world, uh, without a suspicious mind. This is an enemy of yours, because then you are sick. But you have to be careful. And-- and-- and you have to pray to God. Shouldn't ever never happen something like this, anywhere in the world. 

God bless America. I'm very, very happy to be here and talk free here and have the opportunity to talk about my terrible experience here. And we pray to God it shouldn't happen here or anywhere else in the world what happened before. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Great. Stop tape. I think we're almost out anyway. It's a powerful, powerful statement. 