CREW: Done? 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

CREW: Rolling? 

CREW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Kulka, tell us where you were born and what your family was like in the days of your youth. 

SUBJECT: I was born in Czechoslovakia, in Moravia, in the city of Steti. It's a city about 30,000 people, inhabitants. My-- I am born from the Jewish family. My-- my father was a merchant and an observant Jew. And I was educated. After, I finished my school in the gymnasium. 

So I finished the school for-- as an ex-pat-- lumber ex-pat. And we had the factory for furniture, our families, in Moravia, and what, we'd cut sawmill and wood. It's about-- it was-- it was a-- a factory. And when the-- when Hitler came, we were five. Three sisters, I had, and two brothers, I had. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And What are your memories of the things that you loved the most or you liked the most when you were a young boy, the friends you had. 

SUBJECT: So we didn't-- we were very cheerful. We had some connections with the Jewish organization, the Hitler One Maccabeans, and so on. And so-- but when I was grown up in the '30s, maybe in '32, '33, '35, and the Nazis came to the power in Germany, we wouldn't-- we didn't believe that it is something like that, the concentration camps, and so. I read it in the newspapers, but I never believed that it is something-- such cruelty is possible. I thought it's a political propaganda, and so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 1933, you read in the newspaper? 

SUBJECT: Yes, when the Hitler came to power, from 1933, '34, '35, yes? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: That was 21, 22, yes. And then when-- on the 15th of March, the Germans came and occupied Czechoslovakia, yes? And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: '39, in '39. And three months after, I was arrested from the gestapo in June '39. I was arrested as I helped to escape the-- some group-- the Moravia our-- I had my home in the enterprise one on the Moravian/Slovakian border, you know? 

And the people who felt to be endangered, or they-- some, they would joined to the Czechoslovak resistance at Brod. They were going through the borders. And in the woods, I knew the-- I knew some parts. And so I helped to-- to some groups that they could go over to Slovakia. From there, they could go to Poland, to-- which was not at that time in war, and to France, and so on, to join the Czechoslovak resistance. 

And then a group was catched on the Slovakian terrain, yes, terrain. And it-- we were-- it was flown up, and I was arrested, not only myself, and others also. And then I was arrested, and I was put in jail, first in Brno, in Spilberk fortress, and later in Vienna. 

And in '40, I came to Dachau, to the concentration camp Dachau, and later to the concentration camp Nuengamme in '41. And in '42, in October, I was deported to the Auschwitz annihilation camp. But also, in the camp, when I was so long time. So I knew-- I always had some underground connections. And I knew that in the camp, it can be only survive who has the possibility to acquire a job where his job is needed by the SS. 

And so it happened that I got a job already in Hamburg, Nuengamme, as a locksmith and plumber. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you learn the skill of locksmith? 

SUBJECT: Look, I-- something when Hitler came. So I knew that I was thrown out from my-- from my-- job, and so on. So I make vocational training about two or three months in auto repair-- repair shop. But it was not so important if you [CHUCKLES] know and if you are. But important was to acquire it. But the work was very primitive there. 

But you had some connection that you knew how to acquire. So we had about five very old prisoners from all these camps. You were together. And so we happened that we got from the beginning in Auschwitz and we came, so there, it was a very small camp. There were no crematoria in that time, and no gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where is this? 

SUBJECT: In '40-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which camp? 

SUBJECT: Birkenau, the Auschwitz, Auschwitz. In-- in Dachau, there were no gas chambers. And in Nuengamme, also no, no. But then in-- in Auschwitz, there were still one small crematorium in the main camp, yes? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: '42. And this crematorium was, in '41, already there, yes? But-- and there were all the people, gassing people, you know, executing people by gas in the gas chambers, but in small numbers. But its think I will tell you, but I think this is the main strength of this crime, that it couldn't be believed by people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But What did you think when you got to Auschwitz and you saw the crematorium? 

SUBJECT: I will do now. Then I came to Auschwitz. So some prisoners from Auschwitz came to Nuengamme to exchange the Jews, as the all the Jews from all camps in '42 by so-called Reich-- Reich order, were transferred all to Auschwitz from all the camps, yes? The Jews. And we didn't do it, exactly. 

And then came some-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Experts. 

SUBJECT: --some experts from Auschwitz to Nuengamme, some experts for plumbers, electricity, and then so on. And we were transferred to Auschwitz. And they told us, the Auschwitz prisoners, what it has happened in Auschwitz, that the people are gassed, and so on. And we wouldn't believe it. 

First, when I came to Birkenau, so always, they told me, yes, the people are in the gas chambers. They will be executed. They will be buried in the huge-- huge pits, and so. And I didn't believe it. 

After 14 days, I came to Birkenau camp, and there was a huge barricade broke. There was a very bad smell. And there was a blocker before that, a blocker-- a blocker that's a Slovak. And he-- he has a armband-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Armband. 

SUBJECT: --armband with the inscription Blockalteste Sonderkommando And he spoke Slovak. It's dormant to to Czech. And I ask him-- and he asked me that I am a locksmith. He want to repair a lock in the-- in the-- in the block. But the block was abandoned. It was not allowed to go in. 

And I asked him, what are you doing here? And he told me, we are khevre kaddish. You know what it is. We are a very ill, very ill society. So-- so I ask him what it is. I never-- I couldn't understand this. 

And then he told me, we are going about two kilometers behind the camp-- behind the camp. And there are huge pits that there are decaying corpses of victims, of prisoners, which were gassed in the primitive gas chambers. And these decaying corpses are now spoiling the waters, you know. And the typhus epidemic is spreading out. 

So it was decided from the SS to dig out these decaying corpses and to burn them in-- in a free. But they poured it with kerosene and with left over benzene, and they-- this, I saw. And from this moment, I believed it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel? 

SUBJECT: It was-- what I feel? Like it was shocked. But I was already accustomed to this after having the experience in Dachau, where they killed people and Nuengamme, where they killed people, where the people were destroyed there, where the people were-- were threatened to death, yes? I saw it under every commander. They cannot show-- tell you the whole stories from Nuengamme, how I was worked in the-- in the mud till-- till my half korp. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the mud? You were working in the mud? 

SUBJECT: The mud, yes. When the car-- we were digging a canal, you know, a channel. We were digging a channel for-- from the Elbe, from the Elbe. And we were in that-- 10, 20, 30 people a day were beaten to death in the work. I can't you describe all this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kind of work were you involved? 

SUBJECT: Oh, look, it was-- you would never believe how the people were killed by work. You can imagine there was-- [SIGHS] 

--there maybe-- here was the shelving. See this-- this-- this wide-- wide strip. And here, there were the ground where-- where the-- the mud from the channel was put. And we had only a small a small-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: A piece of board. 

--board. They would make a piece of board and-- and around way of a piece of board which has about 30 centimeters of wide. And there were put the people with 500 cars, 500. There were 2,000 people are working. And 500 people with cars there, going, still running. And this mud were was from the ships where the mud loaded to these tracks. And you, all the running. And if you came out from this-- from this narrow, narrow road, so you jumped in the-- in the mud. And then they came, kapo, and they beat you. And so the only-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was forcing you to do this work? The SS men and the kapos, the prisoners, the surviving prisoners. And there were kapos and SS men which were-- which were looking. There was a very huge tower, where there were SS men with the triangle. And he looked upon. And when some kapo didn't beat you or didn't push you to the back, so the kapo must go to this-- to the-- to the car, yes? And so the only break was when somebody was exhausted and fall with this car, and you couldn't go. So the whole around stopped, yes? 

So and we were-- we were very glad that it was the only possibility how he could keep their breasts, you see. And they tried to-- they beat him that he should proceed the work. And he couldn't, so he was pushed aside. 

And when we finished the work, so these death or death cameras, we were putting in the camp. So was the work in Nuengamme. And the same was in-- there was no gas chambers. But they killed the people by this way here. So it's only that the-- the-- or maybe this also hardly, we will tell you somebody that in Dachau, they kill people by cleanliness. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Doing what? 

SUBJECT: Clean, to be clean, to keep tidy, yes? That there, the blocks were so clean, yes, that I was-- in Dachau, there was a very nice camp. The barracks were nice, about 120, 200 people. And there, it was divided, the dining room and the sleeping room, yes? 

And now you back-- there were-- it was the-- the fussboden, the-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The floor. 

SUBJECT: --the floor was very, very, very polished, and so. And you never could go with-- with your shoes to the-- to the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bathroom? 

SUBJECT: --to the barrack, to the barrack. Before-- before the barrack, there was a shelf. And in this shelf, you put your-- your shoes, very different shoes, very-- very different shoes. And so when the-- when it was the lunch, for instance, yeah, and every has a small bathroom. And they-- he had bestecken [NON-ENGLISH], a spoon and a fork and a knife, yes? And you got only the soup, nothing on plates. But you must use all the fork, the spoon, and the-- and in five minutes, you must give it in this-- in this-- in your case, yes? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm sorry, Mr. Kulka-- 

SUBJECT: Didn't understand? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said-- no I didn't-- and you said, that they killed you with cleanliness-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --and that I didn't-- 

SUBJECT: They clean-- mit Reinlichkeit, mit cleanliness 

You should be clean, you know, that to keep clean. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, how would that kill you? 

SUBJECT: No, look. I will tell you that in five minutes-- after-- we had the five minutes' time to eat. After five minutes, they came and control, and they show with a glass if there is-- if you have in your case that the knife or that the-- or the spoon is-- is exactly clean, yes? And if they found something, they beat you-- you, yes? 

And then in the evening, in the-- in the night, so we were going in the night to sleep in the sleeping room, yes? And then at midnight, came a Blockalteste. You know what is Blockalteste? The senior of the block, a prisoner, yes? But he had the right to keep-- to kill you. 

And then in the midnight, he came with his studentens. It is their assistants. And they were crying, you swines, look what you have-- there is dirty-- a dirty floor, and so on. March, and all you should go out to make sport. You know what is sport? To make to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: To exercise. 

SUBJECT: --to exercise, to exit in the night. And they were beating you all to death-- to death in the entrance. And nobody could catch his right shoes, you see. It was very-- it was dark. And it was the shoes were different, yes? And so many people were going without shoes. And they make neither of the exercise, you know, this-- and they still were crying. 

And then once they told, back in the block. So many came with this-- there was mud in-- on the court-- on the courtyard, yes? There was moot. And when we came in the block, so they were dirty. So now they told, so you dirty swines. Now you must lick out of this mud, you see, with the tongue. You understand me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And then they beat people to death for this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were the-- 

SUBJECT: The Blockalteste and the-- the-- the block senior and his assistants, prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were the block seniors? Where they other Jews, or are they-- 

SUBJECT: No, there was no Jews. There was a communist prisoner whose name was Karl Knoll. And he was a very long time in the camp. And he was-- his qualification for-- was only how many people he killed. 

His-- there was a blockfuhrer. His boss was a blockfuhrer. He came in the morning and asked him, so how many people you-- you had yesterday? How many people you have today? And he told him, if you have next time so and so many, so I will-- I will keep your-- your armband 

So and this was very often. And so I will-- this, now you understand, with cleanliness, that they were-- the block was clean. But what they forced you to be dirty. And you had no possibility to clean you, yes? And this-- this was the-- the-- method how they kill the people, especially Jews. But we were in the straflager. It's a penalty camp. Every Jew came in the penalty camp, in Dachau, automatically, in '40, already in 1940. There were no gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you had to lick the floor. This was a penalty. 

SUBJECT: Yes. They lick the floor, and with-- and they beat you also. By this, they beat you. They treated you with their-- with the boots and through this-- this assistant of the Blockalteste. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. These were not the Germans, though, that did this. 

SUBJECT: No, Germans didn't. They were prisoners. For instance, they were criminals which were also in the-- in Dachau in the-- that were made especially for as the block seniors, the prisoners, the criminals. And they got disposition. They had better food, yes. And they-- they-- 