Eva Schaal Oh, it's so hot. 

INTERVIEWER: You're still hot with the door open? OK. 

Eva Schaal Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go. OK, rolling. 

Eva Schaal OK. I was born in Berlin in- in November 1922. My father came from, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry. We have to start again and do your name. I'm sorry. 

Eva Schaal I'm sorry. OK. I'm Eva Schaal uh, née Rose, Rose in German, which is like the flower. And I was born in Berlin in November 1922. Uh, my father came from a little village in Westphalia called Bohnenburg. And my mother came from the Rhineland, from Elberfeld Wuppertal. And when they met and were married, they moved to Berlin, and I've lived there as long as I was in Germany, since, uh, until 1939. 

We lived in the same block, um, of apartments in a very good neighborhood of Berlin, and we just-- we moved four times. Each time it was two houses further down the block. First Kaiserdamm which later on became Adolph Hitler Strasse and was the most famous street in Berlin next to Kurfuerstenstrasse. And then we moved around the corner to Zoostrasse and then to Bredtschneiderstrasse. And Bredtschneiderstrasse was very unique. It was the smallest apartment that we had, except for the very first one. My when I was born, I lived in another apartment two doors away on Kaiserdamm. 

And, uh, the reason it was very unique is that we had the most fantastic view. On the left of looking out of my bedroom window, and off-- down from our balcony, because all German apartment houses had balconies if they were fashionable places, like they have here, too. On the left of, uh, me were the exhibition halls, which was one of the most famous sites in Berlin because every time a big national or international exhibition started, Hitler, later on, came to open it officially with all the dignitaries and all the pomp and-- was going on right in front of our house. 

On the right of us was the Funkhaus, which is the big radio station of Berlin. It's still there today. And a little bit further across was the Funkturm, which is something like the Eiffel Tower in miniature. And it was actually the radio tower of Berlin. But it was very high for those days, and it had a restaurant half way up and an observation tower on top, and an elevator. And you could see in good days the elevator going up and down, and it was sort of a trademark. 

When my son went back to Berlin a few years back, he went right there and he brought me pictures, and it's all still the same way it was. Apparently It was not bombed, or not heavily bombed, because it's still there. They built on to it. 

I had a very comfortable childhood, at least until Hitler made it more difficult for my parents. We had live in help and my father traveled a great deal. He usually came home just Saturdays and Sundays. He was a salesman, a wholesale salesman, for ladies' hats, and he traveled all over the country and sometimes abroad to Switzerland or to Belgium. And my mother ran the house. 

She had a very nice social life. And we had a nanny when we were born, a nurse, and a live in cook, a housemaid, until Hitler forbid, which was many years later, for Jews to have help in the house. Because an alien couldn't live under the same roof with a Jew, and therefore all the help had to leave and Jewish people could not have any help. 

We were able to have a maid for a while, daily, who came in, who was a good friend of ours. She-- her husband was a communist. I'm sure she was, too, and he was in jail, and she was very nice and supportive for as long as she could be with us, and a wonderful help. And I do not remember Hitler before January 30, 1930, when he came in-- um, 1933, when he came into power. 

In Germany, uh, people are very sport orientated. Uh, very often now when I see jogging in the streets and all the athletics, young people doing all the athletics and older people, too, I wonder about it, because in my very young childhood in Germany this always took place. Everybody went to the sports field, the athletic field. We didn't jog in the streets, we jogged at the athletic fields. And everybody did that from five years on, and everybody had a lot of sports. And later on, when Hitler came into power, he stressed that more than ever, because he had this keep fit plan which was very important to him. Because in order to be a strong, overpowering nation, everybody had to keep fit. 

So I had gymnastics and acrobatics privately from the time I was a very young girl. And as it happened, on January 30, 1933, we had a recital, a big gymnastics and acrobatics we did, recital. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

Eva Schaal I was 10 years old. And it was the other part of Berlin. Berlin is a big city. And, um, I remember being on the stage. I even remember what exercise I did on the stage, which was just like rolling around, and we did all kinds of acrobatics and things, and applauding. And all of a sudden it was announced through a loudspeaker system that Hitler had just been elected. 

And I remember this instant very distinctly. And I remember my parents being absolutely frantic. Apart from the fact that Hitler came into power, that they didn't know how we would get home safely. And-- because we were quite a distance away, and I don't remember-- we never had a private car, but my father sometimes had a rental of a car. And I don't remember whether we went back home by taxi or-- I think we went home by taxi, or we had to go on buses and subways. But I remember us rushing out of that place. 

And that was the night of the big parade, and everybody who had the uniform was marching in the street. There were burning torches. they were real flames-- and singing The Horst Wessel Song and all the Nazi songs and carrying on. And just being completely out of hand. And we did get home safely, but I remember this of the beginning-- as the beginning of it all, and I have no recollection prior to that. 

I went to public school. Uh, in Germany, you go to school, uh, for eight years, if you do not go to high school. Uh, the first four years, everybody has the same, uh, basic, um, scholastic, um, skills. And after that, anybody who could afford it-- because it was private and you had to pay for it yourself. And to my knowledge, there were no scholarships, at least I'm not aware of them. The girls went to the Lyceum, and the boys went to the Gymnasium which were the two high schools. And the difference is that in the Gymnasium you learn Latin, and in the Lyceum, you did not. You learned French and English, but you didn't learn Latin because they made differences between boys and girls. 

And the children who did not have the means to go to private schools went the next four years to the same public school that we had all gone to together. And they then learned trades, mostly. They had very little scholastic, um, teaching, but they learned, uh, trades. And cooking, the women learned cook-- the girls learned cooking and baking and all of this. So I went to the Lyceum, the west end Lyceum, in Berlin, in Charlottenburg, which was a beautiful neighborhood. And I remember, um, I was there for two years, and-- but I have to start back. 

Prior to me going to public school when I was six years old, I do not recall anything about my religion. I'm not saying that I didn't know anything, but I do not recall it. But in Germany, religious education was given in public school, and the way it worked was that the Jewish children were instructed by a Jewish teacher and, I guess, the Catholic and Protestant-- I don't know how many, uh, how the denominations were-- had in class, uh, their religious teacher. But it all took place at the same time. You didn't go to Hebrew school or religious school like you do in the United States. But religion was taught in public school. 

And I remember that I went to religious-- to my Jewish, uh, class, as we called it. And, uh, I think that's when I recall finding out that I was Jewish, which was when I was about seven years old. Uh, the German Jewish were, especially in Berlin, were very assimilated. Uh, I remember that we had a Christmas tree in our home, and it was partially for the help who was in our home, but I think it was also partially for us. But this was a good way of doing it, because certainly when you have live in help, you supplied them with a very nice Christmas tree and beautiful gifts. They were beautifully taken care of, uh, by the people who hired them in those days. They got beautiful gifts, and I remember we had a Christmas tree. 

And I remember the fight that I had with my brother after Hitler came into power and when I became conscious of being Jewish, that I wanted a Christmas tree-- Hanukkah menorah, and he wanted a Christmas tree. And my brother was three years younger than I was, and I had to convince him that this was what we wanted. And I remember then going to Friday night services, and it was called a liberal synagogue, which is something between a conservative synagogue and a, um, reform synagogue here. It is not, not like a conservative synagogue. And I remember going there every Friday night. 

And it was really us convincing our parents that we wanted to keep all this, because we are the ones with influence and we are the ones who became, um, more Jewish oriented, which Hitler brought about. But I do remember my father always telling me, you are Jewish and you have to be very proud of it, even when I was a little girl. And he did observe the high holy days, but my mother really didn't particularly care until we made her to, made her. 

And when I went to the Lyceum, the high school, my father said, um, if anybody makes you feel uncomfortable being Jewish, please tell us because we will then send you to a private Jewish school. And it was a little bit desirable for me also to go to this private Jewish school, which was a beautiful school, so I did have some experiences of, uh, different teachers. You know, you had to get up and say, "Heil Hitler," and all this, which I didn't like. And some children teasing me in school about being Jewish and not being able to celebrate Christmas, which they thought was the most terrible thing that a Jew was not allowed to celebrate Christmas. And maybe, in a way, we felt like this also, in the beginning, because as we said, we did at one time have a Christmas tree at home. But this was counteracted by our religious Jewish education, and I explained to them that-- how beautiful the Jewish holidays were, and they just ran away and left me alone. 

Another thing I remember is, it is-- you feel bad being different, and being-- especially when you are a child. And being, uh, Jewish, a Jew, a Jew in Germany, certainly, was different. And I remember this little, very unimportant incident which, uh, I have never forgotten. On the first of May, which was the day of the national worker's celebration and became a national holiday, you bought a little plaque which you wore in your lapel with a pin. And it said "1st of May Celebration, Nazi, Germany" or something on it. And it was something like $0.25 or $0.50 to buy, and my parents had instructed me that I couldn't buy it because I was Jewish, and Jewish people don't wear it. And when the teacher sold it in my class, I felt very, very much out of place and very uncomfortable and shamed to say that I didn't want to buy it, or that my parents had told me I couldn't buy it. So I bought it, and I remember that was the only time in my life that I ever did something that I was told not to do as a child. 

And I bought this, uh, plaque, and, of course, I didn't dare to bring it home, but I hid it somewhere on the way home. I dropped it somewhere in a, in a corner or in a, [INAUDIBLE] a door, but I still remember that horrible feeling that I committed a crime because my parents told me I shouldn't buy it but I didn't want to be different, so I did buy it. 

And then after a while, I decided that-- I told my-- I remember my father putting me on his lap and telling me that he had fought in the first, first, World War, and that everything that Hitler said was wrong. That we were Germans as much as the Nazis were Germans, and that we belonged to Germany, and that he could prove it to me by showing me in this little book that all the battles that he fought and were written into there or registered in there, and he also had some medals. And he showed me that, and he says, if anybody ever says anything to you, you tell them that I fought for Germany. I would have given my life for Germany, and this is our country and nobody can take it away from us. And my parents-- my father believed that for many, many years, that whatever was happening had nothing to do with him, because he had fought for his country, and he was part of it. 

And my mother, I remember, in 1933 or 34, begged my father for all of us to leave Germany. She was afraid. She was afraid of lots of things. She had, um, many, many more apprehensions, and she felt that we should leave everything and we should go. And at that time, you could have gone to another country with much of your money, with most of your belongings. And, uh, but you had to give up your livelihood, and my father felt that this is where he was, this is where he belonged, this is where he fought, this is where his business was. 

And, really, one has to understand it, because if somebody were telling me today, just like this, give up everything that you've worked for for 30 years, leave it all and go, I don't know whether I would go right away. I would say, well, let's first see what happens. And this was the feeling of my father, and he waited until it was almost too late. 

INTERVIEWER: You say now, knowing what you know, having been through what you've been through, that you would hesitate now, if you saw some of the signs that you saw then? 

Eva Schaal Not if I would see the signs of fascism like I saw then, but we didn't recognize them, unfortunately. We didn't really-- nobody had any idea what was going to happen. Some people did, because some people left. Some people left because they had the foresight, and others left because they didn't have much to lose. 

But in my father's case, he had quite a lot to lose. We really didn't have any property or anything like this. We just had a nice business and a nice income and lived very comfortably. We were not the upper class. But we were just living very comfortable with what my father was able to do in Germany. And actually, when he came to the United States, which fortunately he did, he was never able to make roots, because he couldn't speak the language. And he really never, uh, did financially well again, or even made a decent living for himself. It was my mother who had to do it then, who had never worked in Germany all through her married life. 

So, in a way, you know, my father had these fears, and I guess they were justified. Except that he didn't realize what was going to happen to all of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever hear at that time, people talking about the book Hitler wrote and the plan he had for Germany? 

Eva Schaal Yes, but we didn't believe it. We didn't believe this would all happen. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't believe what was in the book? You didn't believe he could do it? 

Eva Schaal We didn't believe that he would ever carry out his plan. And, um, I think all together and in Europe, probably, I don't know. My husband had it-- had a different, uh, experiences. We were very, very sheltered, not only from Nazism but also, if, god forbid, somebody in the family would be very ill, or somebody had committed suicide, this was hushed up to the children. The children didn't-- weren't taught about anything. If my father would have any financial reverses-- and I have now since found out that there was a time where he had difficulties in a certain period in his business-- uh, this was said when the dining room-- when the living room doors were closed, and it was not meant for the children. And I think that our upbringing, with, uh, being shielded from as much as we could be shielded by our parents was along the same lines. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to Hebrew school. Did you lose-- or a Jewish school. Did you then lose contact with all of the friends that you'd had from the public schools? 

Eva Schaal Yes. Yes. And my second-- after my second year of high school, I went to this beautiful, private, Jewish forest school, which is also, again, a typical German thing. They had the idea. And there were many non-Jewish forest schools, which Hitler also very much promoted, but they'd been there before, where it was felt that the children should have as much fresh air and outdoor schooling as possible, and everything was geared to that. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have non-Jewish friends on the street? After all, you lived in one neighborhood-- 

Eva Schaal Uh, I remember one girl, and I don't know whether this was-- I'm sure she never went to the Lyceum, because she was very poor. So I must have either known her from my first four years of grammar school or met her. She lived in my neighborhood. And I know that her father was unemployed until Hitler came into power. And, of course, we have to realize that these were the people that gave him the biggest push of going into power, that there were so many unemployed Germans, and that he promised work to all the unemployed. 

And I remember that after Hitler came into power, things became a lot better for them, because the father did work, some kind of manual work. He found a job. And they had low income housing, they had-- he built some low income housing. And I remember being invited to-- I think maybe her mother may have worked for my mother at one time, maybe doing some dressmaking or something like this. I don't remember the connection, but I remember being invited to her modest home and being very happy to be there. And I remember her saying how good Hitler was for her and what he's done for her, and how her life had improved. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you mention it being less good for you? 

Eva Schaal Yes, I'm sure I did, and they were very sympathetic towards the Jewish people, this particular family, because Jewish people had been good to them. I'm sure they were some kind of a connection there. But it was never said openly. 

None of these people ever had the courage to speak up, because it meant prison or death or something. And I never knew the Jewish people could speak up until I came to this country and heard about the Warsaw ghetto. I mean, Jews didn't defend themselves. They were innocent bystanders of something that was going to happen to them, and I think it's only since we have the state of Israel and know about concentration camps and the Warsaw ghetto that Jewish people fight like every other nation who defends themselves, especially in Israel. And They've certainly proven it. 

But at that time, everybody was very passive. And I remember we had a maid who-- a live in woman who took care of us and of our house later on, a young woman. And she had a boyfriend who lived down the street and he was a plumber. And I remember him coming in his Nazi uniform once to pick her up or so. But they were very sympathetic towards us, but not when it came to speak up publicly. They were just afraid. Everybody was afraid. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your mother trying to convince your father to leave? Do you remember those conversations? 

Eva Schaal Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? 

Eva Schaal Yes, well, my mother would be-- get a little, get a little hysterical, because that was her way. And she would just say, I'm afraid, and let's go, and I don't care about anything else, I want to go. But my father would just say, no, look, we've got a livelihood here, we have a home here. You know, he just wouldn't believe it. He wouldn't believe that this could happen. 

INTERVIEWER: So, how did she win out? Do you remember that? 

Eva Schaal How did she what? 

INTERVIEWER: Win her-- get her way, to-- 

Eva Schaal To go-- to leave Germany? This was after the Kristallnacht, when you had no choice. Well, uh, things got gradually worse. Um, I went to this school, and-- a Jewish school. My brother, who is three years younger, stayed in public school for another couple of years, I believe. And then Hitler made a law, and I don't know exactly what year it was, that no Jewish child was allowed to go to public school. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your brother suffer any kind of discrimination in school? Did he talk about it? 

Eva Schaal I'm sure he did, but he was very young and I don't remember it. So my brother then went to the same school, and the the, uh, Jewish community in Berlin had to start all kinds of different schools, which were not all private schools but schools supported by the Jewish community, because you could not go to school anymore unless you went to a Jewish school. 

So things got gradually much worse. And then, um, I remember that we had read that every Jew had to register. And I don't exactly know what year it was, but it must have been something like, I would say maybe '30, 1936. Maybe it was before. I remember at that time, my grandmother gave up her home-- her apartment and moved in with us. And, um, this went around in every-- in the apartment building that we lived, from floor to floor, that every Jewish family had to register so that Hitler would know where they were. And I remember that the biggest anxiety in our home was not that we had to register, but that my grandmother had to write her date of birth down, and she didn't want anybody to know how old she was. 

[LAUGHS] 

And that's why I remember that incident. We all had to sign in, and then she took it last, and then it was delivered to where it had to go. And then at one time, Hitler made the law so that Jewish people could be recognized by everybody, we-- all women had to assume the name of Sara and all men had to assume the name of Israel. And this was officially put into your identification papers. In other words, if my name was Eva, it became Sarah Eva on all official papers and everywhere, so that this-- it was easily to be recognized as a Jew. You were easily recognized as a Jew. 

Then the Kristallnacht came along-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was is it customary in Germany to carry identification papers before Hitler? 

Eva Schaal I think so, because the Germans were very correct, and there were a lot more things with registering and being accounted for, as it was ever in this country. Now, remember, uh, until this day, I have an uneasy feeling going to police station. Maybe not any more now, but I remember that 10 years back, I did, because it was the most frightening thing to have to go to the police station in Germany, especially as a Jew. You know? 

And, uh, anyway, 1938, um, Jewish salesmen such as my father was were not allowed to work anymore. You were not allowed to have your own business anymore, and you were not allowed to work anymore. I don't know whether you were allowed, uh, to work when you were an employee in a-- in a store or in a factory. But my father had never fallen into that category, and so he was not allowed to work anymore. So things became very difficult, both financially and otherwise. 

And then it became November 1938, and the highlight of all my childhood-- and it's really still true for today-- it's a German tradition of birthdays. And my birthday happens to be on November 11, and which was the Kristallnacht, and that started on November 10, I believe. Either November 9 or November 10. We were not aware of anything happening. Berlin is a very big city, and, uh, Jewish people as a whole, if they didn't stick out and if they kept quiet, were not persecuted, or as easily, as people-- Jewish people who were in smaller towns where everybody knew, Oh, there they are, that is a Jew. 

So we were not aware that anything was happening that day. And my brother and I took the bus and went to school, like we always did. And I don't think noticed anything on the way, because if we had, I guess we would have gotten out of the bus. And we got to school and somebody stands in front of the school, and they screamed to us, hurry up and get home as fast as you can. The synagogues are burning! 

And we went home again, we got home again on the bus-- it was about, school was about half an hour away from our home. Sometimes we used to ride on bicycles, but at that particular time we didn't. It was winter time. 

INTERVIEWER: A public bus? 

Eva Schaal A public bus. There was never a restriction as long as I was in Germany, uh, that you couldn't use public transportation. Um, they had yellow armbands later on, but I had left Germany by that time, fortunately. 

So we came home and, uh, everybody was-- my mother was hysterical at home. The synagogue's were burning and the Jewish uh, stores were being loitered and broken into, and the Jewish men were being arrested. So my father left. My father was home, and he went-- many people in Berlin went into hiding, because, as I said, Berlin is a much bigger place than a small village where you can find people easier. And my parents had a friend who was-- a woman who was a widow, and her husband had died in a very dramatic automobile accident several years prior to that. So she was my parents' age, but she was a widow for several years, and this is where my father went, to her apartment. And there were many-- several other friends, male friends of-- Jewish men hiding there. And it was really taking a tremendous risk, but nobody rang her doorbell because everybody was registered and they did have the list where people were, and they were very correct. And in this particular house, there were not supposed to be any Jewish men, so they never rang the bell. 

And my father was in hiding there-- I don't know, for several days. And, uh, you know, in relative comfort, in somebody's comfortable apartment. Of course, fearing for their lives. And I remember that my mother was very disturbed that he didn't have a clean shirt every morning, because this is what he was accustomed to. So shirts-- clean shirts were delivered through to the-- to the woman's apartment. 

And in the meantime we were home and it was my birthday. And I was absolutely furious because my mother took all my birthday gifts and hid them in the closet, because she felt that if a Nazi would come to the house and see a celebration that, uh, you know, they would let it-- leave it -- let it out on us, and she didn't want that. So she hid it. 

And a Nazi did come, Nazis did come to the door to look for my father, who wasn't there. And a boyfriend of mine was there at the time who was at the time 16 or 17 years old, and he ran down the back steps. Somebody warned us. I don't know who it was, but it was somebody in the house who was obviously not Jewish. And somebody warned us and said, they're coming. And we lived on the third floor and they were downstairs. So this friend of mine um, went down the back steps and he was not caught. 

And after that, of course, everything was in chaos. The Jewish people realized that there was only one thing they could do, and that was to save their skins and to try and get out. And everybody frantically tried to get visas to come to the United States. And people-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your feelings about that? 

Eva Schaal Oh, yes, I was, uh, very anxious to get out. And my parents were very anxious to at least get my father and me out, even if they had to stay behind. But they always put it in a way that they said, it's only going to be temporary . We'll all be together again. And, um, I had a friend I went to school with, a Jewish friend, who had gone to the United States earlier. And she was able to get VISA affidavits, which was the permission to enter the United States for my whole family, including my grandmother, for my brother, and my-- me and my mother and father. 

But the United States had a quota, and you could only leave, even if you had permission to go both by the Nazis and had permission to enter the United States, you could only leave when your quota came up, because they wouldn't leave-- let one extra person come into the United States. And this was early '39, and our quota was December, '39, which was considered a very low quota, date because we didn't expect the war to start in the summer. 

And like, the Polish quota was much, much higher. It took many, many more years. It would have taken maybe five years to get to the United States, where as the German quota was lower and it was only, what we thought, was very short. It was only 12 months. 

And Jewish people would go and get telephone books and go-- um, get telephone books from New York or from the United States-- I don't know how one got that-- and they would look for people who had the same name as they did, and they would write to them and tell them we're a relative of yours. Please help us to get out. And I remember my mother and my grandmother doing that frantically until we got the visas. 

But then when things got so bad-- also, at home people started to auction off their furniture, because they didn't have money to live, and I remember my parents did that. And we had to move into a very-- this is a nightmare to m. It's one of the things I remember was the apartment we moved into, because we had always been used to a very nice apartment, and this was probably two or three rooms in a very bad neighborhood. And it was a furnished apartment, and I remember it had lice, which I had never seen before, in the beds. And my brother and I had to move into the same-- sleep in the same bedroom together, and I guess my grandmother slept in the living room and my parents slept in the other bedroom. And my parents figured we had to go there in order to have enough money to live until something would happen. 

And I remember the auction and, of course, they all got all the furniture for practically nothing. And my parents also tried to find a relative to send some valuables out of the-- of Germany, and somehow Hitler allowed that within very small limitations. So I remember, my-- I had a beautiful Erika typewriter, which was my dream, and I had a gold ring which my parents had bought me and my parents took some Persian rugs and their sterling silver and they sent it all to a relative in Belgium. Of course the Nazis over ran Belgium and everything got lost anyway. They never saw any of that. 

But these were the kind of attempts-- what people were doing after the Kristallnacht. They-- everybody just tried to do something. And then my brother and I were very fortunate because, um, my parents belonged to B'nai B'rith in Berlin, which was a very elite Jewish organization. And members of B'nai B'rith in Great Britain said they would sponsor children of members of B'nai B'rith in Berlin and take them out temporarily until other arrangements could be made. 

So, my brother was 13 in January of 1939, and it was time for his bar mitzvah, but all the synagogues had burned. And I remember his Bar mitzvah as one of the most horrible days of my childhood, because he-- first, my parents couldn't find a place for him to have a bar mitzvah. But then there was a Jewish old age home which had remained intact, and inside they had a little tiny chapel. And they hadn't touched the chapel, they did not go into this home in Berlin. So they decided they would have like a mass bar mitzvah of all the kids-- boys-- several boys. I think it was about 20 boys who would be bar mitzvahed at the same time so that they would have a religious ceremony. 

And I remember us being there and they-- of course, they had a very-- it was a very sad thing. Everybody knew they were leaving. There were no other synagogues around. And I remember my brother passing out up on the bimah. Uh, they said it was nerves, there was nothing wrong with him because afterwards he was examined and they just said, he were so nervous and it was so hot and the whole situation that actually he passed out up there and he had to be taken down and taken home. 

And that was the last, um, time my mother and my father and my brother and I have been together, because, uh, shortly after that, uh, my father had the choice to send one of his two children to England through B'nai B'rith. They had-- they gave my father the choice to make the decision which one of his children. So he decided a boy-- a boy was more in danger than a girl, and my brother was the younger one. So they sent my brother to England. 

And about two months after that, they-- my father was told that they were willing to take another child. And they took me. And I left really-- I was very close to my family, but I really thought-- my mother explained it-- that I would go to England and somebody, somehow would be taken care of. And then they would take in December when our quota was ready for us to go to the United States, they would take the ship from Hamburg or Berlin toward Southampton and we would be in Southampton to meet them, and then we would all four together continue for the United States. And under those circumstances, it didn't feel that bad. I was, at that time, 16, fortunately, because you could only go as a child until the age of 17. You had to be under 17. And then you were considered a child by the British. You could never work. 

The B'nai B'rith guaranteed that they would take care of you. And it wasn't only B'nai B'rith. The Quakers, they did a beautiful job. They took a lot of Jewish children out of Germany, and many other organizations in England did, too, but what particularly strikes out is the Quakers, because some Jewish people were afraid to send their very young children for the Quakers, because they thought they would convert them. But then they had to make the decision to save their life or not to save their life. And of course, most of them did. 

And I went with the children's transport to England, which was a very unique thing. We left in Berlin in the, um, railroad station, and our parents and families took us to the train. We were all allowed, I think, to take two suitcases, because I remember having quite a bit of clothing. That's all we were allowed to take. 

And there were Jewish volunteers, social workers or teachers, who volunteered to escort the children from Germany to England, vouching that they would come back. If they would not come back, something would obviously happen to their families they left behind, because they were never allowed to take any body or anything with them. So this is how we went. 

I remember hundreds of children at the railroad station. And in the last few-- six months maybe, or eight months, I had left school, because again it was the thought of my parents that I had to have a profession, and the sooner I would start, the better I would be. Because how could I support myself, unfortunately alone, if I didn't have a profession? 

So I went to nursery school college. I loved children and I had worked with children. It was a very intensive program. It started at 8 o'clock in the morning and went until 10:00 at night, because they wanted to get a two or three year program into one year to give us the weapons to operate. Of course, we never finished it. 

So they had asked people whether they would volunteer to take infants, because some people were sending their infants out of Germany alone because they knew they couldn't save themselves, and they wanted to at least save their children. Many of them were Polish people who had fled Poland and came to Germany because of Hitler and had no livelihood, nothing. And they just had absolutely no way out. As I said, the Polish quota was much, much longer than the German quota. 

So I took care of this little child who was about one year old, an adorable little girl who had a toothbrush and one pair of underpants and a sweater for a change. And I remember her mother giving her into my arms and asking me to take good care of her until somebody would pick her up in London. And I did. And I remember that my whole anxiety was over that girl rather than about me, myself, leaving, because I was so absorbed in that adorable little girl. And I felt so bad for her, and I had to take such good care of her. 

So we went to Bremen by train and then we took a ship, it was a big ship which went to the United States, but it only, unfortunately, took us to Southampton. And all the children were on that, um, boat. We went to Southampton, and at Southampton the train was waiting for us. And we went on the train and we were still guarded by these same people who had gone out with us. And we went to the railroad station in London. And in London, uh, we were sorted out to the various organizations who had sponsored us. And I remember that I was a B'nai B'rith child, and I know that we were the first ones to leave the train. 

And we were taken to a room in the railroad station where some members of the committee who did all this were. And, uh, we were either taken to youth hostels-- that's what they call it in England. They call a hostel a home for boys or girls who are teenagers and were being taken care of like a children's home. Or we were taken to private people who had offered their homes to us. And I was-- that little girl was taking out of my arms, and I never saw her again, that little baby. I have no idea. where she-- 