[BEEPING] SUBJECT: Oh. All right. 

INTERVIEWER: I'd like you to begin for me. I say, it's your story. It's no one else's story. I don't suggest anything, put words in your mouth. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I thought it was an interview, you know? That you asked-- 

INTERVIEWER: It's a biography, your autobiography. Don't worry, I won't let you get stuck. Rolling? 

CREW: Maybe [INAUDIBLE] 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

As soon as you're [? ready, Craig, ?] we're rolling. 

CREW: OK, we're rolling? 

SUBJECT: OK. I'm Chana Berkowitz I was born in Chop Czechoslovakia in '31. I had two brothers. I was the oldest in the family. We were middle class. Compared to the environment, religious. Considered ourselves Jewish first. It's really hard for me to concentrate to say what what I want to say. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your family like? Number of children? What your father did? 

SUBJECT: I was the oldest. I was a girl. I had two brothers, two younger brothers. My father was-- we had a business, a leather-- furs, leather. And we lived normal, say, till '38. '38, my place of birth was taken back by-- Hungary got it back. Then we had to leave to my parents' home-- to my father's parents. It was a political-- borders were very complicated. 

We stayed there half a year. It's a whole story. We were taken in the middle of the winter. We were supposed to take just 30 kilograms with us to the Czech border. We were left there at night by the Hungarian police near a river and were told that, or we cross the border or we jump in the river, because they don't want us back in Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this an anti-Semitic policy? 

SUBJECT: That was mostly political. They didn't want the people who were born in different parts of Hungary-- Hungary wanted to get rid of people who were born in Slovakia. This part was already Hungary, and it-- well, it was my first shock of my childhood. My father left in the middle of the night with the rest of the young men. They tried to cross the border. We were left there, and my memory [INAUDIBLE] all we had were down comforters. And I cried the whole night, being afraid that I will not see my father again. 

We went-- they came back early morning with some trucks. The Jewish community from there sent trucks with us, and we somehow arrived to my grandparents' house, my father's parents' house, in a vehicle. So we stayed there half a year. And then that part became Hungary again, and we returned home. Because my mother's parents were from the place I was born. So that-- it didn't get too interrupted economic situation. 

Then we started-- as you well know, the anti-Jewish laws started to come into effect. First, we had to take in a non-Jew to be the head of the business. My father was taken into-- for slavery camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember this person that came into your father's position? 

SUBJECT: A Hungarian, nice guy. Not much. He only came-- you know, it was really-- he took part of the money, but it was only a figurehead. Jews, in a way, learned to survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was running the business of your father's? 

SUBJECT: My mother. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of business? 

SUBJECT: It was leather and furs. And people ran or didn't ran. Actually, I don't remember how we went, you know? It was-- my father came back for some free time he had. He came back. I had an uncle with whom it was together, the business. So that they were not in forced labor camp at the same time. So they came in on and off. I'm tired. 

That went on with stronger and stronger anti-Jewish regulations coming into effect till '44. '44-- 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing? 

SUBJECT: What was I doing? First, I went to school. First, I went to regular school under Czheckoslovak government. The schools were very good. But when the Hungarians took over, then anti-Semitism, the new teachers came, and they were very anti-Semitic. I actually remember one, end of the year, one of the teachers pointed me out. I was-- I liked to read, and I liked to study. And he told the class that they should be shamed that the best-- he has to give the best grades to a Jewish girl. 

But then they took us out, at all, from school, and we were just in some kind of a makeshift school, all Jewish kids together. I don't remember well. It's-- what did I do? I-- I read a lot. We lived in the country. I used to walk a lot, pick flowers, pick strawberries, pick blueberries, and not think much of the political situation. You know? Just take it as-- I wasn't very aware of what's going on. 

I can't say completely aware. I was aware, because we had to rent some of the house-- part of the house-- to non-Jews, too. Because Jews were only permitted to live so many in a room. So many for a room, you know. And the one who lived, a young couple, he worked-- he was a train engineer, and he went to the Ukraine. 

And once he brought us a letter that there were people there, Jewish people, in forced labor camp. One of them doesn't eat, doesn't eat non-kosher. If we can get in touch with his family. And we were in middle road if we can send him so food. 

So I remember packages arriving from his family, and my mother adding to it and sending. And I slept with my grandmother in my room. And I remember, one night, it must have been '43, somebody was knocking on the door, on the window. And he said, are Jewish people here? I came from Poland. Can you let me in? Can you keep me here? 

And they really couldn't keep him. Or they told him to go back to the train. I remember, you know, half asleep, and go to Budapest. Because it was a small community, and the local people were very anti-Semitic. And there was just no way-- you know, it wasn't mountains or anything. It was plains. There was just no way of hiding anybody. Actually from us, from the whole community, nobody hid. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the name of the community? 

SUBJECT: Cop. C-O-P, Cop. It was between-- actually, the border of Hungary, and Slovakia, and Podkarpatska Rus if you are familiar with-- the border situations were pretty complicated then, because once it belonged to the great Austro-Hungarian monarchy. And then, the different nationalities received it back from Hitler, for whoever, different times. They were very nationalistic, the Hungarians, every one of them. And none of them wanted the Jews. So they were throwing them from one place to another. 

'44, I actually, in Purim, I was in that family's home, whose husband was in Ukraine, for whom we sent for months food. He came home, and they invited me for Purim. I was there when the Germans came in. They came in and-- I mean, Hungary, you know Hungary worked with the Germans. They collaborated. But actually overtaking the Germans only came in in '44, first to Budapest. 

And the gentleman whose home I was, he was for business in Budapest. And the first day the Germans came in, they-- they just caught young people. And if they suspected they were Jewish, they put them in a concentration camp in Budapest. 

So I was there visiting, and he just didn't come back. I remember he had two children. And we waited for him, and didn't come back. And, you know, waited and waited. Then they didn't know what to do with me. They said, go home. We lived a distance by train, about eight hours. So I started out by myself to go home. I went there on a train. They put me on a train. And they said, nobody knows you are Jewish. And you just don't tell anybody you are Jewish. 

There, my father went to Budapest, and he took me. And the plan was that he would come back for me. But in the meantime, everything went topsy turvy. So remembering that train, my luck, I was sitting in a second class compartment. And German officers came in. You know, so I was the only girl, and German officers. They asking me all kind of questions. And luckily, I-- you know, I could-- somehow that I don't know, I don't understand what they mean. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't speak German? 

SUBJECT: I knew a little. I knew a little. But I was all trembling inside. I arrived halfway, or two-thirds home at a big station. And they said, sorry, the trains don't go farther. You know, there was some sabotage. The trains are-- you can go. 

So I remember waiting there in the train station for a long time. And then, what could I do? I didn't know anybody. I took the train back, and I went back to [INAUDIBLE]. As things settled a little, people got used to the Germans therein and they found all kind of arrangements. You know, temporary. And my parents sent a girl for me. In the meantime, they repaired the train tracks and all that. This was within weeks. You know, two weeks, three weeks. 

I remember a non-Jewish girl came for me. And I went home. It was actually before Passover. And just the Germans were coming into my town too. 

You know, I am telling my children that all that waiting, I get extremely anxious when I have to wait. Probably it has very, very early origins. '44 Passover, we were still home. We knew already that we have to leave. There were lists of Jewish people compiled. And then, there was a declaration that next day, we all have to leave with very small-- I don't remember how much we could take with ourselves, just what we could carry. We were gathered first in the temple, in the local synagogue, the whole community. 

We were maybe 2,000 Jewish people in that area. Remember my grandmother? She-- you know, in that home, she got married. She had her-- she had six children. She spent her whole life. She was 80 years old. I was very close to her. 

She left with us. She lived with us because my grandfather died. My father received-- the day before we had to leave, he received an order to go to the forced labor camp. And he just refused to answer it. Because he said, I don't know where you are going. And I'm not leaving you alone. 

We were my mother, my grandmother, my two brothers, and myself. So he came with us to Ungvar That was a local concentration camp. It was a brick factory. And they just put us down there, waiting for transport. 

It was open. It only had some kind of a cover. 

INTERVIEWER: What time of year was this? 

SUBJECT: That was after Passover. It was-- in my place, it depended on the weather. It might have been like-- it's similar, the weather, to here. So you know, it might have been balmy, or it might have been very cold at night. I remember I was in a state of complete confusion. I was walking around in this factory, looking at things. My next neighbor was the rabbi of our community. 

You know, everybody got a small place to put his belongings. I don't remember what we ate. I remember my mother complaining that the-- or good friends didn't come. You know, non-Jews. They didn't bring us anything. We were not such a distance, you know. They just completely forgot us. 

I remember my mother cooking something on bricks. You know, bricks, open fire. There was some news organization there, Bnei Akiva I remember going to some meetings there. 

It didn't have any German police, or they were all out. We were all on our own resources kind of. 

INTERVIEWER: Nobody was guarding you? 

SUBJECT: Outside. Outside, but not inside. We were there for a week or so. Then they started to select-- to young man again, and take them for all kind of interrogations. And they were very sadistic. Those were, I think, mostly Hungarian police. Gendarmes with the big feathers, very fancy looking. 

And then all kind of orders were flying. You know, by word, or over a loudspeaker. And one day, I heard they were declaring that all those who have papers to go to the forced labor camps to gather at a certain place. 

And the situation became quite bad for young men. Because they were almost daily singled out and sadistically tortured. So we talked between us, and my father decided that if they will call, then he will leave. He will go. Because he can't help us anything here, maybe from the outside. The forced labor camp, they were much freer. And-- but they didn't know when they would have to go. And suddenly, it was declared. 

And I heard it, and I was with my father, and my mother was cooking somewhere. And I remember running, trying to find her. Sometimes, I still can feel the beating of-- I found her, and she said goodbye. And that's what she last saw him. I too. 

Well, we stayed there. In the meantime, they were starting to call for transports. I didn't know where we were going. I don't know if my mother knew, or if people knew. I don't think they wanted to know. I was just-- you know, sometimes I find people hear things, but they just don't absorb it. Because what they hear is so terrible that they-- they just deny it exists. 

So I heard talking that if people will be in-- workers, 50% workers, then the family will be left together. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know why you went to a brick factory? I've heard this before, and the only time that I know about a brick factory seems to be in Hungary. In Hungary were there lots of brick factories? Because this seemed to be the port of-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. It was-- see, because they had a brick factory in an open space, not near a population. And a large, area where they have-- it's not the earth, you know? At least people were lying on bricks. And it has some kind of a roof, you know? Not-- but I think the main reason for that it was-- it was removed from the population. Because Germans were, in a way, very devious about that. They-- they-- you know that. I don't have to tell you that. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, but in other places, they gathered people in synagogues and schools. But in Hungary, there seems to have been-- 

SUBJECT: See, that was not in synagogue. They gathered us before they took us to the factory. But in the synagogue, that was just a small area. And in this factory, they collected the Jews from all the-- from all the district. You know, so this wasn't one city. It was a whole district. It was, say, 20, 25 cities. And they didn't have any in that area. They didn't have any army barracks or anything. 

Do you want me to-- 

INTERVIEWER: I wanted you to go on, yes. 

SUBJECT: I remember they started to call out names for transport. Yeah, and I was saying that there were rumors if people were 50% workers, then the family will be kept together. I remember my brother was a year younger. We said my mother can work, and I can work, and he can work. And so we can carry the weight of my grandmother and my youngest brother. 

Well, we were almost taken [INAUDIBLE] transport. But for some reason, we were turned back. And then we still spent Shavuot in that place. 

And then names were called out. We just-- I remember marching to the train station. I don't remember the box car. I just read about it later. I know I was in a box car. I know it took them a week. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: You were in this box car, but you don't remember being in it? 

SUBJECT: I only remember looking at the countryside. 

INTERVIEWER: But you must have been standing a long time? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember what I ate. I don't remember what I did. All I remember, looking out to the, you know, bad windows. And looking at that beautiful countryside. And sometimes peasant-- you know, sheep herders or young girls with goats on the countryside. And it was spring, and flowers. 

All I remember, I just thought, it can't exist. It can't exist, these two things together. You know, us here and somehow that nature just continues its-- we arrived to Auschwitz. I remember the arrival, because the doors were opened. And I remember some striped uniformed men opening the doors. And they asked me how old I was. And they said, no, you are 16. You are 16. 

And my mother put on me, I remember, three or four dresses and a coat and a kerchief, and my new high shoes. And I was so angry at her. I said, what do you want? I'm so hot. Don't leave me alone. 

Well, that probably saved me, because I looked much older. But I didn't forgive myself until I had teenagers of my own. But that was the last interpersonal relationship between us, this arguing over clothes she put on me. 

We just got out. I remember we were in a line-- my mother, my two brothers, and my grandmother. And there was an officer, a German officer. Extremely handsome, extremely well dressed. And he just pointed on me. And I don't remember. I just remember I went in the direction of the pointing. And I found myself with girls from my area. Is anything wrong? 

INTERVIEWER: Excuse me one moment. Is there someone here? Oh, you'll tell me. OK. Sorry. Go ahead. Thank you. Sorry. 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember we were-- I looked back. I didn't see them anymore. 

We went in some kind of a pass between fences, two barbed-wire fences, three in a row. I knew the girls. One of them was my cousin. And we saw people-- shaved heads, funny looking, standing on both sides of the barbed wire. We thought to ourselves that they must be, you know, sick. They must be insane. They must be insane people. 

And they took us to a center, put us in a large room. They told us to take off everything. And in one line, we went in another room. I remember being shaved and sprayed. And I had my-- they told me to keep my shoes. My shoes were dipped in some disinfectant. I remember they were dark blue shoes. 

And I remember staying there with pins in my hand, hair pins, and no hair, and the shoes dripping the blue color. And looking at each other, and I remember we burst in some hysterical laughter. 

And we were taken to the camp, gave some-- you know, they just handed out some clothes. Whatever-- from a bunch of clothes, whatever they had. And no underwear, nothing. Would you like to ask me anything? It disturbs me that-- 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to know what you were thinking in terms of-- you didn't know what Auschwitz was. What kind of a place did you think you had come to? 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't think I analyzed what kind of place it was. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you say that you-- 

SUBJECT: I think I was in complete shock. First, you know, we just noticed-- like different things. Like the tall, barbed wire with the outlook, with the post. The people, the shaved people with all kind of funny clothes. Then whatever happened to us. I just noticed different things. I didn't put them together. 

Was I thinking if that's a death camp? As I said before, we consciously didn't talk about death camps. I didn't hear about it. 

INTERVIEWER: No one said-- 

SUBJECT: No one said about it. I heard that people were being killed. You know, in groups they were being killed. In the Ukraine. We know the Ukrainians were very anti-Semitic. I didn't know. I didn't know. I was-- I remember being extremely sleepy once we got in the camp. I remember just putting my head in anybody's lap and sleeping. For a long time, all I remember, I was just sleeping. 

Then I found a cousin, and she somehow adopted me. I was-- she had a younger sister who didn't reach the camp. People even thought that I was her younger sister. She was his girlfriends from her town. And we are all on one bed. You're familiar with Auschwitz, how it was? Those beds, 10 in a row. 

And they just took care of me. In a way. I was wandering around. In the beginning, in Auschwitz, all we had to do is be for appell for counting twice a day. But the rest of the day, we were not limited. So I was wandering from one block to another. I was very curious. I was trying to figure out, in a way, what it is. 

I stayed, I remember, once near the wire fence. And I listened to a young man talking to a young woman. And he said he works in the crematorium. You know, the Sonderkommando And he told her, you know, you won't be taken into work camp. You will end up with us. 

And I remember, I heard that, and I came and told my cousin. And she said, oh, you have a vivid imagination. You always-- you read too much. And that's not true. And they said that all parents are in hay lager. 

Then one told me, yeah, you know what hay lager means? hay lager is himmel lager. You know what himmel is. himmel is the sky. That's where they are. That's a hay lager. 

Then I remember walking to the other side of the fence. And I saw there watching people-- families, children, mothers, fathers. And I remember I was so envious. And that was the transport that came from Theresienstadt. 

But two days later, I went to look, and they were not there. They were brought as families, and they went there for a short time, and then taken as families, all, to the crematorium. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that when you first arrived, you thought the people-- the women, the shaved heads, and the striped dresses-- were crazy. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that they were insane. Right. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you realize that that was a mistake? 

SUBJECT: When I became one of them. You know, when I saw the procedure that was going on, you know? And you talked to them. And there were 32,000 women in this camp where I was taken. And they were all recent-- recent victims, relatively, you know? With all what I think back, till '44, it was bearable. 

Well, I remember in the-- I was in Auschwitz about two months, three months. Maybe two, I don't remember time. And a new transport came from lodge from the ghetto lodge You know, they were bones. And they acted so irrational. You know, food were brought to the blocks in large large containers. We were supposed to go and bring them from the kitchen. You know, it was divided into bowls. You know, whatever. Very meager. But kind of orderly fashion. 

Those people attacked the food that was taken to us and took off. I remember took off her shoe. She had a wooden shoe, a wooden-- you know, what they wear in Holland. You know, I don't know what you call those. 

INTERVIEWER: A wooden shoe. The Dutch-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And she dipped it in the food and she drank from it. You know? I thought she was an animal then. Because we were not so hungry. We didn't know what it means to be hungry for years. 

And later, I read about it and I understood, you know? Well, I was-- I was in Auschwitz a few months, and then the selection started. Before that, maybe selections were before I was taken to-- they had two blocks children, number 8 and number 12. Number 8 was our children, and number 12 was children and pregnant women. Because, you know, those who were pregnant when they arrived, visibly pregnant, they were straight removed. But those who didn't show, they were taken into the camp. 

But when they started to show, they put him in a special block. 

INTERVIEWER: They stripped you and they shaved you. And so the fact that you were wearing six or three dresses didn't matter anymore. Didn't they guess your age? 

SUBJECT: They put me-- they put me once in the block, in the children's block. First, lucky or unlucky, I sometimes question. I was the same when I was 11 as I am now. Now first they put me on the Block 8. But you know, we didn't have any-- I am not tattooed. And I just ran away. I went-- they put me one day. There were 1,000 people there, you know? And I went to the next one, went back to my cousin. 

But then they took me again to Block 12. And I went back to my cousin again. But in the meantime, there was a selection. And my cousin was chosen. You know, to a work camp. So she was taken away. So I didn't have anybody there. So I went back to this Block 12. And I remember noises at night. You know, children being born. And they had a long furnace to the length of the block. And that's where there was the delivery table. 

All I remember was that, in the morning, they had sometimes little boxes, moving boxes. They put the babies into a box. Like, you know, you carry a large donut box or something. That's what they-- put-- collected the boxes in one place. 

I don't know. I think I-- I'm sure it's true, but I don't believe it's true. I remember the boxes, the moving boxes. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] believe it's true? 

SUBJECT: I know what I'm saying is true. But I don't believe it. Does this make sense? I don't believe I saw it. Many times, I have great difficulty believing. I'm talking and I think, Chana you must have read that. But it is true. 

Like, for example, I was freed in Salzwedel And I have some memories about it. And I said, oh, it's not true. It can't be. It didn't happen. But then, last year I received a book of essays from Israel-- poetry and essays from a woman who was from Budapest. And she was freed in Salzwedel And she writes, you know. She writes out the names. Salzwedel in all the experiences that I think were just, you know, a fruit of my imagination. So I say-- 

I don't know if this makes sense. Well, you want to go on? 

INTERVIEWER: It certainly makes sense. I don't understand how you were able to find a way to keep yourself from being selected. 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I really don't know. You know, again, I was sick once. I had diarrhea. And I remember, at night, I had to get up. There was just one one block at the end of the camp. And I remember at night going near the-- at night, the starry sky. I remember the picture. And here-- you have seen the pictures of the viat fences. Walking by it, in the dark, and going to the bathroom. 

I was lucky because my sleeping mates didn't complain that-- you know, they all had to turn when I got out. And in a way, I was lucky. Because the blockalteste, she-- you know, there were not many like me. 

And many times, people patted me on the head. You know, just plain-- you know. 

INTERVIEWER: As young as you were? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And once I received in one of the disinfection, I received a long black dress. You know, they just gave from off the rack whatever. And I remember the blockalteste saw me. And she started to laugh, and we came back. And she took me in her cabin, and she gave me-- she gave me a nice dress. Because going to selections, you know, being seen so ridiculous sometimes was enough to be-- 

So she didn't call me to appell either. She didn't call me until the German was coming, or the woman. She left me, because-- 

INTERVIEWER: She was a German 

SUBJECT: No, she was Jewish. It wasn't permitted. Because she knew I was sick. I was sick another time, too. I was-- I had from throat infection or something. I remember having high fever. That was-- I was already in another camp. And they took me to the hospital, and they checked me over, and they sent me back. 

And that-- you know, things like that didn't happen much. But I was reading with Dr. Frankel. Are you familiar with his writing? Emil Frankel? He's a psychiatrist and a neurologist who was in concentration camp. 

You know, he was already a professional when he got to a concentration camp. And he talks about coincidences. You hear many people, all kind of coincidences. You know? We were-- I remember we were standing-- one day, we were standing in line. Standing, you know, for counting. Somebody was missing or something. It was very hot. And people were just fainting around me. 

And I was, you know-- in a way, I thought it was funny that I wasn't. And then one selection I went to. And I didn't go back to my block, where my cousin was still there. I didn't go back, because I met somebody, and I went to talk to her. 

You would think, after a selection, you know, people are dead. But they just continued, you know? And I don't know how long I was away. When I came back to the block, my cousin, she slapped me on right and left. She really beat me up. And then she broke down and cried. 

You know there is-- I don't have to tell you. She thought that-- and, you know, when you are a mother, you know, it's not in a minor key. In a minor key, you know how resentful you are when your son-- you wait for her son till 3 o'clock in the morning. When he comes home, you are extremely happy, but you are extremely resentful for the anxiety he put you through. 

Well then came-- I don't know who he-- am I finished? Do you want me to talk? 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to interrupt the tape at this point, and I'll tell you why. Because this is a very expensive-- will you stop the tape, please, for a moment? And don't rewind, John. Because-- don't rewind. Just stop tape. 

[INAUDIBLE] forget it. Just throw it 

SUBJECT: Oh, oh. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? You look gorgeous. Your eyes are so beautiful. [INAUDIBLE]. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Yeah, thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling? OK. Just continue. 

SUBJECT: Well, as I said, I was in that Block 12. Children-- I mean, those who were selected later. Not those who looked completely children were in blockade. And one day, they said that they need some children-- 500 children, young people-- for a special project. And they took us through some exams that looked that very legitimate, you know? They said, he is a-- he's a doctor. That he is checking coordination, eyesight, sharpless, intelligence, whatever. And he choose 500 kids. 

And they took us immediately to the place from where they sent transport. And they put us through the cleansing and gave us good clothes. And we waited there. And then they said, sorry, we can't take you. Because the blocks where you are supposed to lodge are not ready. 

So, you know, they said, oh, again some kind of-- we just didn't understand why they went through all this and then they didn't take us. So they took us back to Auschwitz. And they mixed us up. There were selections, and this group got mixed up with other people. And then the high holidays came, and they had the most terrible selections on high holidays. On Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur. 

I remember it was raining terrible. So the one who did the selections said he will do the selections in the block, not outside. So he did it. But he took some girls who were capos or half capos to -and took all those he selected. And of course, then, those capos released their hold. Because, you know, they just couldn't take it. They were half Jewish or Jewish. So they got mixed up again. 

So the German get very angry. And he took us out in the rain, heavy rain. Everybody out. And he let one by one in. Everybody. And they took a good group. 

I feel a muscle spasm. Does it show? No? 

Then, after-- I mentioned before, then I got sick. And I was-- you know, those who got sick, they were lying in the front of the block. I don't know if they give me food or anything. I don't think they gave me any medication. They took me to the hospital. And they sent me back from the hospital. That was, you know, kind of providence, if you ask. 

We went through many more selections. And the situation in Auschwitz became terrible. It was smelling awful, because it was very-- maybe I'm mixing up times. Before that, maybe this was already a little cooler. But I just remember the odor. 

And they started to take people more in the public eye. What I mean, before, not everybody saw the people who were taken. But now, they just put them on a truck and took them. I was transferred to another-- it's all Auschwitz, you know. To another block, to another camp. C lager, D lager 

And suddenly there, one day, they said, they are looking for the children for Horneburg So there were about 50 left. So they just collected all kinds of people, additional selection. And they really took us to Horneburg That was a gingerbread city. Small, small city near Hamburg. 

And they took us to a factory. They trained us. They trained me about three weeks to do some tiny bulbs. They said that they are for submarines. Some kind of experimental instruments. 

The life there was-- oh, compared to Auschwitz, very, very good. We were in bunk beds, 16 to a room. They gave us food. Rely on food. It was almost-- you know, when I listened yesterday to Queen about Iran, how he said, you know, within all the crazy stuff, you develop some kind of a normal routine. 

I remember even we prepared for a play. We worked 14 hours in the factory. We had to go up early. I remember how I trained myself to-- we had a washroom to take a real ice rub down, so that it will warm me up before we had to go. 

It was, again, the contrast hit me between us and between the world. You know, Germany, some parts of Germany are extremely beautiful. And people take-- very aesthetically arrange their houses with flower boxes and beautiful curtains. And here, we were running through those cobblestone streets. 

Well, we were there a few months. I have some memories. There were French prisoners of war there. They were free. They just couldn't leave the city. They worked in the factory, too. They were very nice. I remember we had a little stove in the room. And I was picking bricks outside. That was before Christmas. 

And if I was picking the bricks, bending down, suddenly there was a shower of apples, of red apples. And I looked over, and one of the-- they had some living quarters not far. And he came to the fence. We didn't have an electric fence there. And he threw the apples, and I picked them up. 

But we had some women there, non-Jews, who took care of us. I mean, who did our laundry, who did the cleaning. They were brought from Ravensbruck, a small group of women. And they lived in two rooms. And this was a really special arrangement. I have never heard about-- we even had dental treatment there. It was some kind of a-- 

And one of the women saw me, and she grabbed me into her room, and she took all the apples from me. [INAUDIBLE], Christmas, they tried to run away, to escape. It was 10 women or so. For me, they looked big, husky. And they get caught. But we were punished. Our hair was shaved again. And I don't know, some food was taken away from us. But time was very short, because the invasion started. It was, you know, '45-- end of '44, beginning of '45. And Hamburg was bombed, and the women-- the SS women-- they were very nice. 

There were women who made them hats and knitted for them. They were relatively nice. But once their family started to suffer, they took it out on us Slapping, then hitting. I really wasn't hit much. I don't know. luck or whatever. 

But we had to move. So then they-- you know, they started like ants and something drops, running right and left. The Germans started to pull out people from one place. I remember just spending time in train, going from one place to another. And then, they took us to a factory that was in a mountain near the French border. It was called Porta And it wasn't finished completely. But I remember doing the same work there. It had five floors in the mountain, cut out. I remember we arrived there. It had a small yard, like half of this auditorium, and giant steel doors in the mountain. 

And I remember they opened those steel doors, and we went in. I remember them being shut behind us. And there were some labs there. Unfinished yet. And they put us-- took us to some living quarters, that nothing was finished yet. They probably planned to have it. They didn't think that the war will become so concentrated. 

I remember we slept there in a very low room. It was very hot. And I remember they were Bats flying. Some of it was very well done. I mean, steel and concrete. But it wasn't finished. I remember that was the-- what made me extremely upset was there were some women who had households at home. We used to sit and prepare meals. You know? Just-- 

INTERVIEWER: Talk about it. 

SUBJECT: Talk about it. Prepare banquets. 

INTERVIEWER: You lived in this place? 

SUBJECT: We lived there for not a long time. Because then they took us out to another block. I found-- to another camp. My mother's friend's daughter, she was a few years older, and she took care of me. I mean, she kind of-- I think that continued. That my need to put my head in her lap, or on her shoulder, continued a long time. 

Another thing I did, I talked to my grandmother. You know, every night I used to talk to my grandmother. And it's crazy, isn't it? And I used to tell her everything that happened during the day. 

Well, in Auschwitz, you know, you ask me, how come? There are so many coincidences, you know? Like I had a rash on my body. From some rough skirts, because they didn't give you any underwear. And they were extremely afraid of any contagious disease. And they were afraid of scabies. 

And I remember we were already selected for going to that labor camp. And Mengele was selecting. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? 

SUBJECT: How did I know him? Well he-- he was in Auschwitz too. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know it was Mengele? 

SUBJECT: Because they had mentioned. They said his name. You know, he was extremely handsome. Extremely tall. So meticulous with his outfit, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: He wanted people to know who he was? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. But-- I don't know. But he did the main selections for Auschwitz and for transport. And I remember him-- you know, when I had that rash here And he looked everybody over. And he looked at me for something that-- like eternity. Then he let me go. Or once we were in the crematorium, they took us for cleansing. And another transport arrived in the same time, and they mixed it up. They took us instead of that transport to the crematorium and us for planting those two blocks of building were near each other. 

They took us to the yard. And then they turned us around and took us out. And when we got back to the camp, they said, oh, we thought you went to the crematorium. Because they said it just never happened. You know, they didn't care about mistakes like that. So another transport. 

So I don't know. For a while, I felt extreme responsibility for those coincidences. If you understand what I mean. And my children are telling me-- you know, especially my oldest. It's not my fault. That you were-- you know, you were left alone. And, you know, when it comes to Judaism, when it comes to worthwhile living. So it's a great conflict. So that people, when they say, you know, that guilt feelings, guilt feelings for remaining alive, I-- I think it's more envy a lot of times. Not-- envy of those who didn't-- who didn't survive. 

See, I'm talking even with-- I'm completely rehabilitated. I even finished schooling, and I have a family and all that. But I made that fuss with the paper, you know. I just don't want to be hounded. It's so hard to live a normal life. 

You know, you don't want to see yourself. Or if you-- you feel you have a responsibility. But then life as it is is extremely hard to live. You know? Everywhere there are-- you know, you go to a Megillah reading, Tisha B'Av You read about the destruction of the temple. But every description is your own. You know? Your memory is just crowded so much that-- so many pictures, you know, that-- you just-- 

INTERVIEWER: You expressed it very well. 