INTERVIEWER: Rudy, just give us your name and then the place where you live, the city, early memories of your family, brief description of your house, your friends at the point just before the Hungarian change. 

RUDY FABIAN: My name is Rudy Fabian. I lived in Munkacs, what was Czechoslovakia up 'til the year when it was turned over to Hungary. Before it was turned over to Hungary, the population of Munkacs was approximately about anywhere between 33,000 to 35,000, of which a big part was Jewish, anywhere between 18,000 to 20,000 or 22,000. 

It was kind of a cultural center for the Carpathian Mountains. When you went down around 7:30 to the railroad station, you saw thousands and thousands of kids from suburban areas coming into the city. And you had a Hungarian school, a German school, a Czech school. Was a Hebrew school that was a private school, the one that I attended. 

And I only started to attending this school when I became 10 years old, because up 'til that I was 10 years old, I went to Czech school, because in Munkacs there were, though such a big Jewish population, you had a very orthodox population that did not believe in Zionism. And Munkacs rabbi was against it. And some of the people who did send their kids to Hebrew school he did not approve of. 

But when it came after the fourth elementary class that I would have to go to, I went to Czech gymnasium. I had to attend on Saturday. But my father didn't like. And after the first year, he took me out from the Czech school and put me into Hebrew school. 

But was very hard, because I didn't speak a word of Hebrew. And I had exactly eight weeks to learn what some of the kids had to learn in four years. And I had to take a test, but I just about made it. I don't know whether I ever did. But they accepted me. 

Now, the Hebrew school that I went to, these were all Jewish kids. I shouldn't say all Jewish. We had one Christian kid going with us. 

And the school, all the teachers, most of them, came from Poland, some from Czechoslovakia. In later years, we had some teachers who were graduates of our own school who became teachers. It was a very hard school. 

When I started off, they were two classes of approximately 60 to 64 kids in each class. By the time we arrived to the fourth grade, there was only one class, because if you failed two subjects, you repeated a whole year. If you failed one subject, they gave you during the summertime to make it up. If you made it, fine. If not, you repeated for one subject the whole year. 

Yet with all these minorities up 'til this nationalities problem started that Hitler started with all the Germans in our hometown and the Hungarians and this and that, all these minorities somehow lived in peace. There was no problem. 

Most of my friends, a lot of them were Christian, because I loved to go fishing. I played soccer. We used to go fishing together. We played soccer quite a lot. We played hockey. We used to go skiing. Was no problem. 

But all of a sudden in 1938 somehow this whole thing changed. And it was kind of like an overnight night change and an overnight shock that your own neighbors you were afraid to talk to. And you were afraid to-- they were afraid of being-- some of them even were afraid of being associated with you. 

And my biggest shock when we became Hungarian, as a child, I loved to go fishing. I could hardly wait when I was a youngster, because we lived on the-- about half a mile away from the river. And on-- on Passover, one of the-- when I used to steal the afikomen, I used to go to my father. He asked me what do you want for it? A fishing license. And then when we became Hungarians, I could not get a fishing license. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember trying to get the license? 

RUDY FABIAN: I tried to get the license. In fact, I knew the guy who was giving the license. And I went down to him and I bribed him. And I got a fishing license and he warned me, if they're going to catch you, you're going to end up in jail. If you do go fishing, fish somewhere away where they don't know you, out of city limits. 

But on one occasions, one guy did catch me when I was coming home and took away my fishing pole and took away my license. And I ended up half a day in-- on a police station, just because I was Jewish. Parents came down and took-- you know, took me out. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you and what was the name of the river? 

RUDY FABIAN: The river was the Latorica. And I was about 16, going on 17. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you alone the day you were fishing? 

RUDY FABIAN: Yeah. I had my own little fishing spots that I used to like to go to, do some fishing. And it-- it was very relaxing. I found it very peaceful. I still like to go fishing. 

And when we used to play-- when the Hungarians came in, we used to play school against school in soccer. And it became a joke from the people who were watching the soccer. Break the Jewish kid's leg. You know, it was a rough game. 

We were once playing in Beregszasz, what was about by bus an hour away. We were playing a Hungarian school that was strictly Christians. And I will never forget as we drove in with the bus our team to the school, there were big signs by the soccer field. 

A little Jewish fellow with the payos with a big hook nose, instead of a soccer, he was standing with his leg on an onion. And we felt, you know, very degraded. You know, after all it's a sport. It's a sport. It's a sport. 

But they were better than us. But somehow that just put fire into us. And we played them to a tie. Was one player got a broken nose and one player got a broken hand. That's besides the point. 

But we were very proud of us. It was all the-- I don't think any player came out of with not being kicked once or twice. It was a very rough game. But we played them to a tie. 

Then the things that started changing, they had this organization under the Hungarians what was called Levente. And this was once a week. You had to go exercise in the beginning, and you had to wear a yellow band. And that's the first time I run into this personally. 

And walking through the city, 20 or 25 or 30 kids, led by a Christian fellow who was a farmer kid with no education. They used to take us out to-- there was out of the city like a farmer's school, some kind of an agricultural school that I recall. And what did they make us do? Move the manure from here to there and from there to here. It's nothing but, you know, to try to degrade you. 

But on one occasion, there used to be there a big gymnasium for exercising. And they took us in there and they gave us toothbrushes. And with toothbrushes, you had to polish a parquet floor. You know, 20 kids on the line. 

And it was-- I always felt that, you know, looking back at things, at that time, you know, as a youngster at times you laugh at it. But it was nothing the same as when I went later into a labor camp and concentration camp and all the Hungarians tried to break the spirit, tried to break you down, tried to break down all your hopes. 

INTERVIEWER: What were the Christian youth exercising while the Jewish youth were using toothbrushes, et cetera? 

RUDY FABIAN: When they used to exercise, they used to have like army exercises, snappy marching and with a wooden gun and stuff like that. And ours weren't exercises. After a while there was no exercising. 

It was I remember-- one of the things that I remember, on one occasion this Levente chief brought out fencing. Now we-- Jewish kinds were never fencing, never went in for that thing. I'm-- you know, it's funny. As a youngster, when I was maybe 12, 13, 14, I used to belong to the Betar, what was Jabotinksy's group the rightist. In fact, I remember I was very proud that Jabotinsky stopped in our house when he was on a speaking tour in Europe. 

And I was wearing-- used to go-- they used to have-- the Betar used to have these camps during the summer that you were able to attend, but you had to pay for it. Now, there too, the Betar had a younger group, what they used to call Batlanim. They did nothing. They were there to enjoy a camp. 

Now, the older ones, like 15-- I was at that time 12, 13, bit the 15, 16, 17 used to take part with the Czech army in maneuvers. Now, at times I took up fencing in this camp. 

Now, on this occasion, when this guy, this Hungarian at random started picking kids and he gave them a terrible beating, you know, they ended up with black and blue mark. If you don't know about fencing, you know, just flicking it at you. And he never-- he never came to me. And-- And then I don't know for what reason, he asked any volunteers? And I volunteered. And I had a chance to get back a little bit at him. But overall, the experiences, they were-- they were very degrading. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the reaction of your non-Jewish friends, people that you knew before this difficulty began? Do you remember their reaction to what was happening to you and other Jewish people, other Jewish friends? 

RUDY FABIAN: Very passive. They wouldn't play soccer with me. They wouldn't go fishing with me. They wouldn't play tennis. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ask them why? Did you speak to them about it? 

RUDY FABIAN: I had no-- I had very little chance to speak to them, because if they saw me on the soccer field, they just didn't come out. They just didn't want to associate with us. 

The only time that we played was on school basis when this school played-- that the Hungarians arranged against the Czech school or the Russian school or the Hungarian school. Otherwise, we had very, very little contact, because things started happening, like when we used to have literary things from the school, my own school, they used to be usually in the afternoon, after school hours. If you were walking alone, you were out to be beaten up by these same Christian kids that were friends before. 

Beat the Jew. That was the password. And you heard about these things. 

And then we had that in our hometown-- and this was under the Czechs. You had like a promenade. Now, on one side you had all the people. And on the other side they used to call it the [NON-ENGLISH] where the soldiers and the maids used to parade. You know, they could walk. 

But then after the Hungarians, after a while, when the Jews wanted to walk on this side, the Hungarian, little lieutenant or second lieutenant with his little stick used to-- you're a Jew, off that street, on that side of the street. And these were all things that, you know, you feel degraded. 

Like as a youngster, I remember when I used to go with my father to the synagogue and I used to carry the tallis, I really felt it was-- was a sense of a holiday. It was Sabbath. And in a city like this, if you walked on a Friday, you could see that as poor as the man was, when he was walking from the fish market with one little fish home for Shabbat to have fish and a little wine, you know, he was the king. 

And these things after it were very hard to do. You couldn't do it. You were afraid to do it. You hear all these different things that happened in this city or in this little village or in that little village. And things just completely changed. 

INTERVIEWER: There was no attempt made by anyone you knew to try to understand or influence or talk to friends from before about how difficult it was now, how sad? 

RUDY FABIAN: People were afraid for their own safety. I know about one thing that I heard about it later from a cousin of mine that a neighbor of ours wanted to take my sister and hide her. These were Russians, Russian descent, not Hungarian. Hungarian, forget it, Because my own neighbor, I found out, beat up my mother when they were marching them out from the city. And one of our neighbors was a policeman in the Hungarian police. 

And somehow my mother felt that-- my sister at that time was 11 years old, that she can't take of her if she will be with her, without realizing that when they both got to Auschwitz, she went with the kids and they were both killed in Auschwitz, my sister and my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back, if you will, to what happened after the school difficulties and the fishing license difficulties. How did things progress? 

RUDY FABIAN: It was very hard. Hard by I mean that you were constantly pointed. You lived in constant fear, because we lived on the edge of the city. And I would say on the average about once a week it was a knock at the door and the Hungarian Field Police used to come in or the Hungarian soldiers and just go through our house that we are hiding Jews from Poland. There was constant disturbances going on. 

And the Jews when 19-- when the Hungarians came in, they could not have licenses. Now, they says, well, how do you make a living? You have no license. You can't be a merchant. 

We were-- my father was one of the few Jews who did have a license. And that was by what I consider a sheer coincidence, that in 1918, when Czechoslovakia, this part, became Czechoslovakia, and they came to him-- he was a youngster at the time-- to make a donation for the widows and the youngsters that-- Hungarians that have to go back to Hungary. He didn't know-- I discussed it with him-- so he gave a donation. 

And that was on the record, so when they came back, they considered him a good Jew. And we had a license to deal. But most of the Jews had no licenses. That's why then it started all these black market deals. All Jews are black market deals. We have to make a living. 

How are you going to make a living? You haven't got a license. You have to live. What are you going to eat? 

You heard about this arrest. You heard about this arrest. And the Hungarian Field Police were the most brutal people that I ever encountered. 

And when I got in even in labor camp, the guards that we had, the Hungarian soldiers that guarded us, or the sergeant or the second lieutenant who was there, they were the scum of the Hungarian army. These were not fighting men. They were a bunch of imbeciles that they put to guard the Jews. They figured their mentality can dish out the most of punishment and degradation to these people who are involved. 

But it's a-- it's a very-- was-- you know, looking back at it, it really hurts when you see a beautiful Jewish community-- because the nickname of my hometown was klein Jerusalyim, was you had Zionist organizations. You had the Betar. You had the Mizrahi. You had the Poale Zion. You had the Shomer Hatzair. 

Everybody was there, all factions of Zionist life. And there were discussions and there were fights. And some teachers belonged to this group and some teachers to that group. I'm talking my own teachers. 

And as students, we were aware of Zionism. We were aware of-- and all of a sudden, this whole thing just, you know, like you cut off the head. Was a very, very drastic change from-- from one day to next day. And it was very hard to realize or to accept. And you lived in-- in constant fear. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any specific time when the Hungarian Field Police came to your house? 

RUDY FABIAN: Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER: In the house with your mother and your sister. 

RUDY FABIAN: Yes. Yes. And we all had to get out of bed, stand against the wall. And they were looking and there was nobody there. We weren't the only one that they did it. They knocked at the house and we had around that house a fence. 

And all of a sudden you look out, there's about 6 or 8 or 10 guys. And they come in. You had to open up the doors. You had no choice in the matter. They didn't need anybody's permission. They picked this house or that house. 

And it was a very frightening experience, very frightening, and people coming with guns and start poking, you know, making holes in the bed or in this that somebody is hiding there. You know, or they're opening up the closets and throwing out the clothes with their bayonets on the gun. You're a youngster, it's a-- it's not a pleasant experience. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you did? 

RUDY FABIAN: What I did? Stood in fright. Nothing. There's nothing you could do. When they left, you sat down and sat there and said, what is going on? Why? 

And slowly, you're learning to live with it. And you accept it and you can't find a way out. What was the way out? 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother say to you, as a child? 

RUDY FABIAN: As a child, got helfn. My mother was a very, very pious woman. And that's one of the things that up 'til today bothers me. Why did I survive, because she was 1,000 times a better person that I will ever be. This woman lived for charities. 

I remember as a child in Europe, you had no middle class or you were rich or you were very poor. Now, in my hometown, in our home, we had a plate left for the maid with change. And the door-- there was no closed door. The gate was open. The door was open. 

And people used to come to beg. They come for a [NON-ENGLISH]. And they were instructed whoever came to give. 

Now, wintertime, WITH the closing, I remember another one occasion where I used to go with my mother and these packages were made up. And I used to go with the sled at night. And we used to leave the stuff at the door. Knock at the door. She walked away and I ran not to embarrass the people. God forbid he should know it. 

I remember her being involved with a lunch program, because a lot of the poor kids that came to school, the one that I went to, the Hebrew school, maybe didn't have breakfast. So at 10 o'clock, they got a roll and a glass of warm milk. She was there. 

She used to go to visit the sicks people to the hospital. Another one occasion, I heard my father say at home to my mother, "I want half of your good deeds." At home, he only spoke Yiddish. 

INTERVIEWER: Translate. 

RUDY FABIAN: I want half of your good deeds, because we had an export/import business, quite a big business. In those days, all the correspondence was done in German, the business correspondence. And my mother used to do the correspondence. But for her little things that they got more pleasure, she neglected the business. So he used to look for her and she was busy. And all this thing just-- just went. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it just you and your sister in the family? 

RUDY FABIAN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: There were two children. 

RUDY FABIAN: Right. And was quite a-- was a 10 year spread between me and my sister. 

INTERVIEWER: What was her name? 

RUDY FABIAN: Pessy. And she died. Pessel. She was named after my grandmother. And she died in Auschwitz, as my mother and my father died, of starvation. 

It was four weeks to go. I spoke to somebody when I came to the States who was with him. Up to that point, I didn't know where he was. And he told me that his kidneys just gave up and he just blew up and reached his heart and he went. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us any memories of Pessy? 

RUDY FABIAN: Oh yeah. Sometimes I look at my-- my-- my oldest daughter. When she was young is the spitting image. Same moodiness. I guess it runs in the family. 

Yet it might be silly. I used to tutor her in Hebrew, because she went to Hebrew elementary school. And my memories of my sister are all very nice up 'til the point where I last time saw her. I don't know what-- how it happened, but I bribed-- we were-- I was that time already in labor camp, but we were close and it was still Hungary. And I bribed the guard. I gave him my wristwatch and I got a 48-hour pass to come home. 

And this was one day before the Germans came in. That's the last time I saw my family. 

And somehow, you-- you felt that it-- it's going to get worse. It's going to get worse, because by the time I got back to the Hungarian border when I left Sunday night, instead of the Hungarian guards at the border, was already German guards. 

INTERVIEWER: Why had you left? Where had you gone? 

RUDY FABIAN: Back to labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get to the labor camp? We didn't know about that. 

RUDY FABIAN: How did I get to labor camp? Certain groups by age you had to go in. You were 20 years old, you went in. And I was first sent to a place in Hungary that was not too far away by train. And there, they took without any groupings or what. And they took 500, you go to this city, 500 to that city, and 500 to that city. 

And I was sent to a place of Szombathely, what is on-- close to the Hungarian-Austrian border. And we were there for three months. In-- in this place, what we did was we used to walk, left, right, left, right, left, right. Everybody had an instrument from the morning 'til the evening. This, again, was very menial work, just to keep us busy. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

RUDY FABIAN: '42. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened between '38 and '42? 

RUDY FABIAN: I was still at home. 

INTERVIEWER: Going to school? 

RUDY FABIAN: I went to school. I finished school. But I could not get into med-- I wanted to go to medical school, because those days they only took 6%. If there were 94 Christian students, there were 6% Jewish kids. That was it. 

And then right after I graduated, I went into labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER: You graduated high school? 

RUDY FABIAN: Gymansia. Gymnasia. Now, the graduation in the gymnasia, though we started off in the first gymnasia with 120 kids, was 29 of us left. 

By left, I mean not that they were killed. 29 that reached the graduation, because I told you before, if you failed two subjects, you repeated a year. You failed one subject, they gave you time to make up. But that was it. 

And it was a very, very hard school. I still remember-- to give you an idea of just my English subject that I had to answer, my first question was after we wrote the test, a comparison of the Lake poets, of Scott, Shelley, Keats, Byron. And then I had to-- my second question was a comparison, the structure of Coleridge's Ancient Mariner and "a thing of beauty" and We Are Seven from Keats. 

And then a-- a grammar question. I don't remember the third question. But when I tell it, you know, to Americans, they say, what, in a European school? I says, yes, in a European school. They were very, very strict. 

And when we took up in Hebrew school 15th century, for argument's sake-- so you took the 15th century history and you took the literature in Hebrew, in English, any subjects that you learned that century. So you looked at the influence of history at that section of history. It was a very, very hard and very, very thorough school. 

You had to end up a linguist whether you liked it or not once you graduated, because you started with Hebrew and Czech. Then you took up Latin. Then you took up English. 

Then in '38, they threw out Czech and they took up Hungarian. Then you took up Russian. You had to be a linguist. So when you tell somebody you speak so many languages, there's nothing new. And then you spoke at home Yiddish. 

INTERVIEWER: I'd like to go back to that pass that you got from the labor camp to the last time you visited with your family. You bribed the guard with your watch. 

RUDY FABIAN: I gave him my wristwatch and he gave me a 48-hour pass to go home. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe as you came back into your town and what your house looked like and-- 

RUDY FABIAN: Well, when I came back to my town, it was nothing like before, because somehow-- I came in on a Saturday, late afternoon. And the streets were quite kind of deserted, because people were afraid to go out, because it was a common occurrence of Jews getting beaten up already. And my parents were quite shocked and surprised and delighted to see me, because they never thought that they're going to see me again. 

And I remember one thing. I laid down in my own bed. I couldn't sleep. Finally, I took the blanket, put in on the floor. I slept better on the floor by that time than I did in sleeping in a bed. 

And the following day when I went back, I stopped off at one of my teachers on the way because he lived there. It was fortunate, you know, I caught him home. 

But some of the biggest shocks once I got back a few months later when I found the first lice on me. I didn't know what it is. And you know, I showed it to somebody. I said, what is this? He says, it's lice. 

I cried like a baby. On me? And then you learn there are gray lice and black lice and skin lice and head lice and flat lice. And they take up certain parts of your body. 

And when we were liberated by the American Army and they sprayed us with DDT or whatever powder that they had, first two-- number of nights, we were laying there, strange feeling. Nothing is crawling on you. You got used to it. You learned to live with it. 

But the Hungarians by itself, as far as my experiences go with them, were more brutal and more vicious in every respect than the Germans were in labor camps. When they tried to prove maybe that they are-- can be worst, that they had something to prove to the Germans. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in the labor camp? 

RUDY FABIAN: Little bit over a year. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what happened there? 

RUDY FABIAN: Yeah. Well, we were sent out from Szombathely, where we were first three months. Once we were packed into railroad cars like cattle. And the doors were locked. 

And we started traveling and traveling and traveling and traveling. And the doors were not opened. We had no idea where we were going. 

And once, in the middle of the night, the train stopped. And there were soldiers waiting for us. And they took us out from these cars. And we were in Uzsok, what is on the Carpathian-Polish border. 

Now, it took us approximately eight days to get there. And what I cannot understand looking at the map that from where we are, it shouldn't take more than maybe 24 hours tops. Why we were traveling for-- and there was no water, no food, only what, you know, we had. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think about when you were traveling? 

RUDY FABIAN: What we were thinking about? After a while, you-- you start thinking how to survive. You start scheming, because unless you had the willpower to survive-- and I saw it more than one occasion-- people just gave up. 

I saw in Uzsok, and I still-- just to get away from there, in those days yet in the beginning, they still sent you to a hospital. I saw a fellow-- I was that time on helping out the cook in the morning, because each time they assigned somebody there. 

This fellow comes in. He says, can I help you guys chopping some wood to cook the meal? I said, sure, why not? I think he wanted to shake hands, but I was looking, guy put out his finger and chopped off his finger, just to get away from there. 

And we used to work. Now, in Uzsok, we were cutting down trees. That was by the Hungarian border. Now, this was December, January. 

Now, the winters there are bad, very bad. It's very, very cold. And we were living they called it Finn huts. These huts were-- the Finns, Finland, came up with this type of a tent. 

This was some kind of a pressed straw or pressed wood against a board. It was a circular thing and a stove in the middle. And we slept in those. They were like a prefab home. They came in sections. 

But we used to go out to work. And we had to cut down 40 trees a day. Otherwise, you could not come in. And they were watching you to cut it down. 

Now, we lost a lot of equipment there, saws or axes. And I was picked when we later went down a few miles below this pass to go up and look that we can find the-- some of the equipment that we lost during the winter. This was in the springtime. And I was quite surprised to see that some of the trees that we were cutting above the snow were 8 to 10 feet tall. There was that much snow there. 

And then at times from there we were taken out by the German army, what was even worse, to shovel snow from the roads, where we used to walk 12 hours approximately, shovel snow from the road 12 hours, and walk back 12 hours. Now, the snow was so deep that one guy gave it to the other guy who threw it over the road. They were actually cutting like a tunnel, because the wind was the worst thing. You can be dressed-- I don't care how many garments you could have had. Once that wind started going, it just went straight through you. 

And the shoes, we had very poor shoes. Who had good shoes by that time, really? If they got wet, after a while from the cold they were just frozen. They wouldn't even bend. They used to rub our feet. It was brutal. I have-- my left foot was completely frozen. And so many years after it, I still have to put on twice a day a salve on it, because it's ulcerated from the freezes. It never healed up. 

From there-- from-- we went down to Uzhhorod, close to Uzhhorod. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone complain about the conditions? Did any one dare? Do you remember who was in charge? 

RUDY FABIAN: The Hungarians were in charge. 

INTERVIEWER: Names of people, do you remember? 

RUDY FABIAN: Yes, I do. There was-- there was with us a sergeant, fellow by the name of Winkler. And this man was an absolute sadist. 

When he started with us, he was not a sergeant. He was what you would call a corporal. And I taught this guy American history. I used to tutor him. Geography, little bit of literature, grammar, so he can take his test. And he took his test and he made sergeant. 

But to give you an idea about this man, the type of a sadist that this man was, this man used to dream up punishments for us that-- on one occasion, we came back from work and all of a sudden he says, everybody in 10 minutes report in reverse. Now, reverse meant by him asked as follows. 

Your pants, you turn them inside out, the front to the back. The jacket, turned out inside, back. All your garment. Left shoe on right foot. Right shoe on left foot. 

And when you came to report, instead of carrying the instrument in the right hand, had to be in the left hand. Your little satchel of clothing that you had, the rucksack, instead of your back had to be on the front. And you were marching backward. 

On another occasion, he says, you are all birds. And we had to climb up a tree, Whistle like birds for two hours in the freezing cold. These were people who were in charge of us. So people like this, you can't complain. 

INTERVIEWER: For what reasons were punishments given? 

RUDY FABIAN: No reasons. He didn't have to have a reason. He didn't have to have a reason. 

He was God. He was the judge. He was the jury. He was everything. He decided. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep from becoming mad? 

RUDY FABIAN: How did you become-- becoming mad? You do work automatically and your mind isn't there. Your mind wanders. 

You think of your home. You think of your family. You-- you think maybe you will meet them. You think of your future life, what will it be, because if-- you were mentally completely broken. I saw it. 

People just didn't care. They didn't clean themselves. They didn't care. And-- and they just disintegrated, actually in the word disintegrated. 

People just didn't want to live. I had that. I went through that phase. I had more than one occasion where when I went to bed, I says, please, God, just had enough. It just-- it just would be so nice just not to wake up. 

You didn't want to commit suicide. I mean, you weren't that at that point. But that was a wish more than once, because your feet are frozen, fingers opening up. You have no medication, so you put a piece of paper on the stocking. 

And it was a-- it was a matter of knowing how to survive. I was in a camp, labor camp. This was already under the end the Todt Organization when the Hungarians, they brought us back the Austrian border. As the Russians kept on progressing, we kept on pulling back. 

And we were turned over to the Todt Organization. The Todt organization was that time we were building tank traps. And we were in a place that was close to whatever, was a big millhouse that they-- big stones going around and grind seeds. 

And my left foot really blew up. And I showed it to the guard. He says, OK, one day you can stay home. This was in the springtime. 

And I went down to the river. And I saw bubbles coming up. Gee, must be fish here. I had no fishing line. I had nothing. 

So I went back. How can I get myself some fish? I took my stocking. I unraveled the thread. Took three together, made knots in between. 

I took off a pin, made myself the best I could a hook. There was there some manure. I went down and I took-- started looking for some worms. 

I had no lead to take it down, so I tied a stone so it takes it down to the depth that I wanted it. I put on the worm. The worm kept on wiggling off. So I had to take the worm and kill it by pressure and tie it to that hook it shouldn't wiggle off. And then when I felt something in mouth, it just used to jerk it off, because this hook had no backshank to hold it. 

And I caught about six fish. Yeah. Well, they weren't big. I remember I traded one fish for an onion and one fish I traded for a little salt. And I made a deal with the guys I'll cook it. And we had a nice dinner. 

On another occasion, this was yet under the Hungarians, we were putting in mines under the railroad. Now, we didn't do the actual mining. The Hungarian army did it. But we used to dig like about 8 to 10 feet tall little tunnels where they would put in all the explosives. And we used to go to work alongside the railroad. 

And this fellow had there some chickens, the guy who took care of that crossing. And I ask a friend of mine who was from a farm, I says, how do you kill a chicken? He says, you twist his head. 

OK. Next day when we are walking through the forest, I found there a little ear of corn about this big. It was discarded. I put it in my pocket. 

And these chickens knew already when we come to dig that we throw up worms, so they used to come. They weren't afraid of us. And I took this corn. And once the chickens came I threw one and I threw one a little closer and another one a little closer and another one a little closer. 

The chicken came closer and closer. And finally, the last one I put down, it came and I grabbed it, twisted its head, and put it under my coat. And I kept on digging. I guess I didn't twist enough, because after a while, this chicken revived and, you know, started shaking. 

And the guard comes over. What's the matter? What you doing? I says, I have a nervous condition. He walked away and I choked 'til I ended up with a chicken head in my hand. But that evening, I had what to eat. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you retain a sense of humor? 

RUDY FABIAN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did people joke? 

RUDY FABIAN: I did. Some did. If you didn't have a sense of humor-- you know, like one of the jokes that was in-- in camp about these two little Jewish guys who were supposed to be shot. And the Germans start lining up, ready to shoot them. 

And all of a sudden, the lieutenant comes. What? Waste on the Jews two bullets? We'll hang 'em. And one guy gives a nudge to the other. He says, Yankl, you hear? They're running out of ammunition. 

That was the sense of humor. If you didn't have a little sense of humor-- you had to have it. You couldn't survive without it. 

Not that it was always there. There was nothing more frustrating than-- than when you went to sleep and you wanted to sleep and you were cold and all of a sudden you hear, when I am going to get home, my wife is going to make me this. And when I'm going to go home, my mother is going to make me this. And my sister is going-- and, you know, in Yiddish, [man harscht ba neshuma], there's nothing to eat. 

You got 14 men a bread. And you wake up in the morning, you hungry. And when the 14 men-- when I was in-- in Gunskirchen, this was a ritual. 

14 men got a bread. We used to get the bread, cut it into 14 pieces, put it down on the blanket, then take slips of paper and put down the name so there should be no partiality. Put down the names next to the bread. And the person who gave the blanket was entitled to the crumbs. Each day somebody else had the blanket. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you manage to have the energy to work with so little food? 

RUDY FABIAN: In the beginning, I feel that the reason that I had the energy and some of us did have the energy, looking back at things, that I was always involved in sports in Europe. I played soccer in summer. I went fishing. I played tennis. 

I played hockey. I used to go skiing. That I was well conditioned. And a lot of the people who did die, they weren't conditioned. And they just gave up. 

And then you had to-- a lot of it had to do with luck too. And that's the question they keep-- why me? Why did I survive? There were other people who were just as strong or even stronger, because one of our biggest enemies in camp that I considered were the lice. They bit somebody who was sick and you got it. 

I had typhus. You know, I was fortunate enough to get it when I was liberated. [INAUDIBLE]. When the American army came in, I was all of 90 pounds with my clothing. If you looked at my hand, you could see the two bones going down. You could-- you know, you wrinkled your hand like this, it didn't go back, that the skin was-- 

As I said, you can read from today 'til tomorrow. Unless you really went through what went through-- and without a sense of humor-- we used to play games in middle of the work, you know, two, three guys, just to keep your mind occupied, not to constantly think of things, geographical games or historical games or literary games, depending who you were with. 

We came up with the game of 21, where we used to play 21 by head. You started with one number and you can only add three digits. And the one who reaches 21 wins. But it was something to keep your mind occupied. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- how did they treat you? Did they hurt you? Did they beat you? How did they keep people working and obeying-- 

RUDY FABIAN: Where, in labor camp or concentration camp? You have to look at this thing as two separate entities. Labor camp, it-- you had the Hungarian guards. And more than one occasion, yes, they did beat you. 

Once I got into concentration camp, I got in into later end of it. I never went out to work. It was towards the tail end of it, the last six months or so, year or so. 

I-- I just-- like, when I came into Mauthausen, was a dark night. I didn't know where I was. I spoke German. 

So the guys next to me says, why didn't you ask where we are? So I go over there's this stupid so-and-so and I ask him. And this guy took his gun and gave me a shot in the head that opened up my head. 

Next day, I found out where I was. And that's Mauthausen. And I laid down. We came in the middle of the night. There were no tents. It was a rainy night. 

And I laid down. I was with an uncle of mine, my father's brother, younger brother. And we-- I saw the people laying, so I lay down between the people. In the morning when I woke up, these were all dead people, lined up. I didn't know that they were dead at night. 

And that's where the first time I run into what is a crematorium. I saw there a big chimney smoking, smoking. So I asked one of the inmates, because when we came into this camp, we didn't have any more our civilian clothing. We had Hungarian army clothes, except we didn't have the Hungarian little button with their colors. We didn't have no belt. And we had a yellow band and a yellow star, while some of these other prisoners had regular concentration camp uniform, with the little caps and the gray and blue or whatever color you want to call it stripes. 

And I asked one of those inmates, I says, is that a factory that we're going to go to work in? And he looks at me like that, but he's saying, hey, stupid, what are you asking me? He says, be careful you shouldn't fly out that chimney. I didn't know what it is 'til somebody explain me, that's a crematorium. 

From Mauthausen-- we were in Mauthausen about four, six weeks. It's very hard-- I don't remember exactly. But we never went out to work, because-- I shouldn't say that we didn't go out to work. 

They took us out on-- we were in Melk in Austria, one of those cities, Minsk or Melk, I don't recall exactly. But it was after a bombardment. And they took us in to clean up, what we loved, because at least we found some food to eat. 

But on one occasion, they-- we were there in a camp, where-- out of Mauthausen. It was a different camp. This camp was located between the railroad, between a factory and some bridges, right in the middle. And there was an air raid. And we were in bunkers, inside, that the Germans built. 

And one bomb hit maybe 100 yards from us, killed about 1,000 to 1,200 Jewish boys instantly, right then and there. But the pressure of this thing just threw me against the wall. And there was no air. I don't know for how long it lasted. I can't recall. 

But for weeks after, I had a constant hum in my head, you know like "zzzz" for weeks. But then it went away. Then I was in Melk, another camp. 

The last camp that I was liberated on was Gunskirchen, what was on the outskirts on Wels in Austria, what was one of the worst camps that-- that at least I encountered. There was no latrine. It was one latrine for the-- for all the men. 

And by the time you got there, you know, when we got in there they didn't give us to eat. And I ate grass. 

On one occasion, we were sitting alongside a fence there before we got into Gunskirchen. And I saw snails. I said to myself, gee whiz, somewhere I read that the French people ate snails, so try snails. 

So I took the six snails that I found and I said to my uncle, I says, going to have dinner tonight, snails. We got on the march. He says, you're crazy, snails. 

I couldn't get out the snail out of the shell, so I put it on a spoon over the fire. And it tasted like fish to me. And my poor uncle, who was also hungry looks. He says, how can you eat the snail. By next morning he was just even worse hungry, so I got a partner. We ate snails for-- we had for two days snails. 

But it meant you got some food. And once we got into this camp, with all the grass that we ate, it's not an easy thing, you know, even to describe. Our stool was so hard you couldn't pass it out. It was like little bullets. 

And you had to go in to get it out. And I remember like now bleeding and painful. And people were standing online for hours to get to the latrine, because there was only one latrine. 

And I never realized how weak I was in that camp-- this was the camp that I was also liberated on-- 

