INTERVIEWER: Interrupt very much. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

CREW: Ready? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I lived in Czernowitz, Bukovina. Um. And the Germans invaded Czernowitz uh, on uh, 28th of June 1941. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to you? 

SUBJECT: And to me, I evac-- evacuated from Czernowitz before the Germans came in. Because of fear for them. And um, come to-- uh, Kamianets-Podilskyi. 

Kamianets-Podilskyi is um, a villa-- village. Um. Not a village. It's more than a village. It's um, how do you say? 

CREW: Small town? 

SUBJECT: It's a town. It's not a small town. No, no. It's not a village. It's um, a town. Not a small town. It's a town. A nice town. And there in Kamianets-Podilskyi-- before Kamianets-Podilskyi, the Germans reached the Russian, the Russian army and bombed all the trains. And came and go, um-- they uh, went uh, hala'a, they went, eykh omrim? 

CREW: Further. 

SUBJECT: Further. OK. Further. And instead of Germans, were in Kamianets-Podilskyi the Ukrainian. 

INTERVIEWER: What, what country was this? 

SUBJECT: This was Ukraina. Ukraina. The Ukraine and where the population. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you hiding there or were you-- 

SUBJECT: One moment. And the Hungarian were stationed there. Not the German but the Hungarian. The Hungarian, uh, army, which was on the side of the German army. They um, fight um together. 

Now um, I, I was in Kamianets-Podilskyi and didn't know what to, to do-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were your children with you or your-- 

SUBJECT: No. I, I was alone. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: I was um, '41-- I was um, 26. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you married? 

SUBJECT: I was with my husband. 

INTERVIEWER: You had no children? 

SUBJECT: No. No. And uh, there, um, we go through the town. And decided to, to, uh, to return to Czernowitz by foot. Because we saw we cannot uh, go uh, further. Now the, the, the Germans and the Hungarian um, um, were they uh, were there. 

Um, we, we seek the um, police to receive uh, an uh, ishur. 

CREW: Permit? 

SUBJECT: Oh? 

CREW: A permit? 

SUBJECT: A permit, yes. To have a permit. To um, to go home. See um, the authorities um, gave us the permit. And um, when we um, returned uh to the home where we um, where we-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where you were born? Where you had lived? 

SUBJECT: Where we, uh, were, where we were in the night, where we were sleeping. Sleeping. Um. Suddenly, um, the, um, soldiers, the Hungary-- uh, the Hungarian, uh, soldiers, uh, said to all the population, uh, to go, um, to go in to a courtyard. Women in, on, in, one, uh, courtyard, and uh, men in another courtyard. Um. 

When, um, we were in the courtyard, um, my husband was in, the, in another courtyard. And um, after um, some hours, they liberated the women. And said you can go home. 

And um on my way home, um I, um, there was an officer who spoke German, and asked me uh, if I want to eat. Uh. And I didn't eat for three days. I said, yes. And uh, he um, um, said to me, uh, go with me to a family. And the family um, he said to them, to, to give me to eat. 

Then he said to me, go straight home. And today, do not um, do not go out from your house. I didn't understand why he said so. And I went home in the afternoon. 

Uh, my husband returned home. And he um, and he told me, uh, that, uh, all the men uh, uh, which were in the courtyard, um, went to the sport um, sport platz-- 

CREW: Stadium. 

SUBJECT: To the stadium. To the sports stadium. And um, there um, they ask, who is a Jew, and who is not a Jew? 

And the Jew, um, um, um, some of the Jews, they gave them uh, bottles. Bottles to, um, um, to dance before the Hungarian officials. 

And after, afterwards, they asked, who is um, who is not from um, Kamianets-Podilskyi. Who is not from this town may go home. So my husband um, said he's not from uh, from here. And they um, they liberated him. And he came home. 

Um, the other day, I um, stand before the window. And saw many um, carriages. Many carriages. Filled, filled with gviyot, huh? 

CREW: Bodies. 

SUBJECT: Bodies. 

CREW: Bodies. 

SUBJECT: With bodies. And the, and the-- the blood, the blood of the bodies. Tiftef al ha'mirtsefet. 

CREW: Dripping. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And um, in Kamianets-Podilskyi was, was um, the, flusser, uh, how do you say in English? 

CREW: The river? 

SUBJECT: No, this. 

CREW: Oh, the floor. 

SUBJECT: But the floor is, isn't in the house. But on the street. 

INTERVIEWER: The street. 

SUBJECT: On the street. How is it? 

INTERVIEWER: The sidewalk? The pavement? 

SUBJECT: The pavement, yes. The pavement was there, there-- very, very white. And the blood, the red blood, um, of Jews, was red and then-- then ordinary. 

After a day-- day-- were many, many carriages. And-- after, after a day, we left um, Kamianets-Podilskyi, and um, this was a pogrom. They called-- we called it pogrom. Uh. 

We went by foot two months. 

And the Ukrainian um, asked us, where we go. But um, we showed them the um, we showed them the permission and they um, gave us um, the way through. 

But the, the Ukrainians there were the-- the-- the anti-Sem-- uh, the, anti-Semit-- 

CREW: Anti-Semitic. 

SUBJECT: Anti-Semitic. Anti-Semitic. Anti-Semitic. And, um, once they called in um, in um, a cellar, my husband. And um, retained him for many hours. And I waited for him to come out. And I was without, without hope that he will come. 

And then he came. And said that they um, murdered, um, how do you say? 

INTERVIEWER: He came out and they said that they murdered him? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No. 

CREW: They softened? 

SUBJECT: They? 

CREW: Softened? 

INTERVIEWER: They beat him? 

SUBJECT: Beat him. Yes. Beat him. But when they-- when he showed him the permit, and they couldn't, they couldn't read. They didn't believe that it's a permit. 

Then came another, another Ukrainian who knew to read. And he saw that uh, he has a permit. And he gave him the permission to, to go out. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get your husband back to the town you came from? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We were for some weeks in Poland, after, after Ukraina. We went by foot and we go to Poland. And in Poland we waited for, for, um, opportunity to um, to come home. We had an opportunity um, to, to go home, and we come home to Yom Kippur. To Yom Kippur, '41. 

And some days after this, um, there was a publication that all, all the Jews in Czernowitz has to, um, had, have to leave their homes and go to the ghetto. And so one day only from the morning till the night, all the, all the population of Czernowitz, there were 120,000 Jews. 

Um. Everyone took all what he has, what he can um-- 

CREW: Carry. 

SUBJECT: Carry with him. And they were in, in the ghetto. In the ghetto, from the ghetto there were transportations to Transnistria. Transnistria-- in Transnistria, there were um-- I forgot to say that Czernowitz were now Romanian. The Romanian um, authorities, um, the Romanian authorities act was what the Germans say to them. 

And after the um, Germans say to them to, um, to, um, that all the Jews have to, to be in the ghetto, so they um, they um, took them and they say to them to go to the ghetto. And from the ghetto there where um, there were um, from the ghetto, there were, um, trains, um, every day. 

And they said, um, it would be good for all the Jews to go, to go away from Czernowitz, and they will have food and um, um, work and it will be good. 

Then the first, the first trains were of, volun-- volunteers that go. They went. Went. Afterwards, and there were, um, shmu'ot? 

CREW: Rumors. 

SUBJECT: Rumors. 

CREW: Rumors. 

SUBJECT: Rumors, yes. Were rumors that it's not uh, so, um, so good. And uh, it's better to um, uh, to, lehisha'er? 

CREW: To stay. 

SUBJECT: To stay in Czernowitz. And the Romanian authorities uh, then published, a publication uh, that all the, um, um, that um, all the intellectuals and um, who, um, and the um, eikh omrim um, pkidey ha'memshala. Of-- 

CREW: The government officials and clerks. 

SUBJECT: Government workers. Government workers and pensioners um, retired, retired, hm? 

CREW: Mmhm. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Um, may have authorizations, may have permission to, um, to stay in Czernowitz. And, um, and they have uh, to give their names. And um, many of uh, a great part of the population um, registered there. And um, after some days, they read um, the names of this men who uh, can stay in Czernowitz and has not to go to Transnistria. They will receive permissions. 

So my, my mother was um, my father was a government worker. And my mother uh, had uh, a pension after my father. And so she received a permission. 

But um, but only my mother received a permission. Then I tried to uh, to go to the, to um, to the, officer who was uh, the, uh, ha'akhrai? 

CREW: Was in charge. 

SUBJECT: In charge of these permissions. And he um, write also the names-- uh, my name, and uh, my name-- the name of my sister, to, uh, to remain, to stay in Czernowitz. So I stayed in Czernowitz. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your husband? 

SUBJECT: My husband had not a permission to stay. But uh, there were, were also um, his grandmother was in the hospital. And the old, um, women that were in the hospital, they had also a permission to stay. 

Then I went to the officer and begged him to write down the name of my husband, of the permission of his grandmother. 

Um, after, they were, um, for, not firtzish, mit vieren... three years, three years um, stayed in the population that received the permission in Czernowitz, but um, mean-- in meantime, uh, they, um, the, um, Romanian um, police, um, come in um, the night and um, deported many, many from this population. 

Really um-- without, without, um, with permission. They had the permission. But they took them out. So my, uh, I had also an uncle with his family. I had um, I had a cousin. She was a doctor who came from Vienna, from Vienna, to Czernowitz. And her husband was also a doctor-- 