CREW: Oh, thank you very much. Just a little piece. Just a small piece, that's all I need just to keep this on when you photograph it. Oh, no, that's too big. That's too big, because I want to be able remove it after we're done. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: We have the previous two periods, one before the suppression and one-- and I think the way you speak about it is very good. 

CREW: Pardon? 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: The way you speak about those two periods is very different. 

CREW: Which two periods are you speaking about? 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Before the separation and after. 

CREW: OK. We are rolling, and we're ready to go. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: I'm going to start it off with the question. Is that it? 

LAUREL VLOCK: I want you to start out by talking about your hometown and where you came from. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Do I have to introduce myself first? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes. Introduce yourself. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Any time? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes, now. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: We're ready now? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes. 

MALE SPEAKER 2: Wait just a minute. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Oh, sorry. 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Now you can go. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes, your name and where-- 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: My name is Joseph Korzenik. I am 52 years old. I'm married, and I have two children, one grandchild. And I live in West Hartford, Connecticut. I've lived in this area since 1946. 

I arrived here from Germany. Prior to that, I lived in Poland, where I was born in a small town in Southern Poland, which is named Gorlice. It was, at that time, in the Krakov district near the Czechoslovakian border. My family consisted of my parents, two sisters, an adopted sister, and myself. 

Prior to the War, we were what you would call-- considered living comfortably. My father was in business, and so was my mother. And my sisters were educated in the gymnasium. And I was too young to go to the gymnasium yet. 

In 1939, September 1, when the Germans occupied our town within a few days after the War broke out, we immediately began to feel the pressure of the occupation forces on the Jewish population. Shortly after the occupation by the Germans, the Jewish High Holidays came about, and we were not allowed to go to the synagogue. We were not allowed to pray. We were not allowed to gather more than three people at first. 

The synagogues were destroyed. Torahs were burned. Prayer books were burned. 

We immediately began to feel the oppressor's boot. Then there began a succession of edicts. Some of them were, of the nature of it, every Jew over the age of 12 had to register for work. And we had to work three days for the Germans. In my case, I worked six days, because three days I worked my father. 

After that, the edict came out that every Jew had to wear the Star of David on a white band on the outside garment at all times. Failure to do so was punishable by death. Many of our people were executed for failure to wearing a-- to wear the Star of David band. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you forget it, or purposefully? 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Forget it. It was basically an oversight. That didn't matter though. 

Then came about the edict of hostages. 10 Jewish men were named as hostages. And their names were posted on placards are all over town. Should anything happen to a German, those 10 men would be executed. That was, I think, one of the most difficult edicts to live with. 

During all this time, rations were distributed to people whose family members worked for the Germans. In my case, I was bringing in the rations-- those ration cards-- because I worked for the Germans all the time. And the work varied from building roads, cleaning barracks or police stations, chopping wood, working on dams on the river, removing dead bodies from the Gestapo building, burying them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As boy of 13 or 14, what was it like for you to remove dead bodies from the Gestapo building? What do you think-- 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: It was a very-- I would like to say-- difficult experience. I recall, in the beginning, I couldn't look at the bodies. I would lift a man by his feet or by his head, but I wouldn't look at him. But after a while, one becomes immune. 

This was going on until 1942. But I recall, distinctly, the winter of 1941 and '42. In that winter, they began to kill Jews at random in the street. In our town, there were approximately half a dozen Gestapo men. But these men had complete control over the entire Jewish population. 

INTERVIEWER: How big? Of how many? 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Approximately 4,000 Jews of a population of 8,000. Our community-- 

INTERVIEWER: They had complete control in-- 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: Complete control in every respect. They knew, because of the hostage system, nothing would happen to them. Now, this, perhaps, requires a little bit more elaboration, which I'd like to do by way of illustrating. Assuming, that a German was abusing my father, now, my anger could be vented by attacking this German, doing harm to him, perhaps. But the punishment that would be meted out to me would be negligible compared to the consequences knowing that 10 innocent men would be executed because of my foolish act. 

This, perhaps, is also one of the reasons why the majority of the people in the free world cannot comprehend why 6 million people could allow themselves to be led to the slaughter like sheep without lifting a finger in their defense. It is very difficult to raise a finger against the machine gun. It is also very difficult to live knowing that, because of my foolish act, 10 men have been executed. And there are widows and orphans. 

Now, this is something that I don't know if it's been said before, but it needs to be said. But we truly were a people of the Book. We believed in God. And we believed that if we conduct ourselves as decent people, we will be allowed to lead a normal life. But we were wrong, as history has proven. 

The life in the ghetto for me, personally, was more difficult to endure than in the concentration camps or the slave labor camps. Because, in the ghetto, I was with my family, and there was the constant fear of something happening to my family. We were all a close-knit family. 

It's strange, but yesterday, I made a list of members of our family. In 1939, there were 117 people of our family. In 1945, 11 survived. Out of these 11, 2 survived as non-Jews and Aryan papers. 5 survived in Russia, never having been under the German occupation. And 4 of us survived the concentration camps. 

You asked me a question, at the age of 12 or 13 and 14 and so on-- I'm not a psychiatrist. I cannot explain the capacities of a person at different stages of his lifetime. But I do know that most of our survivors who did survive were within that category of age group. 

I recall one particular incident when I worked in the wood processing plant outside of our town. And while I was working in the yard, there was this Polish worker-- a young fellow, also-- and he was sort of mocking me. Why do we work the way we do? They're going to kill us anyway. 

Now, this was early. This must have been early '42, I think. And he was telling us how he participated with a group of Polish workers in a town-- neighboring town where they dug a grave, a large pit. And they witnessed an execution of Jewish people, approximately 900 people all lined up in three lines-- men, women, and children-- and were told to undress, and then they were machine gunned. 

And he proceeded to explain to me, but he was sort of relishing the way he was explaining this to me, as though he were enjoying this act that, when they were covering the pit with the earth, there were some people who were still alive. That had a devastating effect on me. And I began to have nightmares about mass executions. But I was afraid to tell my parents about it. 

At one time, there was-- when I came back from work-- there was a tremendous amount of activity by the German police. And they were all different segments of the police departments. And they were all converging on the Gestapo building, which was in our neighborhood a few houses down from my home. Then, I began to realize that an action is going to take place. And that was when I told my parents what this Polish fellow had told me. 

So my father decided that it's no use to wait for them to come after us. And we ran into-- across the river into the non-Jewish section of our town. And we hid in the hay loft over a barn. And there, we were from Thursday evening until Sunday morning. And we could hear a continuous volley of shootings coming from the direction of our town. 

On that Saturday, we could hear a truck with Ukrainian soldiers coming into this particular courtyard where the barns were. And they started the systematic search of every barn and hayloft. We were lucky we hid in the hay, and they didn't spot us. But we did see through the cracks in the wall a family across the street was executed. They were found hiding. 

By Sunday morning-- this was already around August, I would say August 1942-- that general time-- and by Sunday morning, my father came down and asked the fellow who came to feed the horses what has happened to the Jewish people. And he explained to him that all the Jews were quarantined in a large shoe factory that was abandoned. And there were only a few families-- or approximately 100 in total-- who were left in one town-- excuse me, in one street. 

And then, we decided that, since we are hungry and there was no way-- we were already exposed to this man anyway, so our safety was already in question-- so we decided-- we decided-- our father decided to take us to that town. And we joined some of the Sunday morning Christian worshippers, and we went to that town. And there, we found my mother's brother and his family who were among that group. 

And we also found out that if one member of the family has a stamp on his work papers, he will be allowed to retain the rest of his family. That evening, when the group that I was working with was escorted back onto that street, the German-- he was actually a Volksdeutsche, which is they were Polish citizens of German ancestry, and they were given special rights once the Germans occupied Poland-- so he was the head of the guard. And I know him because a while back, I did him a favor-- favor-- he was going on vacation, and he was carrying a heavy suitcase. So I saw him carry it across the yard, so I ran and grabbed it from him. And he sort of liked me, because I took the initiative to carry his suitcase for him. 

So I told him what our position was. And he took my work papers, and he took them to the Gestapo. And he did bring me the stamp the next morning. 

And I went to work feeling confident that my family will be secure. But that was not to be. That same evening, when I came back from work, my family was gone. And I found out from a policeman-- a Jewish policeman who escorted them out of that street to the quarantine area-- that, as they were approaching, the Germans were executing Jews at random. So my father grabbed my mother and sister, and they ran away from the group. 

And my father was born and raised in a village. So they ran to that village, where most of the people knew him and grew up with them-- not only grew up with him, but they also served in the First World War in the Austrian army. So they were more than just casual friends or acquaintances. 

And these people would not hide them. They would not even allow them to hide in their fields for fear. So they said that the Germans will take punitive actions against them. This is an area that, for Polish Jew, is very important for a few Polish people who took risks to save a Jew. The preponderant majority did not-- not only did not take steps to hide us, but were active in turning us in, if not torturing us by themselves. 

After the War, I found out about a cousin of mine who grew up in that same village where my father was born. He did not go into the camp. He did not go into the ghetto. He lived off the fields. And a neighbor of his caught him and brought him to the Gestapo on a rope like a calf to be shot. 

This can be multiplied manyfold. Unfortunately, those deeds are not documented, because there are no survivors. And the Polish people don't talk about it. 

I ask a question now, as a survivor, having studied and lectured on this subject, why was a country like Denmark-- Christians-- with the Jewish people-- Christians haven't taken upon themselves to save-- something like 95% or upward of that number of the Jewish population-- and only a couple hundred kilometers to the east, Christians too, were cooperating with the Germans to annihilate us. I may sound bitter. I am. Because I was raised with the belief, I am my brother's keeper. 

And I also know of the quality of the Jewish population in Poland prior to 1939. We were approximately 10% of the total population. We were a very active, positive, contributing force for the Polish nation. That Polish nation did not back us up, did not protect this. In studying this period, I come to the conclusion that the Roman Catholic church should stand indicted for having conspired with the Germans to annihilate the Polish population. 

I gave you an account of 117 members of one family. There are entire towns and villages that not a single survivor made it. There's nobody to speak for those people. 

I found, after the War-- I'm jumping all over the place, but this is important. I think it's relative. When I went back to Poland after the War to find out if any of members of my family have survived, I was in a train of repatriates. As we left the Polish border going towards Katowice, which was the next main town, I heard a group of Polish people talking amongst themselves saying something to the effect, well, whatever Hitler did, at least we're grateful to him for having solved the Jewish problem for us. 

Now, this is after the War. This is after what has happened to our people. This is the kind of education these people were harboring. And that education came down from the pulpit. 

When we lived amongst these people before 1939, we knew that they hated us because, in Poland, there was nothing hidden. Ever since I could remember as a child, going to school, I would see on the street-- be it on a fence, or on a building of a Jewish home, or front of a Jewish store, or on the sidewalk-- there were signs-- you call the graffiti here today-- signs all over the place, Jew go to Palestine. You filthy Jew, we don't want you in Poland. This is the kind of a democracy we found ourselves living in. Poland, supposedly, was a democracy from 1918 to 1939. 

However, Poland, at that time, was governed by Church and State. The Church was extremely influential. Kids I grew up with who hated me not because I was different than they were, not because I was built differently, or I spoke Polish differently than they did, or I was a better or worse student than they were-- they hated me only because they were told that I am a Jew. And they such-- as such, I'm not part of the establishment. I do not have a right to live amongst these people, because the Church told them that I am an infidel. I have not accepted Christ. 

And because of that, these same Polish people, I feel, were injected with a venom of hate. That venom of hate still courses through these people's veins today, because I still have contact with polish people. And they hate. They don't know why. 

I feel, perhaps, I found the answer. As children, they were taught to hate the Jew. There's no more Jew in Poland to hate. 

I'm sure there will be some professional psychiatrists, psychologists, people in the field who will agree with me that hatred is not like a radio or television. You cannot turn it off at will. Once it is in a person's system, it is very difficult to shed. And I feel that is the legacy of the Polish people have brought upon themselves. 

When I arrived in my hometown, after this experience in the train, there were a few survivors-- eight or nine, I don't recall. And they told me, Joe, try to get away from here. Only recently, there was a pogrom in a town of Kielce where some of the survivors came back, and they were killed by the Polish people. 

There is no excuse. They were not under the occupation by the Germans anymore. They were not forced to do it. The Russians did not tell them to do it. But, obviously, they felt that they had to help Hitler in the annihilation of our people. 

That is inexcusable, unforgivable. I will never forgive them. I can't. I don't have a right to forgive them. 

To get back to the survival process, if you will, I was privy, while still working in that same woodworking camp just before we evacuated our people to the east-- so we were told. I saw with my own eyes Germans tossing babies in the air and shooting them. I couldn't believe it, but I saw it. It did happen. And they were laughing as they were doing this. 

This is, again, a situation that, now, as I look in retrospect, the Germans were the most enlightened and educated people in all of Europe at that time. That was not a Pole hate from the village who got his education only from the pulpit. Those were university-educated people. And, yet, they were killing infants. Unbelievable. 

From then on, it was just a matter of a day-to-day survival by trying to organize whatever food was available, stealing, whichever way one could. As far as the outside world was concerned, we were less and less being informed on what was happening. After they took away our people by transport, that is a scene that will stay with me forever. 

We were in that camp till about January of 1943. From there, they took us into the mountains near the Czechoslovakian border even closer. And it was in the height of the winter-- extremely, extremely cold, so much so that you watch the birds in flight freeze to death. That is cold. I didn't know about Celsius or Fahrenheit or any of this, but I could tell by this event that it was extremely cold. 

And we were working outside in the yard. I was very fortunate in that camp that I was working in the kitchen, so at least I did not have to endure that cruel cold. By March, they moved us into the first concentration camp, which was in Mielec. There was a Heinkel assembly plant-- Heinkel airplanes. And there we were until 1944. 

During that time, there were various executions. We did not know why or whatever reason. Amongst them, they would line us up on the parade ground, and an assess man would count as he was walking by the ranks, and each 10th person had to step forward. And there were the Gestapo guys with machine guns waiting in a circle. Then they marched them off into the forest and killed them. 

LAUREL VLOCK: I want to ask you. You said the evacuation, you never will forget that, but you didn't describe it. Would you? 

JOSEPH KORZENIK: [SIGHS] Well, the reason I didn't describe is because it is an emotional moment in my life. When you see people that you grew up with-- neighbors, relatives-- and you see them in a state of agony-- screaming, crying-- and you're helpless. You just stand and observe it. Of course, you sort of rationalize, most likely, that they are taking away to the East for resettlement, as some of the rumors at that time persisted. 

We still couldn't believe what the Germans had in mind-- total annihilation of our people. It was still beyond comprehension. As a matter of fact, for the bulk of the 68 months under the German occupation, at no time did I realize or believe that this was a total annihilation process going on. 

I was talking, also, about this particular camp in Mielec, where this group that survived my hometown-- approximately 60 of us-- that were taken from the first camp after the town was finally made Judenfrei, which means free of Jews. We were the only survivors of that town who were incarcerated in the barrack, which was right at that woodworking process factory. And this was right near the railroad siding. That is how we were able to see what they were doing with our people during the evacuation. It's not evacuation, really, it's-- it's the final transport, as it turned out to be. 

And in Mielec, there was another instance that stands out in my mind. There was also a group of Polish workers who were brought into that particular camp to do some work. And I remember one of them holler across the fence to us, you guys are crazy. Why do you work? They're going to make soap out of you. 

We didn't know what they were talking about. We didn't realize it that that the soap we're using in showers was from human fat. And this we didn't know until the end of the War either. 

I speak about living in the dark, or being uninformed. These polish fellows were not forthcoming in letting us know the events of the War, whether there was a positive feeling or negative feeling-- none. We didn't know what was happening, who was at war, or where the War was being fought. All we knew was that we had a daily battle for ourselves, that we were totally preoccupied. 

In that camp in Mienec, in this-- when we arrived there, these people were just going getting over a typhoid epidemic. And the survivors were walking around, like, on their last leg. People just had no strength. We were the strong ones that came into this particular camp. 

And after a short period of time, there was an execution again. They claimed it was sabotage. A group of workers in the rudder department, they were accused of having committed sabotage. I can assure you, we did not commit sabotage, because none of us wanted to commit suicide. And we knew the rules of the game. 

Also, there's another area that is that needs to be told. And that is that each prisoner had to look out for the next prisoner. 