INTERVIEWER 1: For the taping, please just introduce yourself, in terms of your name and where you were born, when you were born. And we'll open up really with a sense of what your life was like. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's the beginning, what your life was like before the war, and to work into your personal sense of when things began to change from what your normal life was, into the life which you were born, your family structure, to the beginning of the change. And from there, we'll [? tape you all ?] together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have a little bit over an hour. 

SUBJECT: OK, no problem. You ask the questions. And I will be very happy to answer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We'll only ask questions when absolutely needed. Otherwise-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, I see. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The idea is that you give us a sense of change-- 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what you've experienced. We'll come in when you need us. 

SUBJECT: I may not have just everything exactly in the chronological order. But I'm going to try to have it that way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's fine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You can. It's not absolutely crucial. However, when you say something, it would help to say this happened in this year and this place. 

SUBJECT: Right. OK, thanks very much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let me change one thing that [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: The card on which I wrote is not apparently the one that Dr. Loewe wants you to use particularly. 

SUBJECT: OK, you did find it, excellent, excellent. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were born, where you were born, and beginning back with home. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: All right, my name is David [? Outholz. ?] I was born in Krosno, Poland, in 1928. It was in May, 1928. I remember it exactly. 

And I think that it was at the age of two or so when we moved from that town to a much larger town, Chorzow in upper Silesia, where my parents have settled. My father was a watchmaker. And, uh, he had a small shop where he worked. 

I had a sister who was a year and a half younger. And, uh, of course, my mother was with us. We, um, had received our primary school of education in that town of Chorzow At the age of 11 or so, I think, the war started. At my-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your home was traditional-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, my, uh, my home was traditional, but not orthodox. We had in Chorzow at that time, a Jewish community which very much identified itself with the German Jews. And uh, my, my, both my parents were very, uh, firm believers in God, and also followers of the Jewish religion, but not in the strict sense of orthodoxy. 

We had gone to a synagogue, uh, on at least every Saturday, every Shabbes. And, uh, the only connection that I had with a cheder, as far as the Jewish education is concerned, was during my summertime vacation, which I spent, uh, with my grandparents. Every year since I can remember, we spent half the summer vacation with my grandparents in the small town of Tuchow. That was on my mother's side. 

And, uh, the other half of the vacation was spent in a small, uh, resort nearby. It was called Iwonicz Zdroj. Zdroj means spa. I guess you might translate it in that way. 

Uh, it was during one of those summer vacations that I, uh, recall the war that the-- when it started. We had, uh, what I, what everybody thought was one of those, another test air raids, uh, which we were exposed to periodically. The siren was, uh, sounded, and everyone was supposed to run for shelter. Except after a while, of course, no one paid any attention. 

On that particular day, it was toward the end of the summer vacation. And we were getting ready to leave back home. I remember the siren was sounded, and, uh, I was outside playing with, uh, some friends. 

And, uh, suddenly, some airplanes appeared not very far above the ground, maybe 400 or 500 feet above. And they were dropping bombs all over. This is, of course, we, I have heard my parents often talk about it. 

And they used to have, uh, weekly card games with their friends, when they used to discuss politics, and solve all the problems. And, uh, of course, at that time, from what I remember, no one ever expected Germany to, uh, actually attack Poland, especially after England came out with the guarantee of Polish, uh, independence, whatever that was. 

Well, the war did break out. And, uh, when I left, I think it was the fourth or the fifth grade, that was the last time I saw the inside of a, of a school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you-- was the sense that you were in danger at the time as a Pole or as a Jew? 

SUBJECT: We weren't in danger at that time at all, to my, to my knowledge, other than, uh, uh, people that were, uh, overrun by an enemy, by an invading force. I didn't think of myself as being in any personal danger. To me, the whole thing became very exciting. 

It wasn't that frightening, since we weren't doing the fighting. We were just the onlookers. I did see, of course, uh, I think I mentioned to you briefly before, a few days after this initial air raid, I have seen the remnants of the Polish Army, including the Polish Calvary, uh, going through the town, small town of Krosno. And, uh, uh, shortly thereafter, the German tanks were arriving into the other end of town. 

Uh, I do remember shortly after the Germans had actually occupied the town, there were all kinds of new, uh, Unordnungs and Verordnungs-- those are the order of the day, I guess, you might translate it as such-- uh, given out by the German military command. And, uh, when, the first time I became aware of the fact that I am a Jew, and singled out as a Jew, actually, because I knew that I was a Jew, but no one-- I didn't even think in any particular way about it. 

When-- I think that one of the very first orders of the day came about, when we suddenly started to wear armbands, and the yellow stars on the front and, and the back. And we were also ordered not to walk on the sidewalk. And, uh, whenever a German officer, or even a soldier approached, we always had to get out of his way, no matter where it was, and always walked on the, on the street side of the sidewalk. 

Shortly thereafter, of course, uh, I have, uh, uh, witnessed some of the periodic Aktion, they used to call it. Uh, it was a round-up. That's what it was. 

The Germans were constantly rounding up people. First it was the, anyone with any kind of education. It was teachers. It was former-- they were looking for former Polish officers as much as Jews, intellectuals, any kind of education that was a tribute to anyone. Those people were rounded up, and very often just taken outside the town in the woods, and shot. 

Uh, I remember my uncle, who was a new uncle, actually. I think they were just married at that, uh, particular summer to the younger sister of my mother's. He was one of the very first victims that was rounded up, and taken outside, and actually shot. We never saw them again. After that, it became, uh, of course, the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw the Aktion? 

SUBJECT: I saw the Aktion. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] [? images. ?] 

SUBJECT: Well, they were soldiers takin' up positions. There were a lot of them on motorcycles. Uh, some of the Polish, uh, police-- there was actually a newly appointed police, I would say-- was helping them out. 

They were going from house to house, and pulling people out of their houses, and putting them into the-- this little town, like many other town, towns in Poland, had one main square. I mean, we didn't have any downtown, there, anything. It was one main square where all the markets were taking place, and all the, all the activity. The the, the town hall was there, and everything was there. 

This is where, usually where these people were rounded up, gathered up, loaded up on trucks, and taken away. Uh, sometimes-- uh, and I remember that, too, during the very first winter, uh, was one of those actions where some of the people were rounded up, the group. Some of them were, uh, run, uh, tried to run away, of course. And they were shot. 

And, uh, I remember the following spring, just the snow was starting to melt. And we were, at that time, gathered, or starting to be gathered to a small ghetto. It was the very first time when we, the Jewish population was taken from this particular town into a small ghetto. And I have seen the last days from the previous beginning of the winter. As the layers of snow melted, we had seen all over again. 

Well, at that time, there was a small refinery outside the town. Everybody called it a rafineria which, in effect, is a refinery. A small group of Jews, and I was among them-- I don't know what I was doing there-- I was only, I think, 12 or 13-- were taken there to work. 

Uh, included in this group was also an aunt and an uncle of mine. I don't remember exactly the circumstances, but it must have been just taken at random, because neither my mother nor my father was in the group. They remained behind in the ghetto. 

And we were all told that we were going to go out it, work for a day, and come back to the ghetto. Well, we never returned to the ghetto. We were kept on that refinery. They prepared some, uh, sleeping quarters for us, and the kitchen. And this is where we stayed for the next several months, must have been at least seven or eight months. 

Uh, this ghetto didn't last very long, the, the, the Krosno Ghetto. It was liquidated shortly thereafter. And, uh, whoever wasn't sent off somewhere, I don't know exactly where, uh, was taken to a larger, regional ghetto in Rzeszow 

This, uh, particular ghetto also didn't last very long. At any rate, when I was taken to this refinery, that's the last time I had seen my father or my mother and sister. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You left in the morning without a goodbye. 

SUBJECT: That's right. I was told repeatedly that, uh, we would be going back that same night, and if not that night, then don't worry, the next day. And so, but I had never seen them again, with the exception of my father. But that came much, much later. And I'll come to that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's the do you think of that not, having, not having the chance to-- 

SUBJECT: No, I don't think of that, uh, in any particular times. I do remember that I was very, very sick shortly after. No one ever found out what was the matter with me, but even the German, the local German who was, I think, some sort of a doctor or medic was taking care of me. 

And, uh, I had such terrible headaches for a period of two weeks. And my eye sockets were hurting. This I'll never forget. Couldn't, I couldn't roll them in any way whatsoever. 

Uh, but somehow I survived. I do remember that German, with a very friendly name. You have to remember this was not the S, the SS. These were all chemists or military people who were in charge of that particular refinery. 

They came with a thermometer, I remember must have been this long, to measure my temperature. And I was frightened of it. But that's apparently all they had, and they were using them for the chemicals. Uh, but I survived and I, we were well treated on that refinery. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your aunt and uncle were with you? 

SUBJECT: With us, with us, right, with this group. Um, and, uh, we stayed there for quite some time. I have only heard, uh, through the, uh, discussions of my, uh, aunt and uncle that Rzeszow was apparently, a few months later, also liquidated. 

And what happens, the-- about half of the Jewish population of Rzeszow as far as I, as I could make out from the stories that was told to me, was taken directly to Auschwitz. And among them was my mother and my sister. The other half, mostly men who were able to work or had any kind of trade, were taken to a concentration camp which was set up specifically for Jews. 

And I mention this because there were many concentration camps in Germany that were mainly set up for political prisoners of any kind. This concentration camp was Plaszow, just outside of Krakow, one-time capital of Poland. And, uh, eventually, that little work uh, period on the refinery also came to an end. And now a small group, as a group, was taken to Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you aware of the possibility that your sister, mother or-- 

SUBJECT: No. I didn't know at all what happened to them, or they're still alive or not. The very first time that I heard that they were dead is when I saw my father again, by, by pure chance in Plaszow. He was taken to a watchmaking workshop, which they had-- Plaszow had, uh, several shops. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's come back to your own-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, that you were in the, the, working the refinery [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Yes. What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happens? The, the work in the-- 

SUBJECT: The work in the refinery was actually, um, limited to stacking, uh, barrels with fuel oil, uh, pulling in railroad cars, which we did by hand, just physically pushing. A large group of us were actually pushing the railroad cars, tank cars. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did it end, the work in the refinery? 

SUBJECT: How'd it end? One morning, uh, a, uh, before we even went out to work, very early in the morning, I noticed a truck pulled out, and then another and then another. And one German officer came out, and talked to the, uh, person in charge of the, of the, uh, refinery. There must have been some sort of an argument, because everybody suddenly rushed to the windows, including ourselves. 

And then, uh, several shots were fired at the windows. Of course, we pulled back. Nobody was hurt. 

But the, I think an hour or so later, we were all uh, uh, let out of our building, loaded up on the trucks, and taken to a small airport outside of town. We waited there for a larger group of people. And then as one group, a long convoy, we were all taken to Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: By train? 

SUBJECT: No, by, by truck. By truck. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your aunt and uncle were still with you in the second-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, they were with us all along. In Plaszow, we arrived. And we were, after this initial, uh, Entlausung and, uh, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me about the arrival, memories, images. 

SUBJECT: Well, the, the, in, oh, yes, it's interesting that you mention. I never even thought of that. In, on that refinery, we all were, wore our regular clothes, such as they were. 

The first thing that happened in Plaszow, we were, uh, we were, we had to strip. We went to the so-called, uh, showers and Entlausung, and, uh, uh, which means, uh, uh, disinfection procedure. And we were given uniforms, which were the usual stripes, I think linen pants, and, and a top, and the cap, and wooden shoes. I remember that. 

Uh, we were then all trucked, uh, into barracks. We were assigned to certain barracks. The barracks had, I think, three or four, uh, tiers of bunks. They were, they, they lined the entire barrack. 

I think the barrack must have been maybe 30 or 40 feet long. It was divided in two halves. Each half had bunks, practically from wall to wall, with openings in the front, uh, in the aisle. And, uh, uh, there were some straw mattresses in it. We all had a blanket. And we all were given one of those little cans, which was designed to, um, to hold the food that we were given, mostly soup. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In Plaszow, what do you remember seeing, and thinking about? What kind of images surrounded [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Well, there, there was, uh, nothing but a, a large area with several barbed wires. There were, uh, guard towers at various intervals, with lights on it. There were-- some of these guards had dogs with them. 

And, uh, I remember a lot of shots were being, shouts were being barked all the time. And, uh, I do remember it was very, very cold. I don't remember exactly the exact month, but it was very, very cold. 

And we had, besides the blanket, we had nothing else. We did have the one pot-belly stove. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We are now in 1940-- 

SUBJECT: Probably early into '40s. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 19-- 

SUBJECT: '40 or '41, even, '41. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember how you felt at this transfer? When you came? 

SUBJECT: No, I don't remember anymore. I do remember being very frightened. That's the very first time that I was frightened, and I, that I have come across, um, I have felt an unfriendly attitude toward us. 

Before that, I didn't have such feeling. I know we were working on that refinery. The people were treating us, under the circumstances, I didn't know. I didn't know how one should be treated or one should not be treated. 

I simply didn't feel threatened at that time. We knew that every day, we would get up. We would have our breakfast. We will go and do our work. We'll come back home, and whatever have you. 

And, uh, there, of course, I was w-- part of a very large group. I have seen also the camp was divided into further, I think there were three or four sections in that camp. One was designated only for women. And that was also separated by barbed wire. One was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Plaszow ? 

SUBJECT: Plaszow, right. One was, of course, only men. And then there was a section for shops, where these various workshops-- there was a printing shop and there was a watch-making shop. And there were, I guess, other shops. I'm not at all familiar with, with the others. 

Uh, I have also seen for the very first time, which made me very angry, uh, Jewish guards shouting and kicking, uh, the prisoners. They were not in the usual uniforms. They were allowed to have regular clothes, some of them very sharp, sports kind of a clothes. 

I remember one, uh, it was a couple. He was, I guess, the chief of this, uh-- we used to call them the kapos, the chief of the kapos was the police, the, the prisoner police-- dressed in riding boots and the pants that go along with it. He was married, very sharp, good-looking people, and very, very arrogant. 

They were in charge of the, I guess what you might call the police, which was staffed by prisoners, all Jews, all of them, including, of course, the prisoners. There were no other kind of prisoners in Plaszow, just Jews. 

Uh, we must have come at the tail end of a very horrible period, because on the way to work, I have seen-- oh, yes, eventually, of course, we were-- I identified myself as a watchmaker, since this is what my father was. And this is where, by pure coincidence, I was taken to the watchmaker shop. And there was my father working as a watchmaker-- couldn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the meeting? 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, he hugged me. And he cried. I don't remember whether I cried or not. Uh, and I remember being very warm that night, because he took me with him into the bunk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long had you been separated? 

SUBJECT: I would say almost a year. I was totally bewildered by this thing. I, I just couldn't believe it. Uh, we were-- since then, of course, we were constantly together. 

I didn't know much about watchmaking. But either he or his friend on the other side of me were doing all of my work, when, when the guards were not watching. But I had a very good time taking these things apart. 

There were all kinds of gauges, uh, from trucks, and from cars, and all kinds of meters. I had a great time taking them apart. Of course, I didn't know how to put them together again, but they took care of that. And, uh, we were together several months. 

I found out then, of course, that-- oh, yes, on the way to work, we were passing-- we walk-- we were passing a huge galley, or valley, you might call, within the center-- a depression in the ground, quite a big one. And there were constant fires there. And I have seen, uh, bones, human bones there. 

And I was told only afterwards that there were between 50,000 and 55,000 Jews shot by machine gun and buried there. And then, uh, several months later, uh, there was all-- there were also a lot of bulldozers working there. These, all of these bodies were being dug up and burned. The stench was unbelievable, unbelievable. 

I do remember that one of the-- we also had women workers there. One of the women was, uh, uh, I guess she became hysterical. And she was just shot right on the spot, and pushed down in there with, with the rest of the group. This-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So on the way to work. 

SUBJECT: On the way to work. This, uh, subsequently, I found out, I don't know, it's a very funny name. It's, uh, they call this particular spot Hujowa Gorka which is, uh, not a very polite word. And I don't even remember. Gorka means "hill." I don't know why they called it the hill. It was a hole. But that was the official name designated, that we had given it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And hujowa is what? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The first word is what? 

SUBJECT: It's a description of a male organ, sex organ. It's a penis, that's what it is. And, uh, I don't know why. Apparently, because of all of the naked bodies that were there. So this is what they called them. 

It was the most horrible sight that I have ever seen, the bulldozers working, digging up, sifting up. People were pulling them out, whatever was left over of the bones and burning the whole thing. 

Of course, they had to-- a lot of it didn't burn very readily, because it was mixed up with a lot of earth, and there was a lot of lime in the mix. Uh, they had to constantly douse it with gasoline, and continue to burn. This, uh, was quite a sight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were how old, now? Like, 14? 

SUBJECT: I was 14. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The sight which you remember, you-- it comes to you now? [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: No, I have never forgotten it. I have never forgotten it. And, uh, it, uh, It's amazing what time can do. 

I never particularly had the opportunity to talk about it, except when we got together with other former inmates of, of Plaszow, whom I met, also by coincidence, in New York. And they were working in a print shop. And we were just talking. 

And, hey, you were in Plaszow. Where you were and such? They told me where they were. I told them where I were. It was-- so they remember the same incidents. Because we all walked by the same thing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because, and what, what about when you don't only talk to people? How do those images stay with you, day and night? I mean, [INAUDIBLE] occasionally [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: I have-- I used to have dreams about them, uh, various, various dreams. Some of them were connected directly. Some of them even, uh, different. Um, and they didn't come out the way I really saw them in real life, in fact. But after a while, that, that went away. 

What I do remember more, even, than that, there were occasions where people escaped. We also had work gangs that were taken out of the camp, outside of the camp gates, in fact, where there was road projects, or whatever. And by the way, a lot of these roads were built and paved with stones that were formerly graves, or gravestones in the cemetery. [COUGHS] Excuse me. 

On occasion, there were prisoners who escaped. And every single time, someone was, someone escaped, we were lined up. The usual time, I think, was around 5 o'clock in the morning, for so-called Appell. 

But or it could happen any time during the day. An Appell means that, uh, you had to go out, wherever, drop whatever you're doing, and line up outside. We were lined up in, in files and long rows. 

And each one of us had a barracks leader who was responsible for the number of people. And, uh, we were counted. We'll see who, especially it happened, uh, in the morning, most of the time, we were counted. 

Because the work gangs came back. Sometimes, they were able to just sneak by. But sometimes, when the count was not accurate-- and that was when those people returning from the work outside the camp, didn't, uh, weren't exactly the same number who, that left, uh, we simply were lined up. The, um, one of the kapos was responsible. 

He was walking along with one of the German guards. He picked out everything sing-- every 10th man in a row. And they were, uh, usually hanged. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In front of you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Not necessarily at the same time. Quite often, we were, we were made to watch during these Appells, uh, hangings. Sometimes, on occasion, a prisoner was caught, and he was brought back-- he or several of them, whatever. They were brought back. 

I'll never forget the sight. There was a, a band. I don't know where the band came from, but I don't remember a prison band. But they were playing one of the favorite German, uh, tunes, popular tunes. 

It was called Komm Zuruck. It was a very popular tune, a pop tune you might call it here. Uh, komm zuruck means, means, uh, "come back." As these prison, prisoners were led back in, in chains, uh, this was the music that was playing. Komm Zuruck, this was the greeting thing. 

And on occasion, there were stretched out-- we had huge logs of wood, trunks, I guess, split in half, where the prisoner was just stretched out on them. And they were lashed. And I guess most of them never survived these lashings. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Also where you witnessed it? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, definitely. These were all p-- public. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: This was all-- it was necessary. Absolutely. I guess they meant to instill the fear of us, sufficient not to do these things. So not only was, uh, a lot of these people who even had the opportunity to escape. 

I understand there were several underground groups that tried to, um, contact us. They, a lot of them were deterred from escaping because they knew what would happen afterwards. There was only one occasion where I really, uh, felt joy in my heart. 

The news spread that the commander of the Jewish kapos, Chmielewicz himself, and his wife, and a group of his friends escaped. They were subsequently caught. And they were lined up and shot. 

I don't remember the shooting. I think this must have been done outside the camp. They were brought back dead, because they were lined up, all lined up, in other words on the ground. 

There must have been, I think, maybe a dozen of them. And we were made to march in the one, long file, with the eyes, with the head turned toward the bodies, head turned right, and to make sure that we got a good look at them. And I don't think there was one single unhappy prisoner in that camp at that time. 

At any rate, I think, uh, eight months or so later, a small group of people were taken to another work camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before you, do you know when you was sent for the Appell, the question of where you stood beside it, whether you would be number 10 or not. 

SUBJECT: Absolutely. You had no control over that whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. What would be your thoughts? How would you choose your place? 

SUBJECT: I was trembling. You didn't choose, because you didn't know where they will start counting. Sometimes, they took from the front. 

We were five deep, I think. Sometimes they would took the second line. Sometimes they were simply taken from the depth. No way to figure it out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you could be the first, for example, and still be the 10th? 

SUBJECT: Absolutely. I had no-- I really wasn't aware of any way to, to cheat or, to, so to speak to, uh, uh, safeguard yourself by, uh, forethought. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Getting the system. 

SUBJECT: Right. I have not been aware. Maybe there was a system, but I certainly wasn't aware of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You experienced it as random? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Quite often, the fellow next to me was taken. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember such a thing? 

SUBJECT: No. But I do remember, especially in the colder months, right after such an Appell, and before we were actually lined up to go to work, a whole group of us were just simply clustered together, very, very close-- actually total body contact. And, uh, this was, obviously, to keep ourselves as warm as possible. We didn't have much clothes. 

And every few minutes, the one from the inside would go to the outside. And this is how we kept ourselves warm. Once we were moving or working, it was fine. It was all right. 

Any rate, after several months, maybe eight or nine months-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were with your father all this time? 

SUBJECT: All the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And slept near him? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you-- were there discussions? Did you speak to each other? Did you have some thought, feelings about him? You said, this was the first warm night. 

SUBJECT: Well, I felt very, very comfortable, like a cat on a stove-- very, very comfortable. And suddenly, relieved-- I do feel that feeling of relief. I didn't think once of my mother or my sister, not once. And he never mentioned them to me. There was, obviously, nothing to talk about. 

INTERVIEWER 2: His, so his being near you-- 

SUBJECT: Gave me comfort. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Less fear? 

SUBJECT: Personal, physical comfort. And also, I guess, I felt psych-- mentally comfortable-- secure, somehow more secure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Had you always been close to him? 

SUBJECT: No, not particularly closer than a child would be, uh, with a father. But we were-- I was much closer with my mother. Uh, well, we didn't spend that much time. 

He was busy working many, many hours every day. During the vacation, he, I think, took off two weeks. So I saw him for two weeks, because he always stayed in his shop and while we were away. But I, I mean, he was my father. I mean, there was no question about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you-- did you talk, ask him questions about anything evenings in the bank or-- 

SUBJECT: No. I don't remember asking him any particular questions. And I don't remember him giving me any particular answers. I remember afterwards not being at all able to understand how adults were able to take the kind of punishment that adults at that time did. 

I mean, as a child-- I'm not making any excuses for myself-- I was-- it never occurred to me that, uh, I would have to make a decision one way or another, or that I could, I could influence in any way my immediate future or my immediate, uh, well-being. I was sort of, uh, accepting the fact that I had to accept whatever others did. Somebody told me to line up for food, I would simply do that. Somebody told me go to bed, I would go to do that. 

But I was never put in a position of having to make a decision one way or another. But, uh, after the war, it occurred to me that if I had-- and especially after the war, after I got married and became a father-- I simply to this very day, I cannot understand how an adult person, uh, man, can accept being separated by force from his family, notwithstanding the circumstances. And I fully remember that at that time, anyone protesting was subject to a bullet. 

There were guards with loaded rifles, and dogs all round. But this is-- apparently, I came to the conclusion that the will to live just can overcome any kind of, any other kind of emotion. There is no other way I can explain that. And this is not enough of a-- this is not acceptable to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The humiliation of your father? 

SUBJECT: The humiliation, and the um, the sudden realization that somehow, you are not going to be, uh, with your family, with your loved ones again. I mean, how anyone would want to continue living under such circumstances is something that I cannot understand to this very day. 

But as I said, I haven't been in that situation before. I would imagine if someone would give me a choice-- those people at that time were not given any choice-- but if someone would confront me today, look, you either go out and fight for your family with the risk of dying, or, uh, just give, uh, give up everything you have, I would most likely go out and fight, even though I would, I would know that I may not survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So that if you had been in your father's place, you imagine you would behave-- 

SUBJECT: Differently, yes, in my father's place. And I have seen many fathers like it, many fathers like it. This is something I have not been able to comprehend, and I still am unable to understand it. 

But again, at that time, I saw everything through a child's eyes. And I can imagine today, after rationalizing-- and I have to do quite a bit of rationalizing-- one might explain that giving up one's life under such circumstances may not necessarily save the lives of those that you care about. On the other hand, I can't conceivably, uh, think of anyone being able to rationalize under such circumstances. 

I mean, you are pure emotion. There's no logic. And there's no reason. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you might be imagining your family now, that you would never is that it? 

SUBJECT: That, this is exactly-- I mean, after having become a father and a husband, I cannot imagine how anyone can possibly accept what was being created in front of his eyes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even knowing that the-- 

SUBJECT: Even knowing, even knowing. Absolutely. Absolutely. And I know that under such circumstances, none of us are able to calmly think. We are all caught up in either a, a, a frenzy of, of fear, and hatred, and emotion, or whatever other kind of, uh, uh, influences that may come upon our faculties. 

But certainly, we would not be able to function normally, or think rationally, or figure things out, figure out the next move. You do what is instinctively natural to you. And instinctively natural to me would be to go out and fight, no matter what happens. 

I wouldn't think of the-- it's like a soldier in combat. You don't think. And you, you don't rationalize. You go out and you fight. If you know that somebody else is shooting at you, you go out and you shoot. 

You don't-- you're not a human being at that point. You're an animal in effect. That's what it is. 

And this is what-- in spite of-- consistently, these people have tried to, uh, lower us to the level of the lowest animal. And yet we have somehow be-- uh, be-- been subject to all human emotions. We were paralyzed, mentally and physically. "We" means adults, and I somehow don't count myself in this part of it at that time. This is something that I have never been able to understand. 

At any rate, I was separated again from my father several months later. I said goodbye to him. We were loaded up on trucks. No, I'm sorry, I'm a little bit ahead of myself. 

It must have been several months, almost a year later. I think it must have been-- afterwards, I found out that the Russians have started a counter attack, and the Germans have suffered. They said because Stalingrad-- whatever reason, the Germans have started to retreat. And as they started to retreat, they were anxious to erase all trace of what was done at that time. And that was the reason for the burnings of all these corpses, and the bodies, and whatever mushed up with the bulldozers, the bones. 

That camp was loaded up, most of it. Most of the people there who were spared were all tradesmen, or professionals, of some sort or another. A good portion of them stayed, remained, and remained behind, and never, never made it. I don't really know what happened to them. I haven't seen physically what was happening to them. 

The rest of us were loaded up on railroad cars. We were given, uh, canned food. And after, I think-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was what year now? 

SUBJECT: I think it was late fall, because I don't remember it being very cold or very hot. I know it wasn't winter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: '42? 

SUBJECT: Maybe '42, '43, I think. It was '43, yeah, '43. Must have been '43. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you were in Plaszow three years? 

SUBJECT: No, about a year, about a year. We were loaded up on railroad, the, the boxcars. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] ? 

SUBJECT: No, no, we went together, together as a group. We're loaded up on boxcars. And after three or four days, we wound up in a new concentration camp, where I had actually seen a huge gate, wrought iron gate, with a nice, beautiful sign above it, which said "Arbeit macht Frei." 

And we were greeted there with open arms by other German-speaking kapos. And this is the first time that I realized that we were in Germany. Name of that concentration camp was Sachsenhausen, and stands not too far from Berlin. I found there many different nationalities, including quite a few Germans. There were communists. There were all kinds of religious, uh, groups, gypsies-- which, by the way, we had a lot of those gypsies in Poland, too, but not in Plaszow, and, uh, a lot of Hungarians, Danes, Norwegians. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jews or political prisoners? 

SUBJECT: Political prisoners. There were a lot of Jews there, but I think that the Jews came only lately. Before the war, from what I understand, this was the concentration camp for political opponents. And we were, again, assigned our workshops. There were works there. 

And we were again marched off to work. The work was-- all these workshops were outside the camp. I remember marching out, and this was already winter. 

And we were walking these wooden boots. And the snow was piling up on the bottom of these boots, like, unbelievable. People were stumbling, and breaking their things. And whoever broke an ankle, or just couldn't make it, was just shot on the spot. So obviously, most of the people could make it to work and back. 

A few months, I think we were there about, maybe, three or four months in Sachsenhausen. A, a group of youngsters was put together and, on a, on a, I don't even remember whether we traveled by truck or by railroad. 

We were taken to a wooded area into a munitions factory. At that time, I befriended a, a young German Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: With your father? 

SUBJECT: No, my father stayed. It was, I was separated from my father the second time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember, did you have a chance to say goodbye? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember ever having said goodbye him. We were simply out, being counted, counted, the usual day, the Appell. And, uh, we were simply taken from the ranks, group of youngsters. 

I remember all youngsters. Uh, I think maybe I was among the younger ones, but the oldest must have been no more than maybe 18 or 19. Uh, we're taken away, and I never saw my father again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you, can you, could you look at each other, like, a little bit or you don't remember? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember that incident at all. I do not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you come back from the munitions factory to Sachsenhausen? Or you stayed at the munitions factory? 

SUBJECT: We stayed there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you and your father at the same-- 

SUBJECT: We stayed there. And we were liberated there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At that munitions factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Um, as you were separated, were there thoughts about the separation or did-- 

SUBJECT: The only thought was on my, uh, I remember that, uh, well, I hope he's going to be all right for the day. It never occurred to me that I'm not going to see him anymore. It's not unusual for a group having been taken away for a day, or even, uh, half a day to do some other work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you expected to-- 

SUBJECT: Fully. Fully. I remember at that time having had a very bad infection. I think I must have gotten hit on the head. No, I injured myself. I don't remember any more how it was. 

The banks there were maybe even lower than in, in Plaszow. And sometimes, when you get up, uh, a little, uh, you know, quicker, you hit your head. And I think I did hit my head. I had an infection. 

They had a regular infirmary there. And I was treated. I was actually treated. So I know that this was not an extermination camp, because those who were sick, or seriously sick, were simply put away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is at the munitions factory. 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, this is Sachsenhausen. This is Sachsenhausen. At any rate, I, of course, have never seen my father again. And for some reason, I befriended, even before we went away, a young German Jew born in Dubek , in, uh, sorry, in Berlin. His name is Max, uh, Lutzhammer. I had just gotten in contact with him after 30 years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now. 

SUBJECT: We were together constantly in that munitions factory. He really, in effect, took care of me. He made sure I always that I had my full ration of food that was given out. 

And I don't know how it happened, but quite often as we were standing in line, I must have been such a miserable-looking character that people were taking pity on me. Because I remembered quite clearly that those people who were standing there with these, um, ladle to ladle out the soup, they were invariably, would go all the way down, and bring it up very slowly, making sure that I had something to eat. It was even in Plaszow that happened. 

And our bread-- the bread, of course, consisted of, I would say, 30% sawdust and 70% flour. But I did have, uh, uh, gen-- I think, more than most, or some other prisoners had. So that was, uh, I didn't ask for it. I must have just looked awful. Anyway, this was fine. And he took very good care of me. 

I have, we have been in this munitions factory for until the end of the war. And I re-- do remember it was around April. That was '45. All work stopped. 

The munitions factory was practically bombed to pieces. There was nothing left of it. And we were left, actually, to our own devices. 

Even the food was not given out anymore. And people started to die of starvation, the first time. And, uh, occasionally, there was, I don't know how some of these prisoners came about the-- there must have been some dead horses from around. 

There was only one or two guards at that time guarding us. It was hardly anyone guarding us. But nobody ran, because we had no place to run. 

And, uh, people were dying, really, an awful lot. I think of the 200 in our group, most of them must have died. Maybe 20 or 30 survived. As the people were dying, whoever could carry them was carrying them down toward the latrines. 

That was the only hole that we had. We didn't even have any tools to-- and we had no other facilities to bury them. And the latrines were piling up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the Germans had evacuated? 

SUBJECT: There was only a few guards left at the gate-- old, old men. Well, anyway, we were-- 

SUBJECT: Although the war was coming to a close, nothing was really more hopeful, the way you talk about. 

SUBJECT: Well, we, we were totally indifferent. I remember I was totally. We were-- at that time, I think begin, beginning to get delirious, because we really had nothing to eat. 

Uh, I was given occasionally by some of the other prisoners some meat to eat. And I didn't want to know what that. Meat was. But I have my thoughts on that subject now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Disturbing thoughts? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, well, I think we were eating dead people that were just, that just died. But at that time, I certainly wasn't aware of it. I remember that most of us were just either delirious or in the last stages. We weren't even able to walk straight. 

But I do remember a ramble through the woods. And I remember-- [CRYING] 

Excuse me. Excuse me. There were tanks going through these woods. Tanks with white stars, and I thought they were Russians. And a few minutes later, there were soldiers with red armbands. And they were speaking English. They were medics. 

[CRYING] 

Well, thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You obviously [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: They, they cut the wires. And they came into the camps. And the next-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Very special moment for you. 

SUBJECT: I realized that the war was at the end. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Only then. 

SUBJECT: Only then. I was, I was surprised. I was expecting the Russian language. I did understand some Russian. 

Nobody rejoiced-- no one. I don't think that we were even able to say anything. I think that the soldiers, the, the medics went from one to another. 

And whoever, apparently, was already dying, they left there. Whoever was still breathing, took them on stretchers. And we wound up in a, in an army field hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, do you remember the song in the woods? 

