SUBJECT: I was born in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: Your name? 

SUBJECT: My name is Esther Reich. My maiden name is Gurvich. I was born in Poland and lived there until the war. My parents, my-- 

INTERVIEWER: In this town? 

SUBJECT: I lived in town. I was-- uh, from the age of six, I lived in the town of Kurzhenitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm hmm. 

SUBJECT: This was not a large town, a small town, you know, Jewish population and-- 

INTERVIEWER: How big? 

SUBJECT: I cannot tell exactly how-- how big-- how big it was, but not big. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm hmm. 

SUBJECT: My father was a shochet at mohel, very religious person. And mother was a very nice Jewish woman and came to raise me. I was happy with my upbringing. They sent me to schools, I started schools-- school. 

INTERVIEWER: How many Jews were in that-- living in the town? When you're-- what do you imagine? 

SUBJECT: I'm not sure. Not too many. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm hmm. 

SUBJECT: I started school at a very early age. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents were of what age? 

SUBJECT: My born to-- I was born to-- my father was an older man already. My mother was a lot younger than him. She was about 18, 20 years his junior. And I was born from the second marriage. She had two children, a son and daughter, 11 and 12, from her previous marriage. And they lived with us, and just like a brother and sister to me. 

And at the age of five, I don't-- well, I'm not sure if I was even five. My-- my father sent me to heder. And first-- the first year, I know all-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you stop it for a second? 

CREW: Try and stop it. 

SUBJECT: I was born and lived in Poland. I am a daughter from a-- from a second marriage. My parents gave me a good education. They sent me-- at an early age, they sent me to school, to heder. My father wanted badly a boy. And I was born a girl, so he gave me a boy's education. He sent me to heder. 

By the age of five, I knew all the prayer book by heart. I started Chumash. He was very proud of me. He came to the rabbi's house to listen to me one day when I first started to learn-- to learn Chumash. He was hiding in the back. And to mommy, I said, he wanted to make me believe that God is throwing-- throwing me money for being so good. 

And I remember my rabbi used to come every Friday to my home, have tea with my father. And he used to pay him invitation. And then I, by the age of six-- I was not born in Kurzhenitz. By the age of six, I moved to Kurzhenitz. And then I started school. I went to-- 

INTERVIEWER: What-- you were the only girl in the heder? 

SUBJECT: In the heder, I was only girl, all boys. But then-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was that like? 

SUBJECT: I didn't mind. Didn't bother me. I was a very, very little girl. Didn't bother me a bit. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the boys play with you? 

SUBJECT: Well, they were friendly, little boys. [CHUCKLES] What would you expect? By then, when I-- I-- I moved to Kurzhenitz. I started school and then to a Hebrew school, to Talbot school. I was-- I had very nice teachers. They liked me and I liked them. I was a good student. They had only, I think, six grades there. So then I finished this Hebrew-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like being at school? Do you remember any particular teacher? 

SUBJECT: I remember. I remember a couple teachers. One teacher was from our town, very nice young woman by the name of [INAUDIBLE], I think was her name. And then there was another teacher by the name Chaim Shapiro, I think. I'm not sure. I liked them very much. They always were friendly-- had not only like teachers, but were friends. 

INTERVIEWER: What was a day like in a Jewish school in Poland in the late 1920s? Can you describe a-- a regular day? 

SUBJECT: The-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER: In the morning? 

SUBJECT: We learned everything, not only Hebrew-- Polish and mathematic and history, everything. In the day, well I-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you begin the day from home? 

SUBJECT: Well, from home, I got up, get breakfast. The school was not too far from home. So I walked to school. I used to take lunch with me and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Winter? 

SUBJECT: Winter, I used to go as well. No cows, they had no cows. It was a small town. We had to-- and it was not too far. Used to come home quite late, and then had homework to do. 

INTERVIEWER: What time? 

SUBJECT: 4:00, 5:00 maybe. Wintertime, we-- somebody used to meet me at the school I used to go with all the children. It wasn't at summer. 

INTERVIEWER: Were the prayers said in the morning? 

SUBJECT: Used to say, yes. Even in the public schools, I used to say prayer, too, but not Jewish prayer. We had a rabbi also. He taught us Chumash and Tanakh, if you know what it-- everything. We learned a lot. 

And then-- when I finished the school, I went to a-- to a Polish school. And we had-- we had school on Saturdays. And my father was, as I told you, very religious. And he wouldn't allow me to go to attend school on Saturdays. So he went to the-- to the head of the school, to the kierownik, was it called in Polish, and ask him, explain to him. And he allowed me to stay home as long as I'll make up the work, the school work. 

So I was-- every Sunday I used to go to. The ones who attended Saturday school, usually non-Jewish girls. Had the homework from them and make it up. And it was fine. And after I finished this-- 

INTERVIEWER: What is-- what were your grades at school? 

SUBJECT: A's and B's. It was four or five, so we didn't have A's and B's-- three, four, five. Two was failing. So it was like a C here, four a B and 5 and A. I usually had fours and fives. And then when I finished the school, it was-- I decided to take bookkeeping, something-- 

INTERVIEWER: Before you come-- can you describe a typical Shabbos at home? 

SUBJECT: Oh, Shabbos. 

INTERVIEWER: How would it begin, beginning from Friday? 

SUBJECT: Friday night, Friday, well, we-- my father used to start it even earlier than-- than everybody else. He was very religious. And then there was a shamas called. He used to go over to-- go and holler bentsch licht telling everybody Shabbos starts, to light candles. So every-- everybody-- 

INTERVIEWER: Shamas would go to the streets? 

SUBJECT: Go from street to street and loud, holler loud to bentsch licht bentsch licht So everybody knew Shabbos starts. 

INTERVIEWER: Light the candles. 

SUBJECT: Light candles. So all the stores closed then. And everybody lit candles and-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the shamas doing it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Schmuel the shamas, he was called. I remember his voice. [CHUCKLES] And I remember he used to scare-- he used to go by the post office. And people used to get scared, throw the pins. Everything used to fall out from their hands from-- they used to get scared. They didn't know what it means. But the Jewish knew-- the Jewish knew what it is, so. 

INTERVIEWER: Non-Jewish would be scared by his yelling? 

SUBJECT: They used to get-- from yelling. He used to yell very loud, very loud. So then after lighting the candles, my father used to-- to go to school-- to shul. And then he came home, kiddush. Had a nice Shabbos meal. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like? 

SUBJECT: The meal? 

INTERVIEWER: The kiddush, your father coming home, the meal. 

SUBJECT: It was very-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's a holiday mode. 

INTERVIEWER: You're back at home. 

SUBJECT: I'm back at home. 

INTERVIEWER: You see it. You're sitting in the room. Can you describe that evening? 

SUBJECT: The-- the house looked very nice, the smell of the food and the candles and everything. My mother used to say the prayers at home. Father used to come in with a happy smile at Shabbos. And then the table was set in the house. Everything, used to say, saying the kiddush very nicely. And Shabbos meal-- it was very festive. 

He-- he-- read his books, his-- whatever he wanted. And go to bed. In the morning, go again to show my mother's Shabbos. My mother used to go in the morning to show to both of them. No cooking on Shabbos. The meal was prepared before Friday afternoon. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go to shul in the morning for Shabbos, on Shabbos? 

SUBJECT: When I got older, not every Shabbos and holidays, I was in shul. No cooking or nothing. Everything was prepared on Friday before-- before Shabbos. And then after-- after shul again, kiddush, Shabbos meal. 

And then my-- my sister, the-- a daughter from his first marriage lived-- lived across the street. Used to visit here. Then lie down for a while and take a nap and then go again to shul. And [INAUDIBLE] came home, say Abdullah, Abdullah. And this was the-- Shabbos was over then. 

INTERVIEWER: What holiday do you like most? 

SUBJECT: What holiday? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. What is the one that you like most, that you remember most? 

SUBJECT: Passover was the holiday I like-- I liked most. Well, it was a holiday-- I liked the baking of the matzah. Used to bake it-- and that we had special plates. You bake the matzah, the preparations, everything. And-- and I also-- it's a small town. Everybody had to get dressed in their things. And it was a holiday a week long. And I liked it more than any other holiday. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one particular Seder? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Our Seders used to last very long. My father was saying, praying a lot. People used to stand under the windowsill, listen to him. And then [INAUDIBLE]. Every-- every-- every little thing he observed, it was very interesting. 

Well, I also liked Sukkot because I always-- my father used to come home for the holidays, for Sukkot. And we-- he always had friends over. The house was full with people. And him I liked very much. I enjoyed his company. This was a happy time for me. Every holiday was nice. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- can you describe your father? 

SUBJECT: The look, or what? 

INTERVIEWER: Every-- the look, what kind of man he was, in detail. 

SUBJECT: He was not a young man, but he was very educated, especially in Talmud. He was so honest. He never said a lie in his life. Till he was-- the-- the rabbis from the surrounding towns used to look for his advice. You know, that in theory, you know what it is like. He was presiding. We had-- 

INTERVIEWER: In-- Tanakh. 

SUBJECT: Tanakh, yes. And if somebody had to-- we had no banks. Like-- after the tour, somebody had to, like to deposit money. He was the bank. They trusted him more than anyone. 

And he was tall, beard, gray beard, peyois. He was always-- he wore a long smock. He was a real Hasid. 

INTERVIEWER: A caftan? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah. Real Hasid. I loved him very dearly. He was very-- very nice. Honest, nice, no words even to describe his-- I cherished my father very much. Also my mother was a very nice Jewish woman. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe her? 

SUBJECT: Well, always trying the best for her children. She always encouraged me to learn, to know more. My father was-- was against me going to Talbot. It wasn't too-- religious enough for him. But she insisted. It's an education. She should get it. 

And he always listened to her. She was-- she was also very religious. She came from a very nice family. She had here, in this country, she had-- one of her brothers was a rabbi. He wrote several books. One was a psychiatrist-- a psychiatrist. He wrote books that God maybe, maybe had heard from him. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened afterwards? 

SUBJECT: Devoted her life to her children, to her family. 

INTERVIEWER: Pardon? 

SUBJECT: I say, my mother devoted her life to her children, to her family, very good to everyone. 

INTERVIEWER: You finished the Talbot, and then you went-- 

SUBJECT: And I went to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Public school? 

SUBJECT: Public-- to public. This is like high school. I don't know. It's called [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like to transfer to a non-Jewish school for the first time? 

SUBJECT: Well, we had many-- I had many friends, all the Jewish children and their friends. And I the non-Jews were friendly. And they were friends-- we've been friends with everyone. It was not bad at all. They teach us very nice, very nice teachers. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there friends among from-- among the gentile population? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. In fact, every Sunday I used to go to a gentile girl to-- for-- for the homework. They were always very-- the parents always were very nice. Always nice. We had lunch. We had gentile friends too. Hitler, after the war, they all turned-- they became different. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. So what happened later? You went to public school and? 

SUBJECT: After when I finished this school, I decided to take up bookkeeping. This was-- this was a very good profession in Europe. This means after you-- could make a living. My father was an older man and my mother was much younger. I thought I'll have to support her, maybe. So I-- and to go away far, I couldn't. They needed me at home. 

So I had a private teacher. I took-- taught me bookkeeping. He was a very good teacher. And I don't exactly remember how long-- how long this course took. But then after I finished this course, I was practicing. 

He-- he worked for a company. He did the books there. And I helped him there. I worked there with him. So this was part of my study. After you finished, this was-- you couldn't get a job without a year of practice and-- and a job. So I-- I just started practicing there. 

And the war broke out. I came out once from-- from this place of work and I saw posters. And the posts saying the-- the Germans declared war. I don't remember exactly what it says. And the Poles. So ended three days, in three days. 

And we had Russians. The Russians occupied, invaded our territory, our country, I guess. And we had soldiers stationed in the house, over the houses and laid around. They all settled. And one day, a Russian man came and knocked on my door. And he said, somebody told me-- I was told that you-- you know bookkeeping, and we are in need of bookkeepers. Would you come and work for me? He worked-- their place of work was not too far. You-- you couldn't tell them no. And I needed the money also. 

And so I think-- this was before holiday. I think this was before Passover. So my mother told him, after the holiday, she'll come, she'll report to you. She said-- he said, fine, and he left. And I went. And I worked there until about-- for about two years. That's what I did. As long as they stayed, the Russians, there. And he treated very nice. He treated me very good. He taught me a lot. I learned a lot from him. 

INTERVIEWER: Was life any different? 

SUBJECT: It was a lot different. It was really-- no religion at all. No-- they had a day of-- it's called-- it was called Day of [INAUDIBLE]. I think this was on a Wednesday, no holidays. The rabbis, priests were not cared at all. Some of them were sent to jails even. But it was no different-- Jew or non-Jew, this was not-- and that was-- I was paid good now. He taught me a lot and he was the head bookkeeper. But then he taught me everything he knew, and I took over his job. He became the-- the head of the company, director. And they paid me very good. And until one day. 

INTERVIEWER: At that time, did you think that the war will get-- start again? That things would get worse? 

SUBJECT: The war was going on, but the Russians-- the war was still going on everywhere, but the Russians-- I could probably tell-- invaded our territory. And we told you. They'll stay. We thought. But suddenly-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you heard about the war in the rest of Europe? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. I know the war-- the war was in full swing still. But we had, you could say, a normal life for two years. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you know about the war? How did you find out? 

SUBJECT: They used to get the paper in the office where I worked. And I used to read it once-- 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember reading in the paper? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember too much, but details where they were-- where the Germans are, how the war is going. I don't exactly remember. It's so many years ago. But I knew the war still was still on. 

INTERVIEWER: And then? 

SUBJECT: And then suddenly, one day, they all packed the office, everything. The papers was left. They left behind everything but took the families and their belongings, and disappeared in a couple hours. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? 

SUBJECT: The Russians. Me and another Jewish girl. All the documents we had there, the papers-- we were afraid that maybe they'll come back and this will get lost. Who could get blamed? So we took it down the cellar, we dug a-- we hid it under the-- we dug a little-- 

INTERVIEWER: Hole in the ground. 

SUBJECT: --hole in the ground and I put it in there. But-- but then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know at that time that the war between Germany and Russia had started? 

SUBJECT: The-- the war with German and Russia was going on, but not in our-- not where we were. But [INAUDIBLE] the Germans invaded again our country. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember of the German invasion into your town? Can you describe it in detail what your experience was? 

SUBJECT: Well, as soon as we heared it, not too happy. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you hear? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: They said, the Germans are coming, they are over here, the Germans are coming. And suddenly, the townspeople started-- not all of them. Many were very nice. But some of them started looting Jewish and the Jewish homes. And bidding. One-- one Sunday was it, I think. We saw rocks. We saw rocks flying in the air. So I took my mother and father, and went out from the house, crossed a little river, went on to the other side of the town. There was a non-Jewish neighborhood. We thought we'll hide there. 

There was one Jewish family living, and I knocked on the door, came in the house, and the house was already full with people. Everybody was hiding there. We stayed there all scared, standing, shaking. And it's safe to say, whatever will be, at least it would have a government. Maybe they would stop this. I stayed for a couple hours, and I went back home. On the way home, I met my brother running, bleeding, crying. He and his wife were hiding on the attic. And they found him. And they demanded money. He was a wealthy businessman. Demanded money, gold. I don't-- I don't think he had with him so much. He didn't give them as much as they wanted, so they beat him. 

INTERVIEWER: That was the local population-- 

SUBJECT: The local population. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --between the German retreat-- the Russian retreat and the German occupation that they looted and beat up-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --the Jewish population. 

SUBJECT: This happened once in our neighborhood. Maybe it's happened somewhere else more. But then the Russian government-- the German governments settled. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: And what-- how do you remember the first German soldiers or cars or-- 

SUBJECT: I used to-- used to stop-- stop in in every household. Loot, holler, beat up some Jews. They used to come into-- many times they came to our house, looking around, taking whatever they liked. My father-- they didn't like-- once they-- they saw my father and they said, [? [GERMAN] ?] They wanted to beat him. And I stood in the middle and begged them, please-- in German, as good as I could talk, don't hit-- don't beat him, please. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember what you said? The words in German? 

SUBJECT: [? [GERMAN] ?] They left him. They left him and they went. 

INTERVIEWER: And who were they? 

SUBJECT: German soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: How many? What did they look like? 

SUBJECT: Dressed in uniforms. Yeah, about three or four. This was not the only time. We had them visiting us many times. But most of the trouble gave us the local police. They had volunteers-- volunteers from our town. Young men. Not high-class people. 

Such people, they just volunteered. They just robbed, beat, to kill Jews. They had many of them. And we were afraid of them very much. [SIGHS] It's-- it was not-- at night, they used to visit homes. They knew-- they knew the townspeople. They knew who had-- who had money. Asking for money. Sometimes they looked-- they were looking for young girls. Once, I nearly got raped, but thanks to my dear mother-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you want to tell about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They were really looking for my brother-in-law, my sister. 

INTERVIEWER: Those were Polish? 

SUBJECT: They're police. They're police. Local police. 

INTERVIEWER: Polish police. 

SUBJECT: Yes. They knew my-- he was known for his-- he-- he was wealthy and they were looking for his money. 

INTERVIEWER: For your brother-in-law and sister-in-law. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they happened to-- they were only two people. They had no children, so they used to do in the German occupation. They slept in our home. They were afraid since this beating I told you about-- my brother-in-law being beaten. So they slept in our home one night. A policeman knocks on our door. He asked-- asking Shulamit-- my-- my brother-in-law's name was Shula. Shula here? Is he? And then he was hiding. As soon as he heard him asking, they hid somewhere. 

So he came in and-- in the living room, and me and my mother were standing there. So as long-- as soon as he saw me, he put his arm around my waist and he said to my mother, you go away, leave us alone. She said, I'm sorry, unless you kill me, I'm not leaving my daughter alone. He got so mad. He took the hand away from me. He slapped her face. Her face was full in black and blue for a couple weeks. Meantime, I ran away and I hid. So I-- this-- I was lucky then. And ever since, I slept me and our neighbor's-- neighbor's two daughters slept in a barn in a hiding place. Their father made a hiding place in hay. And I slept there. Since then, we slept there all this time. And there where I hid during the mass killing. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you were afraid that they will come again? 

SUBJECT: They used to go from home to home, look for young woman, look for money. So. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember how this policeman looked? 

SUBJECT: Young. He was very young. Not too tall. Thin. And handsome quite. I don't remember his name. One-- one policeman's name-- no Jew will ever forget-- Bliznut. He was so famous he used to come in at night to a Jew's home-- Jews' homes and stab people to death with knife. Many people he killed like this. And everybody dreaded his name. Only by the mention of his name, we dreaded his-- him. He was a killer. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. That was 1941. 

SUBJECT: And from '41 to '42, until the mass killing, the massacre. 

INTERVIEWER: What else happened in that time? 

SUBJECT: That time, we used to always-- I worked all the time. All the young people-- people-- young people able to work-- I forgot. As soon as the Germans settled in our town, a Jewish committee was organized. And they dealt only with the committee members, whatever they needed. They ordered them to-- people to work-- work, money, go, whatever they wanted. So I was sent out every day to work. Most of the work was field work on a farm. 

I also worked cleaning flags. Very hard work. I used to come home, I didn't feel my hands. And they used to-- the-- the Jewish committee used to send us to neighboring farm-- Luban was it called. There we used to stay for a couple weeks at a time. And worked there. And Germans watched over us with sticks in their hands. And whose work they didn't like, beat over the head. I was lucky. They never hit me. But people around me used to get it. 

INTERVIEWER: Regular German soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Germans. They didn't have uniforms, but they were Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Not soldiers. Civilians. 

SUBJECT: Probably. 

INTERVIEWER: Anything else going on or in town about this or complications? 

SUBJECT: Well, once I remember. The rabbi from our town was arrested. They kept him for a couple days. And then they called the committee and said, a dog is laying in the street. Go pick him up. They broke his hand, his feet, beat him and-- and threw him out in the street. And this was a terrible thing. He died shortly. They tortured him for days and then threw him out in the street. Said, a dog is laying in the street. We were hiding. As soon as they came in, they made us wear the yellow stars. A Jew wasn't allowed on the side-- on the sidewalk. And always somebody looting. 

INTERVIEWER: Was the rabbi buried? Was there a funeral? 

SUBJECT: A funeral? Who could make a funeral? He was buried but quietly. You couldn't make-- every-- every holiday was marred with-- every holiday, every event-- I think this was on the high holidays, on Rosh Hashanah. They arrested about-- a group Jews. Gather them in a field, and told them to dig their graves, and then shoot them. And before-- before Passover, I had my sister from-- my mother's daughter was married and lived in a neighboring town, Dolhinow was it called. Dolhinow. She had four-- she had lovely little boys. 

And this was just before Pesach. We heard there was everybody got killed out-- a massacre. Mass killing. That-- somebody came from that way. From our town was-- somebody came. They were-- they were visiting their relatives, so I went. Me and my mother went to find out. We hoped my sister survived. But they told us the bad-- they told us that she got killed with her little boys. They told us how brave she went to her death. 

They said she was-- everybody panicked, screamed, cried. She was going with her children by her side, just saying, with her head high, well, what is this-- why are you all screaming like this? This is God's wish and I have to accept it. And she got killed. Her husband survived but later also got killed. Not for too long. This was our Passover. This was our Rosh Hashanah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ask your father why? He was a learned man, a religious man. Did you ask about God? 

SUBJECT: He-- he used to say, the Jews-- the Jews suffer one for the other. There are bad-- people are sinners. Some people are sinners, and we suffer for it, for-- well, he never blamed God. 

INTERVIEWER: You did ask? Or not? 

SUBJECT: I didn't ask him, but that's what his view was always. Jews suffer. Jews suffer one for the other. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think of it as a young girl? 

SUBJECT: What did I think? Who knows. It was terrible. We all thought, why? Why? That's all we ask each other-- why? But that's all we could-- no-- nobody had an answer for us. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- did you expect it to happen to you? 

SUBJECT: Sure. Everybody expected this. The day-- this was in September, I think. 

INTERVIEWER: 1942. 

SUBJECT: 1942. Yes. In the morning, my mother said, I just heart the town is surrounded by the Germans. And this is probably how it end. This is-- and then she says to me, go, my child, go. She knew I always used to sleep there. Go. 

INTERVIEWER: Sleep where? 

SUBJECT: I told you I slept in the hiding with a couple more girls. So she said, go, my child, go. She never-- she and my father never wanted to hide. It was-- they would not survive laying in a little-- like a hole for days. They couldn't do it. So they sent me-- sent me away. And this is the last time I saw my parents. I was there in this hiding place. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember leaving them and saying goodbye? 

SUBJECT: I remember that my mother said to me, go, my child, go. And she says, "Geh, mein kind, geh!" And I looked at her and looked at them like this is-- I felt this is the last time I'd see them. I couldn't-- I couldn't wait too long. I was very much scared. And this-- my mother tells me to go, I went. I looked, and turned back, and looked again. And I rushed out. And this is-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see in that last time that you looked back? 

SUBJECT: A couple frightened people. That's all. Then I went in this hiding place. This was in a barn and the attic. They made-- in hay, they made a small hiding place. And I was-- the family next door-- a husband and wife, and three daughters, and a grandson, and me. We were close to each other. Just not moving around for three days. We heard the cries, the shooting. And the smell of the burning bodies. They gathered all the Jews in a barn at the end of this town and put a burning fire. 

And the first-- on the first day of our hiding, a neighbor of ours brought the Germans in the barn. I heard her voice. I recognized who she was. And told them, search this barn, I know they're hiding here. And they searched and looked. Swords in the hay, picking. But we were lucky enough they didn't find us and left us. We stayed there for three days and three nights. On the third day, it's quieted down. We went to a village that night. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear-- but were there any cryings? Did you hear people shouting something, particular words? 

SUBJECT: Oh, my-- oh! Oi, god! My god! Why are you beating us? They are children. They found many-- the second day at night, they were looking over the-- the hiding places. They found many people, children. We heard children's screams. Mothers-- don't hit her. Please. Why are you doing it to us? Don't shoot us, begging. And then on the third night, it's quieted down. Just the smell of burning bodies. So I walked out. I could hardly walk after sitting down for-- for two-- two days-- three days like this. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think of your family while you were hiding? 

SUBJECT: I thought of no one else. I saw before my eyes my poor parents. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: As soon as I-- for the first day, I thought-- I thought all day, my parents are probably getting now killed. I was sitting down like this with my hands in prayer. And that's all-- like this, crying quietly. Probably my mother and father are now dying. That's all I had in my mind. You'd think I wanted to leave. I didn't. I didn't even wanted to leave. But you have to go on. What can you do? 

INTERVIEWER: The-- do you remember the prayer? 

SUBJECT: My prayers-- 

INTERVIEWER: On that day? 

SUBJECT: I didn't really pray. I just-- God help us, God help us, help. That's all I said. Couldn't-- we were trying not to talk because-- just in my heart I prayed. 

INTERVIEWER: For what? 

SUBJECT: I really didn't know. Believe me. Just not to get killed, not to get beaten, not to get-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you imagine a miracle that might happen? 

SUBJECT: After all-- after all this time, got killed, killed out, I didn't-- I didn't believe in miracles anymore. Just I didn't want to get killed from the-- from the German-- from the hands of the murderers. Just, well. Then on the third night, we walked out and we went. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Quiet. It was dark, in the middle of the night. Nothing. This family I was with, he knew all the roads and everything. And he took us to a non-Jewish family he knew. They left us in. They fed us. I don't exactly remember how-- how long it was. Didn't stay long. She just told us-- the woman said she had Jews-- Jews are hiding in the-- in-- in-- what woods, she told him. He knew. And we went there. We went looking for the survivors. And we went. They were hiding in dense woods. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the walk to that forest? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's-- it was not too pleasant. We were very scared. It was-- but we went. It was a long walk. It's-- we were afraid we won't find them. But finally, we got there and I just happened-- I took-- my couple-- a couple of cousins of mine were also escaped. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find anyone? 

SUBJECT: The-- the woman we went to from the village told us that she had-- Jews are hiding in this-- she told this man, in the [INAUDIBLE] was it called. Dense-- a very dense forest. And we went there. He knew all the-- all the roads and all-- everywhere. So he brought us there and I found not too many Jews but-- not only from our town. There were people from other towns too. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the first person you found? What was the-- how did you find-- 

SUBJECT: We cried. All of us cried. And then this night, we als-- made a minion. We prayed and we said Kaddish. All the men said Kaddish. Everybody cried. They talked about all the-- who survived, what they heard, what-- everything people knew. And then I met a couple of my cousins. One cousin, his wife, and three small children came to the woods. And another cousin and his son. So I was left with them. Didn't-- I didn't stay any longer with my neighbors. I stayed with them. 

And the days-- we used to hide. And at night, we had to go out to look for food to the-- to the surrounding villages, knocking on people's doors, asking-- like beggars, asking for a piece of bread. And many people helped. Some people slammed the doors in our faces. But the most of them-- a piece of bread, a cold potato, an onion, dry peas. This is-- this the way we lived at night. The fire-- we used to make a fire and lay there. A log was our pillow and-- near the fire on the log. This was our life. 

But not for too long. The Germans find out-- I guess maybe the village people told them that Jews are hiding in the woods. And one day, they surrounded the woods and started shooting at us. The two little children, my cousins, started crying. And this-- as soon as they hear the cries, they came in the woods, they killed many people. Some, they wanted-- I was running. 

And I hit-- I saw the bullets-- bullets passing by my head. I just was lucky the bullets didn't hit me. That's all. And then not too many were left. This cousin of mine, and his wife, and one child got killed. The little boy followed me and he survived. And my other cousin, his son survived. And the few survivors left, we left the woods, this part of the woods, went somewhere else. 

INTERVIEWER: How many were you? 

SUBJECT: Not too many, but we went out the woods. 

INTERVIEWER: How many, about? 

SUBJECT: I cannot tell exactly. Maybe 40, 50. But then we met-- in the other woods, we met people from-- people from other towns. And we stayed with them, lived in-- summertime-- summertime, we lived in huts, like the circus, made from branches. Typhus broke out-- broke out. Typhus epidemic. Almost everybody was sick. Many people died again. I was sick, too. I was lucky enough to survive again. No medic-- no medication. No medical help. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, this is late in '42. It's already winter. 

SUBJECT: It's before winter. It's still not winter. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find water? 

SUBJECT: In the woods-- in the woods, I was two years, from '40-- this was maybe in '43. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do during wintertime? How did you cover your-- 

SUBJECT: Wintertime, we lived under the ground. We made homes under the ground. 

INTERVIEWER: You dug? 

SUBJECT: We dug, yes. Holes. And then we chopped trees. We made-- we lived. And then we've been going out. The gross bricks from our-- found it-- we founded bricks and made a little stove. And we lived like this all winter. And then we had to cover up the ground with grass. So nobody should tell-- could tell that people live here. We have to hide. We lived like this. It wasn't-- 

INTERVIEWER: And there weren't-- those were not partisans. Those were just groups of Jewish survivors. 

SUBJECT: Jewish. But then later on, we met partisans, too. Partisans lived not far from us. This was the last year already. 

INTERVIEWER: But not-- for the time being? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

SUBJECT: Just to-- just hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me, how did you find water, food? 

SUBJECT: We used to go out to villages and ask for food. I told you. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. That was enough. 

SUBJECT: A bag on our shoulder, go and knocking on the door, and asking for-- for something to eat. 

INTERVIEWER: And there were no Germans or Polish police in the villages? 

SUBJECT: No, no. We didn't see anyone. But that-- the first time, I told you, when the Germans surrounded the woods probably, probably somebody told them about. But they knew already the-- so I didn't, but some people, older people, knew the villages and they knew the people. And we went where it's safe to-- where it's safe at night. And some people felt sorry and they helped us. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe a day or a night in the forest? A typical day or a night, that you remember? 

SUBJECT: At night, used to-- we used to go out. Almost every night, go out to different villages. It was dark. And not everybody could find the road. The-- the forests were very dense. It was hard. So we used to-- when we-- when-- when we left the-- when we left the woods, we put-- used to put down a branch or something to know how to come back. [SIGHS] And we used to-- it wasn't too pleasant going in the dark at night and being afraid first and right before, we used to look around and see if it's quiet, and then go and knock on the doors. Not everybody was too nice. But that's what we have. In order to survive, we had to go on like this. 

The daytime, we used to sit quietly under a branch somewhere, just tried to hide. Summertime, we used to pick berries, mushrooms, and at night, cook it on the fire. It wasn't easy. We never stayed too long in one place. We were afraid they'll find us, they'll find out Jews live here. 

INTERVIEWER: So what would you do? 

SUBJECT: We used to move from woods-- from place to place. 

INTERVIEWER: And dig new holes? 

SUBJECT: In summertime, we didn't need holes. But wintertime, we usually stayed till winter in one place. It wasn't easy. We had to work very hard to make-- we used to call it [INAUDIBLE]. The last year was-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did people talk about things to each other? Were there any holidays or any event-- 

SUBJECT: In the beginning, we knew-- we knew when the holidays were. But later on, we didn't know even what day it is. We didn't know. The first-- Yom Kippur was-- was a holiday, and every Europe person fasted on Yom Kippur. But the first Yom Kippur, I think we did remember-- we knew when it-- because it wasn't the-- the massacre was just before the high holidays, so we all fasted and prayed. 

But the next one, I didn't even know when it is. We didn't know what day it is. We weren't-- I had-- I left my home in a dress. I had shoes on, a dress, and a coat on. And that's what I had all the time. We couldn't wash it. No iron. Nowhere to wash it, no soap, no nothing. So at night, we used to take off the underwear and, on top-- over the fire like this, sterilize it. Like, I don't know. And that's what kept us from itching, from-- and later on-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were there sometimes discussions among people? Did they talk about certain things? 

SUBJECT: We always talked. 

INTERVIEWER: What about? 

SUBJECT: We talked-- we hoped maybe a miracle would get interest in us. Maybe somebody will help us. Maybe they'll do something for the-- the Jews are getting killed, and killed, and killed. No place for them. Maybe somebody will get interested. We hoped and hoped. And it-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any rumors? 

SUBJECT: No, no special rumors. We used to hear airplanes and hide. We always tried to --- Once, me and my friend went, at night, to a village to get some food. And we heard airplanes over our heads. And suddenly, we hear a voice-- devochki. This is in Russian-- girls. We got so scared. We thought that the Germans. And we ran all the way to the woods back. And everybody moved away from this part of the woods. But then later, we find out this was a partisan, a Russian. A parachute let him down. But we were so scared, so we ran. And ever-- we came-- we moved away from this part of the woods. We thought, somebody is following us. 

INTERVIEWER: So you did not know what day it was-- 

SUBJECT: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: --what happened, what was going on in the war? 

SUBJECT: We had no news. Sometimes the village people used to tell some-- they would tell us something, but not much. You know? 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to other Jews. 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't know much about. But the-- the second year, then we'd been living close to partisans. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. I mean, did you know anything about Stalingrad? 

SUBJECT: We knew nothing about- nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing. 

SUBJECT: I-- maybe some people knew. I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, how did you meet the partisans? 

SUBJECT: Just accidentally, they-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: First, we got scared. We've been laying in our [INAUDIBLE], hiding. And we heard voices. You know, how we-- I-- we thought it's Germans. What can you do? They caught us already. We cannot escape or something. But then later, they started talking in Russian and in Jewish. And they told us who they are. So we're very happy. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they look like? How-- 

SUBJECT: They looked just like ordinary people. Very poorly dressed. Some had guns and ammunition. Some didn't. One, I remember, gave me-- they used to come, and visit, and bring us sometimes food. Sometimes linen, a piece of linen. One gave me a piece of linen, and I made a dress. Also needle and thread from the parachutes. The material-- living became a little bare then. They helped us. We felt safe having them around. But then-- 

INTERVIEWER: They were in continuous contact with you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. But we-- once in a while, they used to drop in. One I remember from [INAUDIBLE]. His name was Menashe. He was very nice. He used to come-- he used to come in and help us sometimes. He knew my cousin. Then we started talking, and I knew who he was, and he brought us bread and material, linen. And it was happy. It was good. But later on, this was already the last-- the last year in the woods. Suddenly-- 

INTERVIEWER: 1940-- 

SUBJECT: Four. We saw the partisans moving out. And quick moving out from this part of the woods. And I started run after them and ask them, please, tell us what's going on. They said, we hear that the Germans had gone to-- are getting ready to attack us. They know we are living here. We grabbed our package-- our package and ran after them. We were afraid to be left here. 

They went into-- they brought us into ditches. The mud was up to here to us. It was-- we'd been sitting for days in the mud like this. And suddenly, the Germans surrounded the ditches. And they started-- they started shooting. And the answer would fire back-- the Ger-- the partisans. They started-- they came-- they came close to the ditches and they-- they started to sink in the mud, so they got scared and ran away. 

INTERVIEWER: The Germans? 

SUBJECT: This time, we didn't suffer any losses. The Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see the German soldiers close to you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Not too close. We saw them. Yes. And they also met there a Jewish family. They were kind of related to me. They lived there. They'd been hiding there all through the-- through the war. 

INTERVIEWER: In the marshes? 

SUBJECT: Near the-- near the ditches near there. But then after this, they left. They went to-- they went with us. And they lived together with the rest of the Jews. And then this was, I think, about the end of '44. We heard that the Russians are coming close. And then we are liberated. Well, some people rejoiced. 

Many people were together with sisters, brothers, fathers. I was alone. I cannot say I was happy. I was happy all this is over. I couldn't take it anymore, as was the suffering. But then I started thinking, I'm going home. Who do-- am I going to? Who do I have home? My family? Nobody. I cried a lot. But at least I was happy at least it's over. This war's over. And one day, we went back to our hometown. 

The first time, the entrance to the hometown was terrible. We all cried. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: The homes-- empty homes. Not a soul and not a-- nobody. But just life has to go on with-- 

INTERVIEWER: You went into your own home. 

SUBJECT: I went to my home. Nobody was there. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that? 

SUBJECT: [SIGHS] Empty. Not a living soul. I couldn't take it. I couldn't stay there too long. I cried all the time I stayed there, and I ran away, and I didn't-- I didn't go in there anymore. Because it reminded me of my father, and my mother, and the place that my mother-- my father used to sit, my mother was. So I couldn't. I lived with my cousin in her home. About 9, 10 months, I got myself a job again. 

INTERVIEWER: That little boy that followed you-- 

SUBJECT: He came back with-- he was with-- I-- my cousin. I forgot to tell you that. My cousin and her son-- she was a widow and she-- she survived, she, and her son, and this little orphan, this little boy. He was with us. And I supported him. All the time, I was going out and supporting-- begging for food and bringing it. He-- he was helpless. 

INTERVIEWER: How old was he? 

SUBJECT: He was four or five maybe. Very little boy. A blond little boy. And my cousin also, she was-- she couldn't find anywhere. She wouldn't-- she would always get lost by herself, so I used to take her at night, help her carry the packages. So I-- I helped them a lot. 

INTERVIEWER: So you saved two people, at least. 

SUBJECT: I say I saved more. And when I-- when we first came to the woods, I found there a widow. She was-- and her sisters, a couple of her sister's children survived. She had-- 

[KNOCKING ON DOOR] 

INTERVIEWER: We are changing the roll of tape. 