CREW: All ready. 

SUBJECT: I suppose the-- to go back to where I was, the third, uh, difference, in a way, is the experience of answered prayer, um, which I think is actually a-- a normal and important part of biblical New Testament experience. And it's not, uh-- I can think of only one case, uh, well, I can actually think of two-- two cases in my life where a Jew has actually spoken to me about answered prayer, yeah. 

One was at a wedding recently, in-- a Jewish wedding in London that I went to, where a-- a London hairdresser said to me, uh, that he was in a reform-- this-- the wedding was in a reformed synagogue. And I asked him whether he was reformed. He said he wasn't reformed. He didn't need other people to tell him which bits of the law he needn't keep-- uh. 

CREW: Oop. 

SUBJECT: I asked him what he thought of Jesus, and he said when he went to Israel, what he imagined would be the most moving moment for him, uh, would be to see the Wailing Wall and the temple and so on. What had actually been the most moving moment for him had been, uh, the Garden of Gethsemane, the places-- place where Jesus prayed and wept alone before his crucifixion, and that-- that he had read the New Testament, that he admired Jesus. The instance in Jesus' life that he found he related to most was the cleansing of the temple, Jesus opposing religious institutional authority and so on. 

And-- and then he said to me, uh, he did believe in God. He believed in God because he'd had a sign. Uh, uh, a year ago at Hanukkah, his father had been ill. And the doctors had said he will die, and you can take him home to die. He may as well die at home, happy as here. 

And he had prayed. He said to me, he said, I really prayed, not a formal prayer. But I really asked God. And now a year later, my father is alive, and I know I have received a sign. 

Uh, and the other case is, in a sense, a very trivial one. It's my mother, uh, and we find it very difficult to talk on, uh, religious things, I suppose, because my convictions are strong. And for her to accept them would be to deny the thing for which her parents died at Auschwitz. And, uh, probably because she-- she wasn't a religious person, isn't a religious person, I think that's a more-- almost a more awful thing to her than if-- than if she had been. 

So we never talk. Uh, but she was quite ill. And-- and when she got, uh, got better, she said she wrote in a letter-- I actually, um, it seems that your prayers are answered. But you must never quote this back at me. Um, but answered prayer is actually a very important part, an intimate part of-- of my experience of New Testament Christians who say, I'm a pessimistic introvert. So it's-- it's never actually been something that's come very easy-- easily to me. 

For example, the college that I'm in-- small seminary with real financial problems, part of an English secular university, we pray about financial problems. Uh, um, and we found that God answers, uh, our prayers-- not necessarily very dramatically, though, I mean, sometimes really quite dramatically. But the very concept that, in a sense, that God is near to be called upon, uh, is there. 

And I suppose we pray to, um, uh, an example-- well, this has been years. My heart is-- is Zimbabwe, Rhodesia. I mean, we have prayed regularly about it-- not in the belief that, uh, a just settlement in Zimbabwe will bring in the Kingdom of God on earth, but in the belief that God, even now, cares about the world and has a plan and purpose in history, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you said where Jesus comes-- 

SUBJECT: Not in the belief that a just settlement in Zimbabwe will-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said before when Jesus comes, evil turns back. 

SUBJECT: Oh, you're going back to that. It certainly-- it has been my experience, uh, that where Jesus is acknowledged as Messiah and Lord and Savior that evil is actually turned back in the lives, uh, of people. Uh, and the Holocaust-- I mean, it's-- if I can give you an example or two, and then let you come, um-- I suppose an example that can be seen in English national life, uh, is the result of a movement know as the-- as the Methodists, the-- the movement from which the Methodists and the Evangelical movement in the English church came. 

Uh, where, um, the simple preaching of New Testament Christianity as a personal-- and a belief that God will personally act-- Jere-- Jeremiah's terms, which is where, in a sense, I suppose, I've thought about it most, that God would write his law in the hearts of people, actually leading one generation to change to individual lives a new part, a new morality, a new joy, and that in the second generation, uh, to the reform of the abolition of slavery, the reform of English industrial legislation, um, and to reform of the tone of English public life. That would be an example, uh. 

And then, I suppose, one knows of more personal ones, I mean, people who've actually-- who I've seen as students or in, uh, in the city in which I worked as a parish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Michael, wouldn't it-- it make sense for a Jew, for whom the world is not his home-- 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --and, uh, for whom the world is a-- I mean, the preachings of Jeremiah and the faith of Moses is going to take place. And, uh, almost as a logical extension, the Holocaust must happen. Wouldn't it make sense to turn to Christianity and to find all that you described-- just because of that? 

It's a haven. It's a promise. It's a-- a home. It's a forgiveness, and that when he hears about that, uh, the ha-- the film, it's also a-- a threat that it'll-- it-- the cursed faith is catching up. 

SUBJECT: You must again answer the question. Are you-- are you-- are you saying, do I think like that? Or are you saying-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you offering a-- an und-- a possible understanding? 

SUBJECT: Of how I think? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, a possible understanding, not-- 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm, yes, that's fair. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- in a very encapsulated way and very simplistic, almost, uh, wouldn't it be the appropriate step to take for a fugitive from the Holocaust? Nevertheless-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: The obvious answer to that is no, because very few have done it. Uh, so if it was an obvious step, it's an obvious step that's not been there to people to see. In my case, from my point of view, the decision was taken before I appeared on the scene, because I started life, my thinking life, a baptized-- uh, a baptized person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, but you chose a religious life. That's-- that's choice. You could have grown up and-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yes, yes, it is a choice. But in a sense, it's not only that, because it's-- in my experiences-- I-- I mean, if I go back to my hairdresser who, in a sense, was very attracted to Jesus and so on, uh, the reason he didn't com-- become a Christian, I think, is that he could not conceive, uh, of how he could accept Jesus without denying all that he was in being a Jew. 

Uh, now, to some extent, that's the thing that modern Judaism puts on the Christian Jew. And it wasn't something that it-- I mean, in the first years, that was actually put on a Christian Jew. Uh, and it's something that was done for me before I thought about it. I mean, to that extent, I was baptized before I, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're-- 

SUBJECT: --breathed the air of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were relieved of that additional-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --burden. 

SUBJECT: I don't think I'm relieved of it or otherwise, really. I think you can't-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You can't. 

SUBJECT: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You can't. 

SUBJECT: It would be pious humbug of me, uh, uh, to-- to-- to sort of answer the question either way. I mean, to say that I was relieved, which I don't think is true-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is not? 

SUBJECT: No, or to say, uh, that I regret it, because you can't imagine your life in terms other than, uh, the terms in which you first read it. Um, is it an escape? I think that's-- that's-- no Christian from any background in the 20th century avoids that particular question. That's not just a question that is asked of a Christian Jew by Jews. It's actually asked, uh, of every 20th-century Christian by his 20th-century secular contemporary. 

And part of the-- part of the question is, isn't the good news, uh, too good to be true? But it is just possible that good news might be true. And then, in a sense, it's-- I mean, I can't help-- help that. Uh, um, it also, I think, great-- underestimates, um, the security that there is to be had, uh, in Christianity in the 20th century. 

Um, if there was a time when it was worth, um, when there was-- when security was actually to be found in the Christian faith, it's not actually our generation. I mean, in the Western world, Christianity, uh, I think even in America, which makes a great show of being religious, is actually a minority, a small minority interest. And most people are-- are secular individuals at heart. Um, and what's true in this country is dramatically more true in Europe, I think, which is, after all, where I live. 

Uh, um, and I suppose what I mean-- what I-- the way I actually feel about it is that I'm a double alien, not-- and sometimes that I've come home. Uh, uh, I mean, I think you are an alien as a Jew. I truly do believe that. And I think if you're a Christian Jew, you're even more so. I mean, uh, tell you I visit America every s-- six years or so, I suppose, and go around all the family, uh. 

And-- and the topic of religion is walked around with extreme care, of course, because actually, it's too explosive a one to be, uh, to be talked about, because it is-- it is actually something that alienates me-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hmm. 

SUBJECT: --from the one human community to whom I actually do, uh, do belong, uh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned the tension with your mother-- 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --around particular having lost her parents. 

SUBJECT: Yes-- I-- I don't have much more to say. Go on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, they were your grandparents. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what of her-- 

SUBJECT: I suppose the difference between her and me on it would be that, uh, to her, to be a Christian is to deny being a Jew. And that's not-- that's, to my mind, not the way I see it at all, uh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, what do you-- topics you choose in your sermons. 

SUBJECT: I probably preach from the Old Testament about as often as the New. I, uh, I'm only conscious of the comments that other people make to me, which is that I use the Old Testament a lot, which I think is true, um. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm, but what? 

SUBJECT: Well, I actually follow the basic principle of preaching on the passage set in the set readings of the Church of England, uh, so I-- um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you-- 

SUBJECT: So within certain limits, that's actually an attempt to be an objective control on my preaching. Um, uh, I suppose I do preach on, I mean, sort of common themes, so God as creator, God as the Lord of history. Uh, the fact that I talk to you distorts my answers in a way. 

I mean, for example, a common theme, uh, is the relevance, um-- the big controversial issue in the Church of the New Testament was the relationship of Jew and Gentile in the church. Uh, and the underlying issue there was, would Gentiles, uh, coming through Jesus, uh, to accept the Kingdom of God and so on have to keep the Law, by which was meant both the real provisions of the Torah and also the traditions of Judaism. Uh, and it's an issue, uh, which has considerable application to the contemporary English church, where you have traditional church people, who actually want new converts to accept the whole paraphernalia-- the whole religious paraphernalia of contemporary English church life, which is in itself, uh, you know, a rich and noble tradition, but is alien to people from a different and contemporary world. 

More-- more-- and the analogy and the principles underlying it are very important. So that's a topic on which I, for example, often preach. Uh, um, I preach about the Cross of Christ a lot. Uh, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you say more? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes I could. Uh, I suppose I often-- I often think about it and preach about it purely in terms of, uh, Jesus, the Son of God, bearing my sins in his cross on the tree, Christ dying for the sins of the world, Jesus dying for the sins of the world, that sort of thing. If I preach for Jews in the congregation, I think I would be much more, uh, careful, because my experience of my own family is that, uh-- is that I have met very few Jews, even intellectual Jews, who actually understand what Christians do and don't mean by that sort of assertion. 

And it actually-- they think it to be found nearer, uh, either a belief in three gods or, uh, a denial of the transcendence of God than it actually, uh, is in-- in-- in careful Christian thought. And I suppose that's partly because a lot of Jews come from-- have come from Catholic countries, uh, where the party picks up its own. So that's uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You preach a cer-- a certain reconciliation, I understand. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, but reconciliation, not that we should be reconciled, but that we have been. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have been. We are no different. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, what have you-- you've mentioned what you feel for-- for German merchandise, for Germans. What if you meet a survivor or someone who's come out from Auschwitz? And I don't know whether-- your grandparents might have been killed in Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they were killed in Auschwitz, 1944. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you do if someone in this room has been in Auschwitz? Maybe if you would not think about it, but just say-- 

SUBJECT: Ah, yes-- I suppose I would listen to them. That's my reaction, um-- what more would there be to do? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you curio-- would you be curious? Do you-- are you very curious? Is there a familiarity? Is it awesome, the number? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you met this person before? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I don't think I have, actually. Um-- yes, I think I would be all those three-- three things, really, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which are? 

SUBJECT: What was the third you said? Curious, awesome, and something else-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you met them before? 

SUBJECT: No, no, I haven't. But I think you said something else as well. Um, uh-- I would certainly want, yes-- I would be interested to know. But I suppose, uh-- I w-- I wouldn't necessarily place a very high, uh, weight on my curiosity. I mean, I wouldn't actually make them go through things they didn't need to go through, merely to satisfy a young man who'd hardly suffered. No, I think, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm, any other words? 

SUBJECT: Awe is not a bad word. Uh, what I reflect on, really, is what would be the difference between if I had met somebody, uh, who survived with nothing from Vietnam-- I mean a Vietnamese, one of the Vietnamese boat people on the one hand, or if I met, uh, um, say, a Kikuyu-- I mean, I come from Kenya, a Kikuyu Christian, uh, um, who'd lost his family and his health and so on for his Christian faith in Kenya, and which, in a sense, is a position I have met. 

Uh, I mean, I think of an old-- an old man, an-- an African clergyman, uh, you know, whose wife was cut up and who'd had all his teeth knocked out and was left for dead, but happened to live, um, uh, continued as a pastor and came to our parish with, uh, one of the men who'd actually been part of the gangs that had done that sort of thing. Because the Mau Mau, the movement in Kenya, actually took the form of an anti-Christian thing in-- in the Kikuyu tribe. 

Uh, and I think my feelings in the three would be quite different, really, uh, wh-- when I've met [INAUDIBLE], this marvelous old African clergyman. I mean, a very intelligent man. Yeah, because in a sense, the man's a Christian, I actually feel a sweetness in it, uh, because I-- uh, I know that he knows where that suffering led in his own life and that it's not actually-- I mean, it's odd to say, but it's not a scar in his own life. 

I mean, he's actually forgiven fully, as he travels touring with this man who, uh, killed his fellow pastors, uh, one sinner touring with another, both forgiven, uh, with a strong, and I believe to be true, belief, uh, in a Resurrection and so on. So that would be one direction. Another one, I suppose, would be the-- the Vietnamese boat people, which I suppose would just be, uh, sympathy or something like that. 

I don't know, no. Interesting, new, but different is, I mean, I've discovered how I feel about Afghanistan, because, uh, my view of Islam is that it's a dreadful parody of a God without compassion. But I actually have great admiration for the free dignity of Isl-- of-- of the Afghan people and, uh, felt a real anger as I read in the British press, uh, American interests are being-- the trade or interests of the West are being betrayed. 

And I think, who actually cares for these people and their own dignity, don't like to be walked all over. So it may be that I just actually have no, uh, inner imaginative empathy for the Vietnamese, and actually might have a bit more for the Afghans, uh. I think with a survivor of Auschwitz, the difference, I-- I guess, would be, uh, partly a sense of personal involvement-- I mean, that this is actually, you know, part of my flesh and blood who's been involved in this, um, partly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is that what makes it harder to ask questions about? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't think I-- I don't think I do find it hard to ask questions about it. I think that's a misreading of what I've said, in a way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I thought that-- I thought I understood before that you said that you would find it hard to ask questions of a survivor out of consideration for their feelings or-- 

SUBJECT: All right, yes, I think the same would be true of a-- a refugee from a Vietnamese-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --boat, unless, in a way, I felt they themselves had come to terms with it-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --that I wasn't actually putting a knife in a wound. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is it less likely for a survivor to come to terms with? 

SUBJECT: I've no idea of that. And I imagine it depends partly on a religion's attitude to suffering, doesn't it? Probably, I mean, many Vietnamese boat people were Buddhists-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --who accept suffering. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Right, what about your response to the survivor? You-- you just began to say something about it's your own-- there's a certain, uh, familiarity. 

SUBJECT: Oh, that was the word. Um-- mm-hmm, I suppose the difference-- the difference that I would actually feel quite keenly between that and, uh, a 20th-century Christian martyr-- I feel, in a sense, there have been as many as there have been-- as there were Jews killed under Hitler. Uh, the thing that awes me most, in a sense, about it is, uh, that it's a suffering that went nowhere. 

In a sense, I can-- I can cope with a-- the martyrdom of a Christian, because I actually do understand what was going on. And yet, that's-- that's quote wrong. It's not understand. Um, I think because I can actually see how it flows through to good, it seems to me that-- that the awful thing that I would-- that I-- and I do feel about Auschwitz and the Holocaust and so on is that when I ask myself what God was doing in it, I-- I can see no further than, uh, that he was not allowing the Jews not to be Jews or to forget that they were Jews or something like that. Um, that's a really good-- 

If you asked me what flowed out of the martyrdom of 1700 Kikuyu, for example, in-- um, I can actually show you. If you asked me what flowed out of Auschwitz, I can't show you that. And I know that-- um, yeah, though, I suppose, typically, what you don't quite want me to do, in a way, is to do it theologically. But that is actually how I work, you see. 

It's actually-- the way I feel about Auschwitz is actually the way I work-- the way I feel about the-- the Western world, really. But it seems to me-- yes? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I would like-- let's leave it with Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, but that may not be fair, may it? Um-- you see, the question-- the thing that I said, which is that I don't know where-- where it's going-- the reason that I feel I need to ask the question, uh, b-- is because I actually believe that the bible speaks the truth, which is what my bible, of course, my bible says too, is that-- I mean, that-- that which is that Israel is part of God's purpose. And in a sense, that raises the question of, what is God's purpose in history today? That actually is a question about the Western world. That's why, I suppose, I want to relate it with. But I'm really ready to stop. I'm hot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Unless you would like to say something else-- 

SUBJECT: No, not particularly, no, I'm done. 