SUBJECT: Yes. Then we went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Can you tell us the details about the trip there? Like, Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mostly, you know, you sometimes-- you think in details. 

SUBJECT: It's because you go back and forth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, we can't go-- but the details of your own-- what you saw. What you felt. That's what's important. As you arrived there, what-- so maybe we can ask your first question. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, about-- did you know anything about what was going on? 

SUBJECT: When we were on the-- working? You mean about the rest of the Jews? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: We didn't believe anything. We heard things. We knew of a man that they paid to pull-- to go-- to ride with the train in the direction because we didn't know where the people are going when they were taken out, so that Paul came back and he said that the Jews are being taken into Treblinka, into a place called Treblinka, and they-- he doesn't know what they-- but they don't come out, and he said that some other Poles said that they are killing Jews then, but we couldn't believe that. We couldn't take healthy people, and-- we just couldn't believe. We thought that maybe there were also different kind of work, maybe to factories, maybe. We couldn't believe that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you thinking about your own future? What do you think about yourself? 

SUBJECT: Well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you speak up. 

SUBJECT: About myself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And look. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. I didn't think much because I never believed that I will survive. I knew that we-- we cannot survive this, so my-- oh, I was always thinking, how-- how I'm going to die, and this is what I remember. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT: How? Well, how-- well, we heard about gas, so I was imagining how long we're gonna choke, how long it is. So we were always praying, maybe-- maybe a bum will kill us. And this we were hoping for, so I didn't make any plans. There were people that were-- that-- there's a friend of mine, she used to say, oh. When we will survive, we'll be carried on silver platters. I said, there will be no such thing. It was impossible. When in '44, and we heard there were rumors the Poles-- because we had some Poles in the factory too-- that the Russians are coming, that closing in, so we were-- we were hoping that maybe they will liberate us, but they had time when from Radom before-- this was in May, probably June, we went by foot from Radom to Tomaszow Mazowiecki and the Russians, they remained 30 miles before Radom, and this was a journey without food and without water, and people were being killed. When they saw a puddle on the ground and they wanted to drink, they were shot, and there were people that, when we were marching in the fields, they-- they wanted to hide, to run away. They knew the place, so with dogs, they were pulled out and they were being shot. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is your imagine from this journey? What-- what do you see? 

SUBJECT: It was a terrible journey. It was-- it was just indescribable. Behind us it was going a little wagon and two horses, and whoever couldn't walk anymore went on that wagon. They-- they took them into the woods and-- and-- and-- shoot them. And I mean, at one point I was bleeding between the legs from the sweat, the heat, and I couldn't walk, and the pain was unbearable, and I wanted to get on the wagon because we knew what's happening, because there was-- I saw were the one man was shot, and there were two children put-- there was still that time. Not many, but a few children. So one, a father and a mother with the two children, and they're begging, and they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The father and mother put their children on the wagon. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, but this was a terrible Jew too, yes. He was a Jew that should not have been born, maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He didn't carry them. He put them on the wagon. 

SUBJECT: He-- yes, he couldn't carry them. These children will-- he was the same was killed by the Jews, too. He was a-- a Musa. You know what a Musa is? 

INTERVIEWER 2: A squealer. 

SUBJECT: A squealer. So they didn't want to carry the two children, and they put them on the wagon, and at one point, I-- I was near it and I wanted to, but two friends, two brothers, they grabbed me under the arm and they were pulling me along for miles. I couldn't walk anymore, and then-- and in the evenings, they always managed to give us a field where the weed was cut, which is very-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Stools. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

SUBJECT: Yes. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And once we laid down, we could never pick up our heads. We had to stay put, and that's how we arrived to Tomaszow Mazoweicki and there the men and women were separated, and it was a factory. When we looked in, we didn't know what it was because the gas chambers weren't-- we just imagined how it looked. We couldn't-- we didn't know how it looked, so when the men were taken into this factory, the screams and the cries, and the separation was terrible because we're told that the men are being gassed in this factory, and we were taken, also, to a-- it was like a prison. And it was third day, maybe two days, and we were waiting for trains to be-- to be taken to Auschwitz. One day we went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. 

SUBJECT: This prison, probably, a lot of people were there. It was-- when we came and we sat down, and in five minutes, we felt, like, a pluck on our body. There were lice, like, big roaches, and then what they did to our bodies, it was-- it was unbelievable what went on there, and we stayed there maybe two days, and then the-- the-- with kettle trains, they took us to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was it you came to Auschwitz? What happened at the gates? 

SUBJECT: The way they-- the way they pushed us into the wagons was an awful thing. It was so crowded that there were fights among us. We couldn't breathe, we couldn't stand, we couldn't sit. It was-- I don't know how many people were there, and we-- we arrived to Auschwitz, we didn't know what to expect. We-- the first thing they told us, to undress, and it-- it was a nightmare. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean undress before you came into the camp? 

SUBJECT: No, when we came into the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was it when you entered the gate? Who was standing there when you came? 

SUBJECT: It's just Germans, and the men were taken out too, but they took just away the children from the men, and the-- and the men went on to Germany. We didn't know that-- later out we found out all the children were taken out and brought into Auschwitz and they were all killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your kids? 

SUBJECT: Yes. That time my cousin-- my aunt, the one that we lived with-- she had one little boy, and he was taken away that time, and they also did in a fashion, they never took just the children. They always place the children on the parents. Not necessarily their own, but whoever stood next to the children, well then they placed the children, or they gave them a hand of the child, and then that the children should feel a little bit more secure. They shouldn't be afraid when they walk with a grown up, so many, many people were victims of this, when there was, at the moment, standing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, standing your child meant being selected for the gas chambers. 

SUBJECT: We didn't know that until Auschwitz, but when we told them, they planned-- took-- we had the few children with us without parents like that, Sholem Shpitalnik. And we had two little girls that the parents were shot, so they were among us. So whoever was standing next to these children, they just placed the children on-- on the arms of that adult, that the children should feel more secure, they shouldn't scream, and they were taken away. At that point coming to Auschwitz, we didn't feel much. We didn't think much. We saw that if that there's no way of being liberated. If we're talking to-- the Russians were so close to us, and they had time that we should walk, and we should go to such a journey and come Auschwitz, so we knew that there was-- that-- with me, I never thought for one moment that I will survive or-- and of course coming to Auschwitz was another experience that always without clothes, the selections. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you describe this selection from the very beginning, even wake up that morning, or the evening before? Just what you saw, heard. 

SUBJECT: [SIGH]. You know, when I went through the selections and they were saying, this is Mengel this-- I never looked at him. At that time, I was 16-- over 16, and the embarrassment was still very big. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of being naked? 

SUBJECT: Of being naked, and-- and they would go around the one had developed better the body, or bigger bust. Looking for stronger people, and this today, maybe, it's a different story, but that time it was-- I cannot even tell you that much because I never-- I just remember my aunt was with me-- the one that lived with me, and many times we were looking for a little red brick to color the cheeks to look healthy, so I remember many times she was doing this to me, and so these selections were very degrading. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And that for you, it was not a matter of living or dying, but this degredation, the shame of being there. 

SUBJECT: I didn't think-- I didn't think of time because I knew I'm gonna die. My mind was only preoccupied-- how-- how the last few minutes I will feel, and how the hurt will be, but I knew that the end will be-- and so it just didn't bother me. So every day was the same thing. It was looking for-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you remember going through the-- through a selection, other people with you standing in front of the-- where they must mangle you. What did you see? What did you feel before? What did you feel after? 

SUBJECT: I can't even tell you how I felt. It was-- we just-- we knew one has to go to the left. One has to go to the right. We-- we knew that he was looking for stronger people for one somehow looked better. He looked for, particularly, twins. He took out twin girls from our group. They were only 17, 18, and we never saw them again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many times did you go through selections? 

SUBJECT: Oh, many times. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like, approximately. 

SUBJECT: I can't even tell you how many. We were there six months. I don't know how many times, and when we came to Auschwitz, we were called-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I want to ask you-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean after the selection, there was no sense of relief that you made it? 

SUBJECT: No. This-- there was-- it-- we kept on going again. Every morning, five o'clock. We had the uphill, and every hour was something else, every hour. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you came to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You began saying something. 

SUBJECT: With uh-- that cutting of the head was a terrible-- they-- they pulled out some hair to cut and that never grew back, and it's-- because I begged them to leave it, so she-- and they were-- and many of them were people from camp working on us. They shaved us everywhere and they had a very strong solution that-- that this maybe, it was so strong that we had holes, and when we came out, we didn't recognize each other because we were without-- sisters didn't recognize each other. We were without hair, without-- we looked completely different. Tall people had short dresses. Small people had long dresses, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How-- you were six months in Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: We wish-- yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And afterwards? 

SUBJECT: And our lager sister, she didn't call. When she called-- every morning when she came to call us out for something, she didn't use any other name, but she called from our town. Round up my whores. That was-- that's how she called us out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Round up my whores. 

SUBJECT: Yes. This was-- that's how she called us out. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] Polish. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

SUBJECT: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] This was an-- it's-- there were different incidents in the whole time, but we came as a group of-- we're specialists that we worked in a mission factory and we had some qualification, so each time a factory in Germany needed some workers, they came. They looked for us. So we-- they took us also in the selection, and they always took out the best ones, the strongest one, and I was the last one, of course. I always shied away, and I was always the last one, and this didn't-- and we left Auschwitz in December. We were the last ones already, and they also needed people for an ammunition factory, and so we were the last ones to go. My aunt could have gone before, but whenever I stayed behind, she somehow-- she was more aggressive and she could help us out more, so she stayed with me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: She was very important for your life, I understand. 

SUBJECT: Yes. So in December, we left Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 1944. 

SUBJECT: 1944. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There's one thing that I think we didn't touch, is your father. 

SUBJECT: Well, with my father I was separated. And he went to a different camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And so I stayed with my aunt most of the time. She tried, where she could have been in different places, but she was going-- she was trying very hard to go where I was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then December '44. 

SUBJECT: Yes. We-- we were cleansed, and dressed, and we had-- we got the coat for the first time with the different sleeve, and the back was marked, and we were told that we're going to-- to Germany to work to a factory, so we arrived-- it was-- the journey took a long time because the train was bombed many times. We went through Berlin, and then we had to go out to leave the train, and they had to bring another one, and maybe eight days we were schlepping from Auschwitz to Leicester. This was also a factory of ammunition-- bombs they were making there. And the-- the journey was also a terrible one. There were many sick girls between us, and we couldn't-- there was no-- we couldn't stand. We couldn't sit. We had very little space, so of course there were a lot of unpleasant things among us. 

When we came to Leicester, the lager sister was a Hungarian woman, and so she-- she told us we were quarantined because there was sick people among us, so she would notice that she had made a little candle and a little tree she had. So later on she told us that she was half-jewish and half Hungarian, so she'd told us it's Hanukkah. It's now Hanukkah, so she had the candle and she had the little tree, and there after the-- we were quarantined also, without food for three weeks. We had-- it's just-- I myself can't understand how we survived without medical attention, and we had plenty of problems. We had so many sores, and on myself, and the-- so we were quarantined three weeks, and afterwards we were working in the factory also 12-- 12 hours. There were two shifts, and again, we-- in Germany-- we heard a lot of bomb-- bombing and this, and we were praying and hoping that maybe-- maybe it-- there will be a bomb for us, and it was discouraging when we saw that the Germans were hiding. When it was very bad, they used to come into us. They had shelters where we slept. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You want a bomb to be falling on you? 

SUBJECT: Mhm. That's-- we were praying for that. We were praying. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That it was the end? 

SUBJECT: We're told that this would be the best-- best death, this would be. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't hope at that-- in January '45, you didn't hope to be liberated? 

SUBJECT: No, no. We had no way-- we knew that the D Day was not a success because we were hoping that we would end in Radom, and we were hoping that maybe, maybe we-- and we were figuring we had time to run-- run away from the Russians, and now in December when we were evacuated, we were already among the last ones, too, we saw that in Auschwitz, which I forgot to tell, in the fall, it was-- the sky was constantly gray from the smoke. The stench from the burning and-- was unbearable. There was no grass, no flies, not a living thing, and so we were talking among us, that they have time for everything. They were burning people, and-- and they were giving us soap from human, and they have time for everything, so it-- so we-- even '45, we just couldn't believe that we will be-- we'll survive this. As a matter of fact, when we heard that we are liberated, we thought that we are the only ones, that it's a coincidence that because it was April the 1st we were liberated, that we are the only people alive, and I was very sad when I heard I'm free. I started crying and I said, now the war begins. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now the war begins. 

SUBJECT: Begins, because I'm alone. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you describe April 1st, 1949? 

SUBJECT: Yes. This was also-- they took us out from the factory. All the three fronts were closing in. The English, the Americans. We heard the bombs from all sides, and they didn't know what to do with us. They themselves wanted to run away, so they took us out from the factory and we were walking. I don't know which direction, but we were walking. We were walking at night, and the daytime we were hitting-- they hid us in trenches and different-- in small place among farmers. Wherever they could, they'd turn, and at nights we were walking, and there were times we were walking between the fires. It was so-- but we knew that we're going to be somehow squeezed in and that it's close, because one-- in the same factory-- one man, he was a German, and he was working there at night-- I will go back to the story, how it-- because one story brings into the other-- when he were working at night, 12 o'clock they gave was soup. Maybe a little soup, a little soup, and if there were-- if some soup remained, they gave some extra to the people. So of course by giving this, there was a fight. Everybody wanted to be first one in line. 

I-- I never went for the [INAUDIBLE] because for me it was important more that I should sleep the few minutes. We had a half hour period of eating, so I got my sleep when I-- I'd eat first, and I went to sleep for a few minutes, so I was observed by somebody, and one day I-- when I put on the light at my machine, I noticed a small package, and so I was afraid to touch it, and I didn't take it. The following night, the same thing happened. When I woke up, I saw a little packet, and I didn't take it again. 

So the third night, when I close-- when waiting, the lights were closed, a man came over and said that he's a German and that he not observe me, that I never went for the extra soup, so he felt that I need a little bit extra, so he gave me a piece from his sandwich and he said, he wanted to win my confidence. He said, look, I'm a Germany and I work here, too. I don't belong to Hitler's party. That's why I'm here, and I-- he wanted, I should tell him, whether it's true, what's happening in Auschwitz, to the Jews, and this and that. Well, he was-- this was also towards the end already, and he was very nice. Every night he brought-- he said, I can't bring you much, but from my sandwich-- because they checking-- I'll give you as much as I can, because a-- a friend that-- I had a friend that we were sharing, whatever we had we were sharing, so she had a little ring kit with her, and she told me, maybe you will ask, maybe he will bring a little bit more bread. 

So I asked him for it, and he said, no. I can't do that. It's the-- it's-- the war-- it's almost the end the war, and I-- much I can bring you, and but whatever I'll be able to spare from my sandwich, I'll bring it to you. It meant a lot that time, wherever he lived. So he was bringing us news that it's-- it's-- the end is coming. We shouldn't be afraid. That they losing the war, the Germans, and the front is here and there, but we didn't believe because we knew from the past experiences that we-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What you feel for him when he did that? 

SUBJECT: He was a decent person. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel? 

SUBJECT: I had no confidence. I told-- he showed the number, he was amazed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your number? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us. 

SUBJECT: He was so-- he-- he was so-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you show the number? 

SUBJECT: He looked at the number. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like this. Hold it out. Straighten your hand. 

SUBJECT: He couldn't believe it, and he asked me, but-- but to me, he still-- he was a German, and I was afraid, but he was telling us that not to be afraid anymore. That they can't harm us anymore, that the war-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you couldn't quite trust him. 

SUBJECT: We couldn't trust him when we were afraid, and then we were taken out from this factory to the journey, and we were-- at this factory, we were 700 women. Approximately, at that time we knew that we were half and half-- we were Polish women, about 350, and Hungarian women, and they divided us into two groups, and-- and we walked and I put maybe-- I don't know. The time is something I can't remember how long-- because we were walking just night times, and day times we were-- couldn't sleep, but so we slept very little, so the time is very messed up with me. Maybe a week, maybe 10 days we were schlepping around, and one day it-- they found a square piece of land, and they told us to lay down flat with our faces down, and they-- and we had the machine guns all around us, and we knew that this the end. 

And we were just laying, waiting the bullet to go through, and after a while somebody screamed, we are free. We are free, and I was with my aunt, and I said, no. Let's not pick up. They-- this is again a trick. They want to kill us, but it turned out that the Americans observed this. They saw what's happening, that the first group was killed. They shot all the women, and they came-- they parachuted down, and once the Germans saw an American, they gave up, and they liberated us, and when I heard that I'm free, I-- I started crying. I said, now the war begins, because we are probably the only ones. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the feeling when you saw the first American? 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you-- it was-- we couldn't speak with them because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did he do, the American? 

SUBJECT: He uh-- he was-- they were shown. They took out-- they were shown that the Germans took out white flags. That means that we are free, not to be-- but they surrounded-- took us on a truck, and they were watching us the whole night because they were afraid that the Germans shouldn't come back, this wasn't the place, you know, to be probably taking. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did the first American look to you? Like? 

SUBJECT: We couldn't speak with them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How'd he look? 

SUBJECT: He looked very good. There was one among them that he knew one or two words, Polish. He said that he's from the Shenkevish family, related, so he knew very little. It was unbelievable. We couldn't believe that we are free, that we-- that we survived. We were not happy because as I said, we thought that we are the only ones in Germany between no-- nowhere and nobody, and we just-- we couldn't comprehend, and many of us got very sick. I was also very-- we were liberated in a farm. It was called [INAUDIBLE]. And the Germans had run away and left the milk and everything, and somebody-- my friend gave me a glass of milk. That was the first thing she gave me, and I couldn't take the milk and I got very sick. I was very sick. I had terrible cramps, and so the Americans called the Red Cross, and they were [INAUDIBLE], and they took-- I couldn't speak to them. I was showing them my stomach, so he was-- they took us in a room, and he was looking for big pots to heat the water. He-- he thought I'm gonna have a baby, so that's how ignorant they were, too, that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You might have been spoiled from hunger at that time, or not. 

SUBJECT: I don't know even how I was, but the milk was too rich after so much hunger and everything. I was liberated with a-- a yellow turnip. I was holding on for a long time because I-- I said it will be worse. It will be worse, and I was afraid to eat it, and I was liberated with a yellow turnip in my hand. So after eating turnip, I don't know for how long, and so the milk was too rich for me, and I was very, very sick. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me, we have to-- if we jump 35 years-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --what of this is living with you now? 

SUBJECT: What is living-- my living? 

INTERVIEWER 2: For you, today, from the story, what is alive and makes things different? 

SUBJECT: To me, it was the biggest challenge that I could bear children. This was, to me, a miracle. You know, when I came into camp, I had just had a period, and-- and I wasn't right when-- that's why I told for, and after the liberation, for many months, I also didn't menstruate, so I was sure I will not be able to have children, and many of our people don't have-- I'm sure this was the cause of it, too. So this was, to me, the greatest thing of the world that could happen, when I had my children. As a matter of fact, I told my husband, too, that I don't think I'm going to be-- have children. Then when I met them, I still didn't remember it and I didn't know, so this was the greatest thing that could happen to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And any other things that you carry with you today from that time? Ways of feeling, thinking, that make you-- 

SUBJECT: Well, uhh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Influence your life? 

SUBJECT: Many things. My-- my mother, at 41 she was killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You think of-- 

SUBJECT: I was very close. Many things that-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Stay with you. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Night times, dreams, all of it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, I have one dream that I always have. This was a story with shoes. Shoes were a big thing. It's very hard to tell all the experiences, but when we came to Auschwitz, I had high boots, and they took it away from me. They thought that I have gold. I don't know what they-- so whoever had short shoes remained with them, and I had high shoes so they took away from me the shoes, and this was a terrible thing. I couldn't walk in the wooden shoes. 

They-- they made holes in my feet and it was just terrible, and we were also-- in Auschwitz we were once transferred to another field, which it was called KL. I don't know if you-- you've probably heard of it, so there, the-- all the roads and the streets were made with pointed stones, and in between mud, so in these wooden shoes, it was torture to walk on these pointed shoes with the knot, so my dream is-- I have only one dream. I carry my oldest son. He-- because he was a heavy child, and he has no shoes, and I walk in these shoes and the wooden shoes, and I fall and pick him up, and I walk again. The mud in the shoes, and always carrying the older son-- I have two songs-- and this dream, forever. Different experiences, but always with the shoes and the pointed stones, and the mud. It's just-- because I suffered a lot from the shoes, and my aunt and at one point, she was-- she was-- she says, oh, what's going on? So she saw a truck with-- full of shoes, and she ran after the truck, and she pulled off a pair of shoes, and they were like, children's shoes that I had to bend my fingers to put it on, but I was-- that time I suffered, though, was there with the feet, but it was a big thing to have something on besides the wooden shoes. So this dream is always with me. The shoes and the-- the pointed stones. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What occupation-- what business-- what do you do? Your husband? 

SUBJECT: My husband was-- he was a for a business at home, and he switched real estate. OK? 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's a very beautiful moment. Thank you very, very much. 

SUBJECT: All right, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 