INTERVIEWER: OK. Just continue. You're coming back home. 

SUBJECT: When I got back home, I looked at my father, I looked at his children. We are-- two nephews there with the grandfather, everything like that, and with the-- and I told him the story of what happened over there. It's no place where to go. I thought-- I told him about the farm over there. I told him about the other [INAUDIBLE], when I went to sleep over there. In the way home, I told him the whole story-- where I met the boys over there and everything like that. It's no place where to go. The only thing what we need is a medical-- somebody should bail us out or something like that. It's the only solution, what we needed. 

Because it's no place where to go. It's-- even-- even you would pay to be there to hide, I think. It's not-- it is not 100% over there. They are-- to me, you know, they are not friendly and they are not, you know, [INAUDIBLE]. Because I saw it myself in the day. In the day when Hitler come in, that day, I saw them in the street. And they all were so friendly. With-with a  thing they- heil, Hitler. Everybody, you know, heil, Hitler over there. You see? If somebody goes with the wind over there, you know, it's no good. 

If you haven't got your own, and all, and all, friendly-ship, you know, with the people and all. So I told my father and everybody the whole story. And there's no place where to do it. That's the only place, you know. We have to wait till-- till something, you know-- messiah, anything has to come, something over there, to rescue us. We haven't got nothing where to go. That's the only thing over there. 

We had people from the ghetto out-- 8, 10, 15 boys, beautiful dressed, shoes, everything. We didn't have nobody back. Nobody come back and to say the story of what happened and everything like that. How they was grabbed, what they was grabbed I, in the ghetto, had a beautiful pair of boots over there, and I gave it away for to go out to see what's what over there. I showed-- I told my story, how I was the stretch over there. And was nothing to it. 

While I was waiting and working and working until we come to 1942, you know, till September 1942, the day they announced that only 10 pounds for person to take it. That was exactly-- at Yom Kippur, 10 o'clock in the morning, they said, this is the day where we have to go out. You know, the Aussiedlung and the Smiths, you know, we're going out in order-- all together from the city of [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: They're going to relocate you. 

SUBJECT: Relocated. We're going to go and everything over there. So we went out from the synagogue. Everybody went home. And they took certain streets, you know. They took it. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to know. They gathered together in the synagogue and told you-- 

SUBJECT: We were going to the synagogue, yeah, and there was a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Because it was Yom Kippur. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yom Kippur. 

INTERVIEWER: And they came to the synagogue. 

SUBJECT: They come to the synagogue and says raus, raus, raus, out, out, out, out. Out, out, out. We all went home. And they started the day till-- it took five days. Every day, they took 10,000 people from certain street, another street, another street from the ghetto. You know, they took it out. And we was-- I was, the fifth day-- the fifth day was no food, no nothing at all, because we didn't get anymore. We didn't go to work. 

That thing over there, we didn't get any work. So across the street from us was a bakery over there. It was the bag from the bakery. And I happened to run in in that bakery to the bag. And I wanted to get some bread out with flour. Then I walked out with a bag, the shot come through my ear. I went back to the cellar. Me and I don't konw who that girl was-- we hide. The door was open. We was behind a door. They come in. They took out all the flours, all the bread. For two hours, we were stranded. They could not get me with that girl. We were silent until the door. 

So what happened-- somebody-- they walked in into my house. And they saw one running in over there before, you know. And they run into my house. He was a couple, about two, three houses up from our house. So this was across the street. They took that man, and they put him right in the middle of the street and right in front of our windows over there. They shot him eight times. Eight bullets he heard. That man got up. He get up. And he bend back down, and he sit down, and that-- the-- thing over there. 

So anyway, it was terrible. We went in. My mother said, this is it, don't go no place, you know, and this and that. I put mine [INAUDIBLE] on with the tallis. And-- and I played. And this is it. 

When we went the last day out, and everybody had 10 pounds over there. And that Mr. Degenhardt Mr. Kapinsky was there, the president. You know, he was standing right in the front. That's why I said to him-- he asked me, how old you are? I said, 20, you know. That's-- I'll always remember that-- 20. I said, I'm 20 year-- 20-year-old. You know, this was 1942, you know, September. And he let me go to the right. 

My mother, with her two nephews and my niece-- my youngest brother was 12. His sister was 14. And the two nephews-- you know, one was four, one was two. My mother had them over there. Beautiful boys over there. And they all went to the radio station. And my father, and me, and two sisters, and a brother, we was-- went to the right. 

INTERVIEWER: You told them you were born in 1920 instead of 1923. Is that what you did? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I told them, you know, Rather wait over there. Yeah. Because I was afraid I'm going to be too young and he's going to-- not going to accept me, you know? I don't know what happened to me, why I told him that over there. It's just like somebody would be in-- in me. Somebody must have been in me to tell me something, like a devil, like something. I don't know what can I tell you. I just happened to tell him, you know. He said, how old you are? I said, I was born 1920. He said, well, go to the right. 

So it was-- where we come in over there, in a big, big factory over there-- they call it the metallurgie-- when we come in over there-- and there were so many people there. It was bumper to bumper. And all of a sudden, somebody is screaming, we need 300 boys over there to go to work here in this and this place over there. So I run to my father, and I said, dad, a guy is there, he needs 300 boys over there. He said, today you're on your own. 

Whatever you want to do it, do it. You know? And I didn't say-- I didn't even took my bundle. The time passed. Everything was in the same place. My sisters was there, my father was there, my brother was there. I didn't took my bundle with me. So we left, and they picked boys. I don't know. They looked at the boys, you know, like, with the-- with the-- with the-- you know, with the-- with the glass. You know, they looked-- they picked boys, you know, like you'd pick apple. You know? And we went in over there to that HASAG. 

INTERVIEWER: HASAG was what? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: HASAG was what? 

SUBJECT: Was a-- a camp. It was a factory. I think that HASAG-- before the war, it was a-- that HASAG was a French-- a French-Belgian manufacturer there from textile factory there. It was a beautiful place over there, I think, over there. When the Germans occupied this over there, they took it away everything and they made it for a camp and everything. When we walked in over there, the four-- the-- when I come in over there, the barracks was not built there. It was not-- it was still, you know, you know, with the machinery and everything like that. 

So we come in over there. The first thing what we had it over there when we faced that is the German over there. And we-- was was-- you know, we went with Germans over there inside in that HASAG over there when we come in over there. The first thing, they lined us up, all 300 people. And they put suitcases on the floor. Open. 

And they told us the story-- whoever has a diamond, a ring of gold, of jewelry, everything, has to put it in over here. And they undressed one man of naked. And that's going to be happy-- the guy stays with the thing over there, and that's going to be happen. So what? Are you going to take a chance? Yes or no? So you put it. You give it them. You give it them everything. You didn't have no choice. You give it to them. They robbed. They take anything away, so we give it to them. 

And we went up one flight. There was one huge room for the 300 people. With 300 people-- 150 girl on one side, and 150 on the other side. Was only one bathroom there. And that's the way we was inside. And this was the first day without our parents. The first cry out in that night, as I said, was-- we choked-- we was choking and crying, you know, and to laying down over there. No beds, no nothing. It was all, you know, floor over there. 

And we had two guards. One in each-- one-- there was a door over here. And one, a door over there. They all with the bayonets. They tell us the story-- anybody going to escaped, which I don't know how, going to get killed from both sides. This guy [INAUDIBLE] from one side or this guy from the others are going to get killed over there. 

So next day, we went to work. Three miles we went every day to work over there. 4 o'clock in the morning, we get up. We counted in the morning the people. We went to work. And we worked in a stone mine. Stone. We-- I took stones and unloaded it in wagons. And we pushed it away, you know. Take it off, unload it, and also mine over there. 

My shoes lasted me only, I would say, six weeks. They went from all this moths and everything like that. I didn't have any shoes anymore. Six weeks, they didn't give me no shoes. I went-- that time, I think it was start the first half an inch, an inch snow was already on the ground when I went to work with, you know, barefooted. 

I went to work. In that time, I got the diarrhea. You know, working over there, you couldn't go no place. I had the diarrhea walking to work over there. I come into work. I was putting-- I was-- was a fire, a [INAUDIBLE] fire. And I went over there in the corner. I said, to hell with you, I went down in the corner over there. I say, maybe I would warm up. 

There was a Ukrainian guard over there. And he said, what are you doing? And I showed him. I told him over there. He understand Polish. I said, listen, do you see, I haven't got no shoes, something like that, over there. He put me in the corner over there, till we went home over there. And he stood over there till we went home, till 5 o'clock, until we went home. 

INTERVIEWER: He protected you? 

SUBJECT: That's-- that's-- huh? 

INTERVIEWER: He protected you. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No? 

SUBJECT: I shouldn't go away. He put me there-- see, I was standing there, you know, for a-- for a-- for a punishment. Because I went away from work over there and I had-- I want to warm myself up over there. So he punished me to put in the corner. Another friend of mine, you know. I mean, it's another, you know-- from a Ukrainian thing over there, family. You know? So you-- where-- where can you go? What can you do? So here, you have the Polish, here you have the Ukrainian, and here you have the German. So we went home. 

I had a pair of-- [INAUDIBLE] rags. I had to put rags on it. So all, you know, with the feet over there. I don't know what happened-- where did I get it or something like that. Something come in, I think. A transport come in from Treblinka, I think, from the dead people they-- they're always did it over there. You know? They must have it. They give you a pair of shoes over there. So we worked there a couple weeks, about three. 

I would say after four weeks working, one night we come home, and they said, pants down, shoes off. And it was two doctors there. And the German was there. And they checked us over, you know, everything. Like, they-- they took-- they-- they looked us in the eyes, and they looked at-- we haven't got any rash. They was looking for any rash over there. But they took out 13 or 14. I don't remember. I think 13 I know for sure, they took them away. They had a little rash over there. Beautiful boys. Nice-looking boys, 17-, 20-year-old boys. 

INTERVIEWER: They had a rash? 

SUBJECT: Huh? With a rash. Yeah. I had a little pimple here from-- from eating, I would say, over there. A little sore, a little thing over there. Any-- anything over-- any rash over there-- anything what they didn't like it over there, they-- they-- they took them away over there. I would say we had a lot of carrots, or dirt, or-- from lice or whatever it is over there. You know? You find this kind of thing over there, not from clean. There was a lot of lice there, you know, I think. 

So anyway, we had-- we-- they took away the boys. And we went upstairs. We went upstairs. So that happened that that boy, when he come home, was to be about 12 o'clock at night. And he was-- I don't know how he find next to me, because he was laying next to me. He come to me over there. 

And he was laying next to me, and I asked him what happened, you know, quiet, because you could not say nothing at all, because the guard was on both sides over there. You couldn't hear a thing. As I said before, over there, if you want to go to the bathroom, you had to open up one finger or two finger. And if he said, go, you're going. If not, he said, lay down, you had to lay down. See? This was the strict-- so strict. 

So anyway, that-- the boy. And I said to him, what happened? He said, they took us, you know, on a hayride to unload hay with the-- with the-- with the pitchfo-- with the pitchforks, whatever you call that. And the Ukrainian, they got drunk. And they stabbed them with the rusty fork-- fo-- 

INTERVIEWER: Pitchforks? 

SUBJECT: Pitchforks. Yeah, they-- they-- they stabbed them with that thing over there. So the guy bleeded next to me. He bleed me out over there. You see, he bleeded over there in that thing over there. But you could not help him, because one night before, the same guard shot a guy in the corner, because he only turned over. He couldn't lay on one-- on one side. He turned around for the other side. 

He couldn't lay on this side. He must have had cramps or whatever he had. He shot him. And he had two brothers with him. You know, he had one brother-- they had three brothers. He shot one of them, you know. And you-- they couldn't do nothing either. I mean, I could not help him over there to get water. And first of all, the sink didn't have any water anyway. The only thing you could take from the top is the water, you know, from the top over there, from the water from the top, from the toilet. You know. So we couldn't-- we could not help him over there. He bleeded out. 

When we went to work in the morning, he still was laying there. Whoever took him down over there-- they all went over there. Why they did it over there, I don't know why they did it over there. This was the discipline for them. And this was boys were could get out from them. They all was mechanics. They all was good kids. They all was-- they didn't kill nobody. And they all was, you know, to help. We did cooperate. We did everything what we can. Oh, but still, it was nothing, you know, to-- to do it, for us, you know, just to kill the thing over there. 

We had one night we went home. Was two-- two guys. They fall asleep in the-- in the-- in the place. And we was counted-- 298. And we took one guy out, because every 50, they had responsible one guy. And they took out the guy, you know, and they shot him, because he didn't know where the two guys was at. 

The next day, the two guys, you know, was there in the-- in the-- in the factory. Nothing would happen to them over there. I mean, it's-- it's-- it was something, you know, this-- everything what I saw it, you know, it was a young boy, the same thing. You know. He was a cap maker. I know him very good. I see him every day. I mean, I see him. In my-- in my-- in my dream, I can see them. Of course, we all worked together. 

And one night, we come home and they needed 104 people. They just needed, so they took out-- the most where they took out, the [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: They needed 104 people for what? 

SUBJECT: They must be short in the-- for the transport to go away. They must be short in some kind of a killing or something like that. When they took them out, they picked, you know, you can be here, you come out over there. And as I said, you know, before, I think Razmid? was in that group. You know. He took him out too. 

And they took the shoes off, with the coats off. And we took the coats with us over there. And we went up to the barracks. But all 103 is not there. I mean, from 300 people that I told you where we went over there, I can tell you less than half were-- will remain. I didn't think so. It's-- we lost 103, we lost 13, we lost that man when he was killed over there. One man on the floor was killed over there. You know. And it was-- I mean, young boys. They could be alive the same like me or-- and everything like that. 

Even you wouldn't tell her the truth, that they didn't have to be alive, it was not safe to be alive. 

INTERVIEWER: [SIGHS] 

SUBJECT: We couldn't-- we couldn't break them in. And-- and the workmanship with everybody-- I was admired, where everybody did the work over there. Mechanical for young boys was-- was something what to see it over there. Was worth-- everything was worth money. 

INTERVIEWER: You said there were three terrible months, you told me. What happened in the three terrible months and where were you? 

SUBJECT: The three-- the three months? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I was-- three months over there With-the-the- We went to work every morning. You know. And you couldn't move no place. You was under guard all the-- all the-- all the time. You know. We was counted morning. We was counted evening. We was-- I was in HASAG. You know. In the three months, I was in HASAG. The only thing-- we went to work. It was not finished. They didn't have the barracks yet, so they took us in a different place to work. And they kept us, you know. 

So we went every day to work in a different-- I don't think we went home to sleep. We went-- and we went back to sleep in the HASAG over there. And we had one meal, you know, a day. And in the morning, we had a cup of coffee and a-- black cup of coffee and a small slice-- you know, a piece of bread over there, a small pieces-- a slice of bread over there. The only thing what we find, you know, sometimes on the way and in the factory over there was carrots. A lot of carrots over there where we eat over there. 

So we lost all these-- all these people over there for the-- for the three months. And after-- af-- after the three months, you know, we went to-- back to the-- they built the small ghetto. We have to go. We went to the ghetto. When we was in the ghetto, they was building already the barracks over here in HASAG. [INAUDIBLE]. And we was six months over there in the-- in the ghetto, which we went from the ghetto to work every day. You know. We met outside. You know, out-- from the ghetto, we went to work over there. 

It's the same thing. They went in and people-- I remember one thing that amazed me. A farmer come in in the ghetto, in the small ghetto, with a horse and wagon. What he wanted to take out in order the-- the dirt, the manure, you know, wanted to take out the manure. I remember we did not let them take the manure. We pushed in four boys in that thing over there. And one guy took the horses. And we kept that guy inside. 

And he let the four boys outside to the-- to the-- you know, to the-- out-- out the ghetto over there. And you come back over there. And after, they released the Polish fellow over there. We did everything what we can. Oh, but outside, it was-- it was not good. We had-- on all the side, we had, against the Jewish people, the Polish people did not cooperate with us at all. Because I know boys went out dressed with guns and everything. They could not do nothing, because this was it. Instead to be together, to bring them in, to cooperate, to work with them together-- they did not. 

Because I know all the boys. I was visible. In HASAG, I was visible. Everybody knowed me. From 5,000 people, I don't know anybody who didn't know Leon Glick because I was working in the locomotive. I was hired. I was visible. And with the machinery, I was visible with everything. So I was around everything. I stood up, you know. Inside-- in Ger-- in HASAG, I stood up with the Germans, you know, you know, and I showed them class. We showed them class. That's what I'm going to tell you. We took up the biggest machinery. I don't know how we got them in. the others got to me, and we did it. We did the wonderful-- we work-- we gave them my work. We did it over there. 

INTERVIEWER: You removed machinery from the trains? Loaded them up? 

SUBJECT: All the train. I took the way-- I was a locomotive engineer. I took the-- I was a locomotive. And I took the locomotive, and I took the-- the-- the wagons, whatever they belong. And I could have take people out. I could have take people out. I could have take people out in order to smuggle them out too, you know? Because I was the only one near the door to throw my-- to outside over there. There was one fellow come in from outside. One fellow, when i hook him up the wagon-the I don't know how he got in in that wagon over there. And he come in over there to the factory. And he remained in the factory there, one fellow. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened after this? Did you ever-- were you in HASAG all the time? Or-- 

SUBJECT: All the time. All the time working inside in HASAG, working together, working for the people. I did-- one time, I did inside in HASAG, it was a day what was-- I don't know what kind of punishment. Was nothing where to eat. Was a one wagon with potatoes. And I said to my-- to my friend of mine-- he's now in Montreal. I said, [? Fischerman, ?] look what I'm going to tell you. 

I'm going to go a little bit faster with the locomotive. And now the people going home, you know, from work open up the handle, let the-- let the potatoes go all over the factory. Let them-- let them go. Let them-- let them run. And what was it. And when the bus come out over there-- and he said, what did you do? And he called me-- right away, they call you dog, you know. You-- you-- you know-- you damn dog, you know. That's all what they called you over there. Well, I said, I don't know. I didn't know nothing. You know, I'm upstairs and I think over there, it just must be happen. You know? 

It's-- it was-- I did it. I opened up a wagon from-- from Leipzig. I opened up a wagon, you know, with-- they were-- there was beautiful stuff over there for the Germans over there. When it come to the wagon from Leipzig, this was their-- you know, this was their stuff-- orange juice, chocolate, and everything over there. We did throw in-- I-- I throw it-- throw it over in the barracks over there. I told him, you go tell the boys, you know, I'm going through over here. Let's throw them over there. How come the seat is open? The seat I always opened up the seat over there. I looked at over there. 

And-- and we did something. You know, we did something to help to survive. I did it. We couldn't do it. Like, I-- I, myself, over there, I had a couple potatoes. And we went into a pipe. We were sticking out pipes over there. And each factory had pipes. And the steam is so fast. You take a stack. And you put it in five potatoes, four potatoes. And in 10 minutes, you have a beautiful potato. You know, from the steam, you had a potato over there. 

Oh, but the German-- the-- the Ukrainian guard caught me with it. And he took me, you know, in the main. And he-- he-- I got 20 lashes over there. I mean, it's-- it's-- you see, for four potatoes. It's-- how dumb-- how can you do something like that? How-- how can you-- how can you-- how can you do something like that? You know, how-- where were you raised? What kind of hate you had this over there to this kind of people? 

One girl was killed inside, yeah, was 14 years old over there. And they said that she had a bullet in her pocket, which was not true over there. He was an old Ukrainian fellow, 90-- 70 years old with the gun over there. See, I was dying to get in over there, you know, that thing over there. You could not-- see, something that they wanted to get a medal or they wanted to get something, you know, to talk to the Germans, something like that about. But there was no-- I mean, not the cooperation. 

They did not-- a little guy, a little guy, a German, he must have been about five foot tall over there. He was-- the dogs was bigger than him, the two German Shepherd. I mean, he walked with the dogs over there. And he said to the dog, the dog was the man and I was the dog. He said, bite the dog. You know, it's-- it's just-- they just fooled around, you know, just to-- to-- to-- to kill and to-- this kind of thing over there. 

So that's why I-- I can't understand that the-- the-- I can't understand, you know, what-- what-- I think that the best thing would be when-- and-- and now when they're working, and sewing at a machine, and everything, it reminds me over there- I think it was like the men said over there, it would be the best thing, you know, for the people, for they would kill themself. If they would have a pill before, they would be better off. Because I have always, always, even now-- I can't forget it. 

I can see my mother in the wagon. Because I was working in the-- in the-- with the-- with the-- with the wag-- with the wagons, you know. I saw how the-- big they was, how wide they was. And you mean to tell me you're pushing so many people, older people, in a wagon? And they go to the-- to the death camp? And there be children and everything? They could have been choked to death before they went in over there. And another thing of it is if the wagon went, if the-- if the-- the wagons went to Treblinka. 

They didn't go straight, because the-- the-- the main-- they did not go straight, because the express comes first. They had to go down the line. So they could be staying a couple hours there. There was no war there, no nothing at all. So some-- some, they were staying two days, and some were staying three days, and some were staying a day, [INAUDIBLE]. Always going down the express [INAUDIBLE] over there. I know the whole story, because I see the work was exactly like that. We switched it. We did it. We find out every little story. 

There was no place where to go. We had people from Treblinka coming. We had a boy coming in. We are coming with the train. I let him out. I had two with people, you know, from a-- from a city, from Kielce? They shipped in people. They choked. They said, water, water! 

And we couldn't do nothing at all. The bus come in over there. They was talking on the telephone. I don't know what they were doing. They shipped it right out over there. I don't know. They-- they want to take it in. We took in a lot of people. We took in a couple of wagons. We took a load over there. We unloaded the people over there. Swollen legs, with all this kind of thing. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question, Mr. Glick You mentioned earlier something about being turned in to the Gestapo. Some girl had turned you-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. This was a girl. This is-- this was a cousin of mine who-- she was, as I said, you know, before-- it's a good thing you remind me. This cousin is now in Australia. And this cousin, she was-- she give away all her money to the Christian family to hide them out. There was-- she was there with-- two brothers was there. And there was three-- yeah, it was three. I don't know if I was over there, they was hiding out. 

So the man said to her, whatever money you give it to me, you are [INAUDIBLE] already. You-- I spend-- you spend it on you already. And you have to go. So she said to them, where I'm going to go now? I have customers, she said, outside. Maybe they owe me money. Leave my two brothers there. You know. And they had some children over there too. They had some children too over there. Let me go out, you know. Let me collect the money. Whatever I'm going to have it, I'm going to give it to you. 

So this Christian girl, she went to school with her. I said, Adela, what are you doing over here? She said, here's my watch, here's the ring. Don't say nothing. She screamed, Gestapo, Gestapo, a Jew is here. That's all what-- that's what-- she was the happiest thing in my-- in her life. Anyway, the-- the-- the Gestapo come in. Where is your brothers? In HASAG. So the only one what I was in HASAG. 

So they come with the- there was a Jewish policeman. And it was a-- a capo with the Jewish policeman and that little guy, you know, that little German guy with the two dogs over there. The Gestapo couldn't come in over there with the diseases and everything, to the inside in the barracks. So he said, Leon, we-- we need you over there. I said, what-- what happened? I went down from the-- you know, went outside over there with the thing over there. I went to the main office. 

And the first thing, you know, they-- they give you a slap over the face, and you don't know where you are over there. Did you have a sister in the outside? I said, I haven't got no sister. That's not my sister. There was-- you know, I didn't want to say they was killed. I said, you know, they took them away. And you must have a sister. I said, no, I haven't got it. So he said, who is Adela? I said, oh, Adela, this is my grandfather's father's daughter. I said, she's got nothing to do with me. And this is not-- I didn't even know who she is over there-- is-- is over there. 

So anyway, they took her to Auschwitz. Her husband was in that-- in a different-- in a different place over there. They took the husband. They killed her husband. Her husband was killed. He was three miles away from us-- from our place over there, in a different place, [? Nurok, ?] where I worked before. And the only thing what I had it-- it was good that they needed me. My boss rescued me. This is a true story. 

Somebody said to him-- I don't know. It's either the secretary. He had a Jewish secretary. He must have said, the boys must have telled him, because it was a night shift. They took Leon, they took Leon. The whole-- the whole-- the whole fact-- the whole people, they knew about Leon. As I said, I was visible. So he come in, and he talked to them, and he-- he let me go. I didn't ask him why and what to the boss. I didn't say nothing at all. You see, I couldn't say danke schoen or whatever it is over there. 

Oh, but he-- he was the one that let me go. He said I was needed. I was needed in the factory. So this is-- it is-- it is-- this is the story, what I'm telling you. We worked in-- we cooperate each other, we worked together with the boys just to be, you know, to survive. And I saw it after the war. I saw her after the war. She lived in Australia. So what can I do? Should I tell them, you know, that my brothers is in-- over there? They should be killed all together? Slap me back, she says. That's all what she said to me. A lovely girl, a beautiful girl over there. She didn't know that I was there anyway. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Glick you're married now. Did you marry someone who also-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --had a survive-- was a survivor? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you meet your wife? 

SUBJECT: I met her after the war in Czestochowa She was-- I was a couple miles away in a different camp over there. She was the Kamienna They was in Skarzhisk they-- they come in through Czestochowa They come in. I would say, you know, that they look for the [INAUDIBLE] over there. And-- but they didn't have nothing to do with that. And I think in 1944, I think the killing stopped the-- Auschwitz stopped there, because the [INAUDIBLE] was the end of 1954. 

They took us out in HASAG over there. There are less people. What we lost was-- was in, I would say, the end of-- not-- yeah, it was in 1934 over there. We lost 400 boys-- 400 people. They took the sick out and the elderly. Mrs. [INAUDIBLE] mother around that time, they took her out also. She had-- because the father was a big shots over there. 

But anyway, they took around 400 people at that time. And they-- they-- I don't know why did they killed them that time. And also, the police, where I have it over there, what I saw it-- the-- the police, we had beautiful police with the women, with the children over there. They-- they was killed brutally. I never saw-- they was very, very brutally killed over there. They tied them up, their hand in the back over there. They put them in the trucks over there. I was the only visible-- 

