SUBJECT: I'm surprised I'm holding up like this anyhow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You, you-- you know, I'm not surprised one bit. I'm really not. 

SUBJECT: Why? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because, I mean, no one can do what you did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I really wouldn't if I would have --. 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --lowering myself into it. 

SUBJECT: No way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And I don't think that you-- you did the normal things to adapt. I just don't believe it, a, a person-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, both of, both of us didn't do the normal things, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I've been hearing it, and I'm-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Mark is, Mark is a fighter, too. Both of us didn't just walk in like this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But I-- somehow or other, you don't hear this from the female side very frankly very much. 

SUBJECT: Look, I came to this country. I didn't know anybody, nothing, right? The Jewish-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't tell me yet. Wait. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh yeah, I'm taping. 

INTERVIEWER 3: All the way? 

SUBJECT: No. No, no, let's, let's finish. So you want to go back how I survived? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just finish the woods. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I, I felt, you know, I cannot just walk out any place. I don't know where I'm going to wind up. So I said, let's wait 'til daytime and we'll take our chances. 

We got-- and we started walking. I knew that I came from the camp this direction. I knew-- I said, let's sit down. I sit down facing the direction I want to go next day so I won't lose where I'm going. 

So I said, I will sit down. Let's sit back to back. And I will sit down face the direction I want to go tomorrow so I will I will know where I'm going. I will know I'm not going back to the camp. So that's what we did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had to sit still all night? 

SUBJECT: Well, there was-- we couldn't walk. We couldn't go any place anyhow. 

Next day, I walked in to a little village. And I got to give this guy credit-- a German, my foreman. Who do you think I meet when I come to that little village? My foreman. OK. 

But, the German-- the, the Americans, the Russians, the English were on their, on their backs already. That's why they were liquidating all the ghettos and all that. They were liquidating the cities. They were shipping all the people to Berlin. They were evacuating everybody to Berlin. 

So in that village was already nothing normal either. When he saw me, he introduced me as a cousin from protectorate, which was the part that, you know, that the-- from Poland, the part that was really, you know, annexed through Germany. He introduced me as his cousin. I wouldn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think he wanted-- 

SUBJECT: Protection. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --protection from you? For-- 

SUBJECT: He wanted-- he didn't do it for my sake. He did it for his skin. He wanted protection from me, which he told me. 

Went, took me to his home with my girlfriend. Gave us fresh clothes, fed us. Then he said, look, we got to evacuate. If I don't make it, if I, you know, I mean, if they're coming before we're evacuated, will you say a good word for me? 

I was always good to you. I never beat you-- which was true, which others did. So I had a lot to be grateful for. 

Said, I was good to you. I helped you. I taught you. I never said that you are not the carpenter. I never squealed on you. Which was true. 

Said, will you-- well, I need protection. Will you help me? I said, sure, I'll help you. 

But I said, in the meantime, 'til they're coming, where am I to go? Well, he took us to the woods where they had, you know, the Luftwaffe. They had those huts in the woods-- the Luftwaffe. And cots, you know, the bed, they had, uh, bunk beds. They had huts with bunk beds for the Luftwaffe. You know what the Luftwaffe is, OK? 

So they had this for them, but that time nobody was there because everybody was getting evacuated to, you know, to Berlin. He brought us water. He brought us food. He said, stay 'til whoever comes in here. 

It was-- they were the Russians. They were expecting the Russians. He said, and after the war, if everything's over, I hope you will put in a good word for me. I said, sure. I will sign it and seal it for you. 

We stayed there for three weeks. We didn't know what's going on. My girlfriend started getting, like, claustrophobia. 

I-- she said, I don't care if they kill me. I cannot stay here anymore. I'm getting out. I don't care what they do to me. Well, I couldn't let her go alone, so I went out with her. 

We got to a different village, because we went a different direction. These were different woods already. And we got in a different village. And all you had in that village were a few old people, because they had evacuated all the population. 

They told them if the Russians came in there were instantly going to kill everybody, so they evacuated. They left-- you came in in homes where you could-- hot food was on the stove. That's how they left, because the Russian was on their heels. There were a few Ukrainians which were, you know, the same thing, DP-- you know, people that, that, you know, got out to the same way. And a few old Germans, and there was a couple of Polish that worked on the farms. 

You see, the difference is they that took them. Us, they put in camps. Them they took mostly to farms and to homes to do private work. So they were there. 

And this was on a River Oder. And we got in there, the, the old, the few old Germans there didn't care. At this point they for sure didn't care. And the Polish and the Russians and the Polish and the Ukrainians, you know, we're one of them. 

And the front came right on that, on that river. On this side was Russia. On this side was Germany. And the German Army came in, and we were with the German Army. I was on the front with them. 

When the Russians started bombing our side, as a matter of fact, my girlfriend, we were like on a second floor house. The homes were empty. We could have any home we wanted. The soldiers didn't care where we go and what we go. They were worried about their own skin, OK? 

We had enough food. There was plenty of food everywhere. It was a village. You had farmers there and there was food galore, but we were on the front. 

And one morning my girlfriend is standing naked and washing and something hits the roof. And the house is on fire, and we jump out from the second floor. We didn't even break a leg. And it took about four, five days and the Russian captured that part. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you came to the United States, can you describe what it was like for you to rebuild your life in a totally strange country? 

SUBJECT: It, it was very wild. We went, you know, we lived-- we went to Poland, because when we parted in Auschwitz, we talk about it before. We said, whatever happens, anybody who stays alive comes back home. I mean, we didn't know. It's not that we got the home, but we come back to our hometown, OK? 

And, uh, so the war was still on when I got back to Lodz. I got back in March. I smuggled through. The Russian Army and everybody else. I was in there wagons with coals, and I was in wagons with cows, and I was with everybody, but I got back to Lodz. 

And Katowice, in one town the Russians put me to jail. They said I'm a spy. But they knew I'm not a spy. They knew my cut hair. 

They knew I did not-- I don't have a number. They did not have enough time to do it on me. And they knew that I'm not. But I guess, you know, they had to do something, you know, that they caught me, you know, in the, in the trains and all that. So they kept me overnight and next day they let me go. 

When I got back to Lodz, it was March, but the war was still on. And then I, you know, I found, I worked, you know, like here, it's the Jewish social service. I was registering the people who were coming back after the liberation. People were coming back from camps. I was taking all the details. I would give them, you know, the cars for supplies and for bread and all that. 

I, I make it short. I see you, you want to make it short. 

Anyhow, and then we went back to Germany because we wanted to get out. I did not want to stay in Poland. And we figured from Germany we'll see, we'll go someplace. 

Well, we came to the United States because my husband had a, a position in Germany. I don't know, he must have told you. So we got in very quickly. 

And it was quite a while because, you know, after all we went through. And you know, and my dream was to come to the United States because my dream was I be able to breathe. I won't be afraid to go in the street. I won't have to turn my back. It took me a long time not to be afraid of a policeman. This took me quite a while. 

But in the beginning, it was like hazy. You know, I don't know the language. I don't know people-- just a few people, you know, like us that came before. 

But little by little we learned that you got-- we have to adopt. We got to learn the customs. We got to learn the habits of this country if you want to fit in. And we got to try to start building a new life. 

It took quite a while to do it, because we still had the feelings-- that fear and the trauma that we went through, through the, you know, the war in Auschwitz and the camp. But little by little we started meeting people. We met awful nice people, people who came to my house brought a babysitter to teach me English, and the babysitter to play with the baby. We had somebody who came to teach my husband to drive a car. The people were awful helpful. 

And the cutest thing was that I don't know if I could say 10 words in English, and everybody said, gee, you're doing so beautiful. You talk so nice. And no fail, I never met anybody who say, oh, you need a little more or something. Everybody, who, they heard me say three words, you're doing so beautiful. 

Like, we never had a holiday like Thanksgiving in Europe. And came Thanksgiving, Elizabeth Katz brought us a fruit basket and everything. And I said, what this is? She said, well, it's Thanksgiving, and she explained the holiday to us. 

So people that, really, they were nice. Like, somebody got me in to work for the Jewish Congress. OK? But, you know, they had a store on Park Street, a secondhand clothes store. So she got me in. She said, you bring the baby, you help us out. 

She got me-- she took me to, to meetings through, what was the name, ma'am? From the, from the markets, uh-- oh. Very prominent people in, in West Hartford. Oh, I've skipped, you know. All right, I forgot the name. I will remember it probably a little later. 

Took me to gorgeous home with plush carpets like this-- me, poor old me, newcomer-- to lunches. They tried to get me into it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you-- 

SUBJECT: And it was just-- I just couldn't believe it. Why would people bother with, you know, with somebody like me? OK, I went to high school. I graduated here high school. I had to get a degree. I had to do something. 

But I was just amazed how the people were nice. And every store I came shopping, I didn't know the expression for something, you know? I knew a little bit-- the foods I knew. And everybody said, gee, you speak so beautiful. I just couldn't get over. This was really something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your feeling about being Jewish in this new atmosphere? 

SUBJECT: I didn't, you know-- I knew that it doesn't make any difference in this country. So my fears were going back to the other countries, not to this. The only thing I still, like I said, I was still afraid of a policeman. If a policeman would approach me, I would shake like a leaf. 

And he didn't approach me. I didn't commit any crimes. And believe you me, you know, we're so either trained or what, but I'm afraid to get a speeding ticket, which I did get, you know. But, you know, we obeyed the law to the letter, but nevertheless, it took me a long time to get over that fear. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were the most significant aspects of your adjustment to things that you remember that made you feel as though you were really becoming an American, becoming a citizen here? 

SUBJECT: Well, it took quite a number of years because our ways were completely different than here. Even our way of dressing. Like, I remember when I came to the United States and my little boy had a little fur coat, which children wore in, in Europe. And I didn't know that, and I knew very little English. 

And we were walking one day on Main Street-- I remember like today. It was corner of Main and Pearl. And somebody turns around and says, Eskimo. That's all I got out of the whole sentence. But Eskimo is quite universal. So its the cheapest, they think we're Eskimos. 

I took off that coat my child. Sent it to my sister lived in Sweden, and went into [INAUDIBLE] and bought him a junky coat. That's how badly I wanted to fit in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What other-- 

SUBJECT: And little by little we did it. But you know, there's still, we're still, you know, we still got a lot of European ways. You know, you just don't discard something that you were brought up with and for, for generations. 

But, we tried to fit in. We tried to adjust. But we're still I, I would say, we're still Europeans in heart, at heart maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you do with the memories of the bad times? How do you handle them? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't want to talk about that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They're still there? You still deal with them? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They will never go away. You really don't expect it to go away, do you? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your perspective of America, of the American way of life, must be somewhat, um, attached to your previous life. And I wondered were times where you find you think of something differently, you feel something differently than your American-born friends? 

SUBJECT: Well, look, everybody's entitled, even a monk. Take the same people what are born in the same place, each one has a different way of thinking. And each one, you know, will look at the same problem different way. So it's certainly no different. And they got different way of looking things. Like, you take any group of people, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. 

SUBJECT: Do you agree with him, or does he agree always with you? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I wondered-- 

SUBJECT: You're both Americans, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you find that you seek out other survivors for friends? Is there a-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, we don't have to seek them out. Because in the beginning, that's all we're with together because we had so much in common. And we still stick together, positively. 

Those are our friends who understand us completely. Completely, with heart and soul and brain. So naturally we, we stick together. We have so much in common. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you handle-- 

SUBJECT: If you wouldn't be, if you wouldn't be in that position, would you know all the things we are telling you? Well, how many millions of people don't know it? So naturally that will stick with, with our people, because we don't even have to talk. We just understand ourselves by the look, and by the smile, you know, by the, by the tears, or whatever. We don't have to explain nothing, but to other people we have to explain. 

And a lot of people just don't understand it. A lot of people said they never knew nothing. And there are plenty of people still don't know nothing. There's plenty of people that got to be educated. It's shocking how many people don't know. 

After all the books and all the shows, some people say it's too painful to read it. Some people say it's too painful to watch it. It's painful for them-- they didn't go through it. The least they can do is learn about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You, your son, your son, I just want to ask you about how-- 

SUBJECT: I'm hot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know. Just one minute. Your, your son, how you've handled this with your son. 

SUBJECT: Well, my son complains now that we didn't tell him, which, he's right. In a way, he's completely right. I'm talking about my oldest son. My youngest son knows, and I will explain you why. 

There's nine years difference between the two of them. In nine years, we get, got a little bit calmer, a little bit, right, a little bit settled. When we came, he was a year and a half old, and as time went by I was not in a position to talk about it. My husband was not in a position to talk about it. 

And we felt we cannot give the child nightmares. It's enough we live with fear. If there was a knock on the door, we jumped. We didn't walk, we jumped. Because we thought maybe it's the SS men, or god knows who. 

So it took many years till you settle down that you were not scared of a knock or if a pot fell down or anything, any noise. And we felt, how can we do this to a child? How we can put the fear into him? He is in a free country here. It's in a different country. Let them grow up freer, and later on when he understands, we will tell him. 

But he complains now that we told him too late. That we should have told him-- not that he doesn't, you know, he knows now, but we should have started telling him sooner. My youngest son, we started sooner, because like I said, it was nine years difference and there was a little bit difference. 

I could talk a little calmer about it. I would have maybe like 15 minutes that I would not break down and be able to talk, like today. I'm amazed at myself. I don't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you are a magnificent person, 