[TONE] INTERVIEWER: OK. Yes. You said when you were in the camps, what you thought about in those circumstances. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: You know, when I was in the camp, Laurel, a lot of people have asked me already how I survive and why I did survive. And the most important thing, which it is true, is I never gave up hope. If anybody in the camp-- this is from my experience-- gave up hope, never survive. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep hope alive in yourself when you went-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: You fight for your life. 

And another thing is it is the instinct that always was-- I'm talking for myself. It's everyone is individual. I like to live one hour and see the end, Germany should be defeated, the end of Hitler. 

And except that is the most important thing, and I'm saying again and again, is that hope, where for five years, labor camps and concentration camp, always hungry, you were thinking only what-- one thing when you were in the camp, your stomach and some way be protected. You shouldn't get shot. You shouldn't get killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that survival was dependent on-- well, I'm sure on many factors. But I wondered if a lot of it had to do with your friends, the people helping you, helping one another. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Helping each other, we couldn't help each other too much, Laurel. We tried. Sure, we tried. 

But if we are talking about helping each other, then I tell you a fact. In 1943, I was in Germany. And at that time, we-- we used to build the roads. That was in [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

And in the morning, we used to get up 5 o'clock in the morning. We used to walk to the job for an hour and a half, two hours, wintertime, no clothes, I mean warm clothes, wooden shoes, 'til you came to the place. We are knocked out. 

But let me tell you one story, the one night, we used to go back home to the barracks. That time was a storm, very cold. I would say must be below zero. And people were freezing to death. 

And I know it. I did see a man from the same barrack, from the same room, was freezing. And you know, I don't know even the doctors in the United States know about it, or the doctors in the whole world. A person when he is freezing 'til death, he is conscious to the last minute. He know what is going on. 

But he's getting stiffer, stiffer, and stiffer. He can't help. And I remember this like this could be today, that that man was begging. Please help me. 

What kind help did he need? Should rub his legs, his arms, his body that his blood should circulate. That was only help. 

But I was the one who I couldn't help him. I got to help myself. If I going to help him, I going to get stiff. 

What kind of help did I need? I was moving around in the same place, jumping around, rubbing my own-- my own legs, rubbing my own arms. How could I help this man? And I was looking at the man, how the man finished his life. 

You couldn't help him. How can you help him? It was impossible, even if you want to. 

If you had a slice of bread or a little soup, whatever it is, was not enough for you. How much they gave you, you were-- constantly, constantly you were hungry. That everyone, every person, and most of it I would say were fighting for his own life. 

And another thing, even if you want to help the gentleman didn't like to see you should help him. What kind of help can you give it to anybody? 

So-- and that is not only-- you see, sometimes you went to work and people, I couldn't walk anymore. Yes, we tried to help them. Most what we could do one from one side, one fella from the other side. We helped them whatever we could. But sometimes, you had to give up, because everyone-- everything was heavy for you. 

INTERVIEWER: It's very, very brave of you to say what you just said, Mr. Rosenberg. I wonder, though, if-- and I admire you for saying it, truthfully. I wonder if you ever talked with one another about your hopes for the future or-- well, if you ever-- let me ask that question first, then I'll ask the next question. Did you have the strength to talk to one another about what-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: What we could do-- talk to each other sometimes if we came home, most of it on the Sundays, we didn't go to work. Sometimes we sat down, we talked to each other how tragic, how horrible our life is. 

A lot of people didn't believe that we will see the end of it. But people like myself or other-- when they said never gave up hope-- this is what I said before, I never gave up hope. That was the biggest help. 

And we were talking sometimes about our family, or maybe sometimes that we will ever see our families. I myself-- I don't know why, but I myself, just something was inside. I thought about and I didn't have too much hope that I'm going to see anybody from my-- from my parents, my brothers, and my sisters. 

Why? Because in 1942, when the selection and liquidation, I realized that time already how terrible it-- it is. I realized already that time in 1942 that the people are going to the gas chambers. I know that time already that the transport from Czestochowa, they are going to Treblinka. 

And in 19-- before the liquidation of our city, two brothers came back from traveling. Some way they escaped from Treblinka. And they told us how terrible it is. Not everybody knew about it that they came back from Treblinka, because if the Germans would find out, they would kill them right away. 

But a handful of people knew about it. I knew about it too, because I used to go out-- I used to date his sisters. And because of that, I know him very well. 

And I know how terrible it is. And-- and he told us how terrible it is. And because of that, I knew about it that-- how-- that my parents are going to Treblinka, and my brothers and sisters are going to Treblinka. 

And in the camps-- most of it in Germany, because I was in Germany already in 1943, in concentration camp-- politically we were locked out from the outside of the war. We didn't know nothing what is going on. 

But in 1944, we start to feel that we have more hope to survive. Why? When the-- the English planes, they used to attack the German city-- cities in 19-- they used to bomb, the 1944, they used to bomb. The English, they used to come in in the nights. The American used to come in in daytime. 

Then we had some German people. It was-- well, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And those Germans even, in the nights, when the English planes used to bomb the German cities, they used to come in to our camps to protect our life, 'cause they knew it, that the-- the planes will not bomb the concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1944, then, you had some idea, as you say, that maybe it'll come to an end. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever speak with other people around you, people you shared a bed with, for example, people that you had to work with, about the hope of ever seeing them again after the war was over, after it was all over? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well, let me say before I answer your-- this question why we knew more in 1944, the end almost in 1944. 

When the English-- I think that was the first city when the English took over was a big city they call Aachen. Then that time, we know it's no good for the Germans. And except that, we-- we were not far from the Switzerland borders. We heard rumors. Somebody must from our camps maybe be in contact with some Germans or whatever it is. We heard a lot of rumors about it, that the Germans are losing the war. 

Then that time, we had big hope that we will survive. But in 1942, 1943, we were living from-- not from one day to the other, one hour to the hour, minute to a minute. We're nobody. We walked and you see your friend of five minutes dead. You were in the night asleep in the barracks and we knew it, that if we are in a barrack 50, tomorrow morning we'd be only 47 or 46 or 45, starving from hunger, starvation. 

So in 1942, '41, '43, we didn't have too much hope. But in 1944, we started to hope that we will survive. But again and again, always whenever I come to a discussion with people, I say that people, if they had hope, that was the biggest help. 

And another thing why I should arrive, I had four miracles in my life. I escaped four times. And if I wouldn't escape, I wouldn't be alive today. I wouldn't say that I was smart enough. 

But I realized the situation. I have a chance for a million if I escape. Now one thing what I will tell you, one incident when I escaped, in 1942, they liquidate the ghetto in my city, in Czestochowa. The last liquidation was 5,000 people. 

And that time-- because I told you before that those two brothers came back from Treblinka, they brought us to a place, 5,000 of us, today I would say it wouldn't be enough for 500. And we were there five days. 

And I will never forget. Was a gentleman, that time he was maybe in the '60s and I was that time 23, 24, maybe 25-- 25 years old. He said to me-- to me and other few friends of mine, fellas, if you can do something, do it. 

I am 60 years old. I can't do it. But if you are able to escape-- because we knew it, that-- that 5,000 people are going to Treblinka-- do it. I prepare myself and four more of-- of my friends. 

INTERVIEWER: What would you feel if you thought you could see those four friends again? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well, those friends, again, I would be very happy to see them. But you asked me a question before, was possible to help each other? Now let me tell you, it's a good story about that. 

When I escaped that time-- it's long to talk about how I escaped. But let me tell you the bottom line. When I escaped that time-- we escaped that time, one was shot on the roof. Four of us escaped. When we-- whole night, we were in the-- on an attic. 

And we were figuring out how to come out from that ghetto, because we escaped. We went on the attic. There was no people anymore. The ghetto was locked up. 

Then we figure out some way. The best way is going to be only in the morning, 5 o'clock, the start the daylight, people are starting to go to work, through a window to jump out and get mixed up with the Polish people. But before we went out-- and we were talking about it. Then I said to my friends, if we go all together, then I don't know what we have a chance. Every one of us has to take a chance. 

I spoke the language good. I was blond. I had a chance. I knew the city. 

And I told 'em, fellas, I'm sorry, but I feel that I going to go by myself, which I did. You go one way and I'm going to go my way. I never know what did happen with those three. 

LAUREL: What would happen-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: And I-- let me-- let me finish it. Now, and I was walking around in the city for three days and three nights. I was sleeping in a-- some backyards, in a park. 

And I was trying-- because I knew the city very well and I knew people what they used to be in the underground. And I was trying to be in touch with the underground. I couldn't get in touch with them. No way. 

So what was my decision? My decision was I got to go back to the-- to the camp, to the labor camp. And I came in. 

When I came into the labor camp, a friend of mine did see me. And the first thing, his question is, where's my brother, because his brother was sent away with the transport. I said, Jack, I don't know. 

Your brother was very much depressed. He didn't carry what I did. I couldn't take him in mine-- with me. Then I said, what shall I do right now, Jack? He said, if you-- if they gonna to find out that you are here, they're going to shoot you. 

There's only one thing to do. Sometimes people are escaping. Now, they are counting every morning. If we're going to find out somebody escaped, then that time you could go back to the-- to the barrack. 

Which in three days later, two people escape. In the morning, I was standing in the line just like anybody else. Then a-- there was an oberscharfuhrer. In the morning I'm standing and he is calling Rosenberg, [GERMAN]. No. He didn't say the Rosenberg, but we had a number. He said [GERMAN]. 

LAUREL: Leave? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Laurel, he told me. Then I knew it. The five minutes later, I knew that. He was shooting everyone. 

When I stand in front of him, then he couldn't believe it. I was able to escape from this transport. Was so many Ukrainian, so many Lithuanian, so many Germans. How did I escape? 

And he said to me, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

LAUREL: Which means? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: That I-- if, you know-- if God did want to protect you, that he's helping you. Then I made up my mind I tell him the truth. I got no choice. 

He was very, very much surprised at how I did it. But he telled me-- on the end, then he asked me one thing. He said, now, don't you know that you're going to be shot? Why did you come back here? You're going to be dead. 

I said-- then I said to him, you know why I came back? I feel that I am still productive for the German army. I still be productive for you. And he liked that what I said it. I was the first one what he didn't shoot. 

LAUREL: I keep pressing you on the same point. But there's a very-- I'm trying to-- I would like to know directly if you ever had any thought while you were in the ghetto, when you were in the camps, while you were in the work camps, of caring about ever seeing any of the people that you were with, working with, fighting with, whatever, if you ever cared about seeing them. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. Oh yes. 

LAUREL: Can you-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. 

LAUREL: --start at the beginning and say what you felt about that? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. We were talking with friends of mine. Said maybe the day gonna come that we're going to be free people, just like anybody else. Maybe the hour gonna come when we'll be able to have a normal life like anybody else. Maybe the day someday gonna come that you-- we'll be able to joy, to enjoy ourselves, just like anybody else. 

We realize the tragedy, the horror in the camp. We realize. But we were talking between us. 

Person what he was sleeping with you in the-- in the barrack, the person what used to go to work with you every day, you felt-- you used to feel that he is your brother. Used to feel that she is your sister. In one camp I was were women too. That was-- that was in Poland, in [POLISH]. But in Germany, we were men only. 

We used to feel that that's all what we had. But-- but when it came to help physically, whatever it is, even if you want to, you couldn't do it. Was impossible. 

LAUREL: Did you talk about ever meeting again in another life? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. We used to. Maybe someday. We used to talk about it, that maybe the world gonna have some compassion to us on the end of the war, at the end of the war, what the German did to us. 

And we were talking even in 1940-- '44, the end of 1944, when the uprising was in Warsaw, the Polish uprising was in Warsaw, they brought in to our camp Polish people, brought in 300 persons. Laurel, from those 300 persons, in times of 3 or 4 weeks was left maybe 10%. 

Why? We were used to it already. They were not used to it. They used to die like flies. 

LAUREL: I-- I have to keep coming back to the same thing until you will answer me. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yeah. Yeah. 

LAUREL: I'm asking you if you ever thought if you will be free and you will have a good life that you will meet again the people you were with, that you felt like he was your brother, he was lying in the bed with you. Did you ever talk about it. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. 

LAUREL: And what did you say? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. Yes. We used to talk about it, that someday if we come together, we-- we-- we couldn't foresee the future, because, like I said to you, we were locked up from the outside world. We didn't know what is going on. 

But just like between us, we used to talk about it, that maybe someday we're gonna meet together. We're going to talk about the past, how bad used to be in the camp. And the most what we used to talk about it, Laurel, this-- we used to talk about it a lot, that we would like to come to the world to tell them what the Germans did to us. That was so much talking about it. 

Why we were talking about it, to tell the world what the German did to us, for one reason. I was the witness how people used to be shot. I was the witness how the people-- they used to hang the people. I was the witness how the people would starve from hunger. 

The people when they went to their death, one thing was, the last saying from them was-- used to be, in Jewish they used to say, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] Don't forget to tell the whole world what the Germans did to us. 

LAUREL: What did you think when you heard people say that? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: When I was-- I was thinking, I was thinking all the time I was the lucky one that I'm still alive. But I was thinking. I was hoping the day going to come, the hour going to come I'd be able to tell to people, to the whole world what the German did to us. I-- was-- I did talk about it. And I did hope. There was inside in me the will to tell to the whole world what the German did to us. 

LAUREL: What good did you think-- do you think it will do if you-- if you tell? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well, first of all, number one, the people should know what the German did. Second, it's going to do good or not, I don't know. But I feel that is my obligation to tell what is being done. I feel-- if I'm sitting right now on this chair, I feel that I am talking for 6 million people. I am talking the true what those people told me I should tell you, I should tell to other people what is being done. 

And I think if I wouldn't do that, I-- if I wouldn't do that and I wouldn't say this to the whole world what the Germans did to me, I think that would be very, very wrong, because I feel sometimes that those people trust me, that if I going to be alive, my obligation to tell them. 

LAUREL: You said you felt like a brother to someone you were very close with during those times. Suppose you saw one of those people today. What would that re-unification, that-- that-- that new meeting, that re-meeting of them mean to you. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well, on reunification, let me say this, Laurel, because we lost everybody, the family. And if I see anybody, which sometimes I meet people which I didn't see him for 30 years, which I was in the Catskill a few month ago and I did see a friend of mine, which I didn't see him for 29 years or more than that. What I'm saying? Since 1942, that is-- is more than that. 

And if I see a person like this, I feel that he is my brother. I feel that it's impossible to tell you how good I feel that I spent with this man in such a terrible, horrible situation, and now I am in United States in the free world. And if I meet this man, I feel that he is to me more than a brother. 

And you-- you-- I can't explain so much what means if I meet a person like this how much joy this gave-- is giving me, how much pleasure this is giving me, which Sometimes if I meet that person like that, we cry. But we cry because we are enjoying to see each other. 

And Laurel, this is something what is very hard to understand. The American public should understand our situation. People have brothers and sisters. They have their parents. But the what he hasn't got the parents and the person what he hasn't got the brothers and sisters, to him a good friend is just like a brother. 

And the most enjoyable time is for us, if I meet a man-- if I meet a man when I used to be with him in concentration camp, and we are sitting down, we are reminding ourself how bad it is, and today we are living in a new world. We are living. We are having a family. And we are able to live a normal life. 

Sure, we will never be the same, because you always have on your mind what happened with 40 years ago. You live with that. You sleep with that. You dream all the time. 

It's a funny thing. We survivors, whenever we come together or we meet each other in a restaurant or we meet each other, we play cards together or we meet each other on a bar mitzvah, on a-- on a wedding, whatever it is, on the end, always come up how we-- what we went through. All the time. 

Sometimes we say, well, we came to a bar mitzvah. We came to have a pleasure. That's human nature. I never walked away from a bar mitzvah or from a-- from a wedding or from whatever it is, if I meet my people, we shouldn't talk about the past. And I think we should talk more about it. 

We should talk not only between our friends. We should talk more to the public. The public should know. 

LAUREL: How do you feel when people don't believe you? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Very bad. I did read some books where they say it's not true what is being done to the Jewish people. I did read a book, I think Professor Woods in Chicago. He wrote that only one million Jews were slaughtered, lost their life in the time of the war. It's not true that 6 million Jews were slaughtered. If I read something like that, it's a lot of pain. 

One thing is only-- just like I said before, it's my responsibility. It's my obligation to tell the people what is being done to us. I would like to meet a person like that. 

LAUREL: What do you feel about other people who are now being hurt mindlessly, such as what happen-- I mean, other parts of the world, other peoples are being slaughtered much as the Jews were being slaughtered. What is your responsibility for them? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well, I think should be responsibility, my responsibility, to do whatever I can. Now, what I can do-- I'm not a high educated person. What I can do is only sometimes if a pamphlet comes in, they need financial help, I always help. 

I'm not in-- in situation-- I'm not able to go to protest for them, because it would be too much pain for me. But I'm wondering sometime, this-- what this civilization is doing, because the Germans were the civilized nation. And I think the-- the-- the more educated you are, more civilized you are, they are still doing the same thing. I-- I-- I just cannot realize what is going on. 

LAUREL: If a large number of people who survived the Holocaust got together, do you think they would talk about how they could help others avoid what happened to them? Do you think they would care? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. They would care. Sure they would care. Nobody can care so much as the one who went through. 

When-- I tell you something. When we had the convention and the-- and the Beth El Holocaust Awareness, I was there. And the-- was a delegation from the Armenian were there. I was glad I did see him. I felt that they, the Armenian came for help. 

Now, one thing what I spoke to one Armenian, I did blame him. I said, why did you wait 'til the Jewish people are doing something? It's 65 years already when your nation got slaughtered from the Turkish. You just wake up right now. Why are you waiting so long? 

And I felt that I am helping them. I felt that the Jewish people are helping them. And I think that the Jewish nation, the Jewish people, are people what they would like to help anyone-- anybody. 

And personally, I personally would like for help. If I would know, I-- I would be able to help the Vietnamese, or the-- anybody else. Anybody would say, I would like you should come with me, be a delegate or whatever it is, I would ready to go. But it got to be from their nation, from their people, got to be the organizer. I cannot organize for them. It's enough I'm organizing for my people. 

LAUREL: When you talk to your children, as I imagine you have, to your children about what happened to you, what is it you tell them that you want them to remember from all of this? Are you concerned about talking to them. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yeah. Yeah. See, years ago, I didn't talk too much. First of all, I had my problems, communication problems, financial problems. The wound was too fresh. 

But now, they finish college. They grow up. Then before I go, I feel that they should know what is being done with their grandparents, with their uncles, with their aunts. 

And for the last 5 or 10 years I would say, if my kids are coming home for a holiday, that time when they are coming home for a holiday, we should enjoy ourself. But the last 5 or 10 years, if I have an opportunity to talk to them, to tell them how we used to live in Europe, even I used to tell them the pogroms, before the '30s, before the '40s, I think they should know about. 

And I think if I am telling them that it's more important than if they read a book, which my son and my daughter, my two sons are high educated kids. And if they read a book, they understand better than I do. But if I tell them, then I'm the best witness. They understand me better than if they read the book. 

And I would advise average survivor if he has a chance, especially we are the survivors in the 60s already, some of them are in the 70s, before we go, before we leave this world, not only my kids should know, but if it is a chance to talk to you, to the public, I think it's very, very important. Maybe the people are going to learn something about it. 

LAUREL: Do you worry about your children carrying a burden because they don't-- because their parents went through so much, and therefore it makes them different than other children? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: No. No. I am now more attached to the Jewish nation than before the war. And it's true. Why? I went through so much, then I would like my kids should keep the heritage. 

And I tell the truth. I live in a democratic society. And I'm not a racist. I'm not a-- don't like if I see people are discriminate. But one thing what I don't like it is mixed marriages. I would like-- I would feel very, very bad if my kid leave the Jewish religion, because I gave so much pain for my nation, then I would like to my kids they should go on with it. 

And another thing is, you know, you were talking about what kept me that I should be alive today. You know, one thing is the truth. We were talking so many times in the camps, in the concentration camps. 

I used to talk to my friends. We used to be a family for 96 people, uncles, aunts, cousins. Nobody's left. That time, on the-- in the-- I thought nobody is left in the concentration camp where I used to be. 

I was trying so much that my name shouldn't disappear, the Rosenbergs shouldn't disappear. God, I used to say, help me some way that the Rosenbergs should still be around. And if I going to be alive, the Rosenbergs still going to be around, which from the 96 people we are left only four of us. 

One cousin I got in Canada. One cousin I got in Australia. One cousin I got in New York. And I am the fourth one. From 96 people, that's all that's left. 

We used to talk a lot. Take-- we got a lot of names of the Rosenberg or the Glicks or the-- or whatever it is that disappear. They just disappear. So if you are at least one is around from a family, it's you feel good that your generation is still around, still going to be around. 

LAUREL: What would you feel if today or in the next-- or the next small amount of time you found out that someone who you thought was gone was still alive somewhere in this world, but you didn't know. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: From my-- 

LAUREL: Do you think that's possible that someone in your family is alive but-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I don't think so. 

LAUREL: --living somewhere else. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I don't think so. Why? Let me tell you why. You know, people-- I am always in contact. Since 1945, I'm in contact with those people. 

In the beginning, I used-- when I came in contact with those people, I used to ask them, how did you survive? Did you know my brothers? Yes. Do you know anything? No. 

In Germany, I was trying all over in the beginning. In Israel, I was trying all over. Now, why I say it's impossible, I think it's-- well, it's always a miracle. But I think-- but why I say it's impossible, you should know one thing. 

We have societies in this state. We have societies in Israel. We have societies in Australia or wherever it is. It's societies. 

Wherever I come to a society, and if I want to find out something, I go to the society for my city. And I am sure if my brother would be alive, he would do the same thing. This is the way we would find out. 

If I didn't find out 'til now I don't think he's-- anybody is alive. I don't think so, which the religious way, maybe you would say it's not right to say to give up hope. But a fact is a fact. I don't like to be fooled. 

And I don't think I have any hope right now after-- what is it? It's 35 years already after the war. If I didn't see it after the war so long, I didn't hear from anybody, I don't think I have any hope to find anybody from my brothers and sisters. 

LAUREL: OK. That's great. Is there anything else that we forgot to cover? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Well-- 

LAUREL: I heard a knock. That's why I stopped. I know they're going to kick us out of here. 

You can get very close maybe in this light. Oh, you're-- doesn't matter what he does. OK. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: OK. One thing what I would like to talk about too, Laurel, is when I got free in 1945, that was April 4 when I got free by the First Division, the America division. The first few hours was unbelievable. Not for-- of the whole five years we were on concentration camps. At once, people are coming, say the American Army. But some people, they couldn't believe it. 

The American came. They said to us, we are going to the next city. You're free. 

I got free in a city, was-- they call in Germany Osnabruck. The whole transport really is supposed to go to Dachau. 

But the Germans got stuck. And they left us. We were on a transport maybe 10,000 or 12,000 people. They left us and they run. 

We were five days on that transport, on the trains. We didn't have what to eat. We didn't have what to drink. 

And the Germans were on one mountain and the Americans were on the other side. They are fighting each other. We were in the middle. 

What we did only, we took off-- we did see what is going on. We took off only our white shirts, whatever it is. We put it on the trains that we shouldn't be bombed from the American. 

I think we were at the time 10 or 12 nationalities, that train. I would say I would estimate maybe 1,000 or 1,500 die from hunger, from starvation on that train while we're waiting 5 days. But after when we came into the city when the Germans brought us in, then before I came into the city, I did see German soldiers hanging on the tree. I was that time 80 pound. 

And then when I saw a German soldiers hanging on the tree, I stand and I looked at that body. I couldn't believe it. How is that possible? And I was standing and looking. 

The American used-- the soldiers came to me and begged me, please, [NON-ENGLISH], come out. I didn't want to walk away, because it was unbelievable. 

OK. We came into the city. The German soldiers gave us whatever they had. That was wrong. 

We were hungry. We couldn't take it. We start to get the diarrhea. The people used to die like flies. 

Two or three days later, the Red Cross came in. They stopped the whole thing. The Red Cross didn't come in, I don't know what would be with us. 

Now, they took us to hospitals. And little by little, we start a new life. But that time, Laurel, we start to realize our problems, our tragedy. 

How long you were in concentration camp was one thing, two things, how to fill up your stomach, and the second, you shouldn't get shot. You shouldn't get murdered from someone. But when you are free already, three or four weeks later-- 

LAUREL: Oh, hell. Oh dear. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: That's all? 

LAUREL: Yeah. Then you'll think of it. I understood what you were saying. 

