SUBJECT: He said the right thing, for me at least. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, you were there until liberation for how many months? 

SUBJECT: About six. 

INTERVIEWER: And from that point on-- 

SUBJECT: From that point on, the Russians sort of wanting close up Theresienstadt, and wouldn't allow anyone to get out, because there were terrible epidemics going on, and they were-- they were frightened of it. And so afterwards they-- we organized, we managed to get out. One Of the Russian commanders was a Jew, and he gave us some kind of a paper, and we managed to get out of Theresienstadt. 

And a group of us, some men and women, we stores-- we didn't steal, I mean, all these farms were deserted. Because Theresienstadt is located in the Sudetenland, and these were all German villages around. And so the farms were deserted. So we simply took a carriage, we caught some horses that were running around, and we started our way back home. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were there, did you-- you said there was a day of liberation. What was it that happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, what happened was really interesting. It's when the-- before the Russians came, the Germans threw their hand grenades and everything in, into the ghetto. And we thought, you know, that our last minute came. And then when the Russian tanks finally came in, I mean, there was-- it was incredible, such a great jubilation. And I couldn't believe it. 

And I kept on saying, I really survived the war. And now, the biggest part of the people, just the idea that we were free. We started going and moving towards [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which was the nearest German town. Even so, there were-- we didn't realize it. There were still street fights going on there. But we had to go out, we had to move. 

And as we were going on the way, I and my sister, I saw the side of the street, German soldiers wounded, dying, dead-- terrible, terrible sights. And some way I told myself, I should be glad that they are dying there. But I could not-- I could not feel any gladness, I was really quite upset. And I told my sister, I mean-- and this is terrible, it's terrible to see all these people dying and wounded. 

And somehow, the first time I realized it, you know, they are suffering the same way as we. And so, I thought that, look, I don't want to go on, let's go back. And my sister said yes, but you wanted-- you wanted to move out, and so on. So now, let's go, let's go to the nearest town. I said, no, I don't want to. 

So we went back. I was surprised that I was upset over-- over these horrible sights, which were horrible too. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you come to an explanation for yourself, over the years? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I think that basically I don't like seeing people suffer, any people. And during the time that I wasn't in Theresienstadt, I was assigned to the sanitary ward, and some of the sights I have seen were terrible. 

For example, this was the time when the German Reich was collapsing, and they would send people to Theresienstadt, Jewish prisoners, some of them by foot, some of them by train. And it was terrible for us to watch, because these people staggered into Theresienstadt. They couldn't walk anymore. And on each side there was SS men dressed in black. And they collapsed, even in Theresienstadt, they would shoot them on the spot. 

And I remember thinking, and telling myself never to show any emotion in front of an SS man, and never break down. And I didn't. But it was terrible to see. And another terrible sight was when we had to pull out people from the wagons that arrived. And most of them were dead. And some were living underneath he's the dead. So that was also not-- not a nice sight. 

INTERVIEWER: What kept you going during-- after the man said the right thing, about how you looked. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What kept you going? Was it the thought of escaping? Your hatred, your pride? What-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I did not-- it's hard to-- I thought, you know, the will to live was very strong in me. I don't know, I used to be the kind of person who would get up in the morning and just be happy to be alive. And I guess he conveyed the idea that I might still live. And once I got up and cleaned myself, and started eating, and functioning, I thought now my next idea should materialize-- namely, I can escape. 

I still made up my mind very strongly that I will never die by German hands. So I guess it was-- it was a mixture. I hated them so much that the idea of dying through them was-- was just not, not thinkable. 

INTERVIEWER: You know, I ask you because 40 years later now, I-- 

SUBJECT: That I cry. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I guess I can't help it. It's-- it's not as painful as it used to be. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, no, no. What I'm saying is that at this time now, I can still feel from you the determination and passion to live, as you talk about what happened. And it seems so strong that I'm very-- 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Affected by it. And that's what I was responding to. And I wanted to know how-- how you did it. How you kept hope going and you answered. You had a real determination and will to live. 

SUBJECT: I guess so. I still do. 

INTERVIEWER: I was about to ask you that. You had mentioned outside about the after-- the after effects. And what-- 

SUBJECT: I'm married to the man I met while living on forged papers. And I was very happy for the next 15 years. And then afterwards, my husband became ill. He was a young man, and he had lung cancer. And two years later, he died. And I guess that was a bad time. 

INTERVIEWER: After he died. 

SUBJECT: But I have-- I had two children, and once more, well, I first of all was very determined to bring them up. And secondly, I guess I have-- I do have a strong will to live. So eventually, I succeeded in creating some kind of career is maybe too much, but livelihood for myself. I became a designer, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: A designer of-- 

SUBJECT: Children's clothes. And I think I managed quite well to bring up my children and so on and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: How old are they? 

SUBJECT: Old, now. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: My daughter is 25, and my son is 22. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh-huh. And you're-- where do they live? 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE]. My son is a medical student. My daughter is studying music. 

INTERVIEWER: Do they have some of your determination? Do you see that at all in them? 

SUBJECT: I think they do. I think they do, because-- I don't know, I tried not to speak to my children about the Holocaust when they were little. But my mother-in-law used to tell them quite a bit. And oh, they would always say, all these war stories, we are not that interested. 

Once I read a report that children of Holocaust victims are affected, and I asked them, how do you feel about it? Do you feel you are affected? And they said, but Mommy, how can you ask such a question? Of course we are affected. 

And I said, but you know, I never really told you anything as long as you were little. And they said, yes, but do you think we didn't know every time someone spoke about Germans or so on, you always had a comment? And then I recalled an incident that happened. 

My son went to school. He was about 6 and 1/2, seven. And at school, they must have told him about the Holocaust. And he came home, and he raised his hand, and said, "Heil Hitler." And I didn't say anything. But I said, you know, Robbie, don't-- don't ever say that. And he became very serious. 

And he didn't ask me why not, and he went to the bathroom, and wouldn't come out for quite a while. And I would knock, and I said, now, what about you doing there so long? Come out, please. And he came out, and his hand was bleeding. And so I said, how did you hurt it? What happened? And he said "I scratched it out so I should never say it again." 

So I don't know. I didn't tell him anything, and I felt I never-- I never really spoke to them when they were little, yet I must have conveyed something. But they, they don't-- don't have my fears and anxieties. I'm sure they are affected, because one is affected by everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. You feel anxieties and fears now? 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't-- I guess I'm just more of aware that families should-- that families should stay together. And I know that, you know, there is this possibility of being broken up. Yes, I do have this anxiety if any of them is away, and not back in time, I am irrational-- I try to fight it-- but I am irrationally afraid that something might happen. 

And I have to tell myself a million times, what could happen? Everything is fine. And well, it doesn't help. As long as they are not at home, I am anxious. But maybe it's part of my nature, you know, because my grandmother didn't go through the Holocaust, and she was the same way. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, we're-- 

SUBJECT: So we are finished? 

INTERVIEWER: Just about out of time, yes. 

SUBJECT: Well, you see, I cry easy. 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, no. I think you describe it in such rich emotion and detail that it's hard not to. So we thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: Well, you are very welcome. I don't know if it served any purpose, but I guess each story is different. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: And if you want to see it from the point of view of a psychologist, is it possible that people are not affected by happenings around them? Everyone is, right? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Even-- even smaller happenings affect you. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: So I guess in a way, we are-- we are coming to [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I am sure of that. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, in ways. But your will to live, and determination is-- 

SUBJECT: Well, yes. I guess, like with everything else, certain things you gain by fighting. And I guess there is something else. But that's not with everyone who went through the Holocaust. Many people that came back became very materialistic. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: With me, it worked the other way around. I really am not worried about money, and these things. And I don't make myself worries for the future. And I'm not upset when-- when I lose something, or-- lots of things become very unimportant to me. Somehow I learn to look at the basics, that's all. But everyone is different. 

INTERVIEWER: Can I say something just off the camera, off the record? My own reaction to what you're saying-- and I don't know whether you're aware of it-- is I find you very inspiring. I'm not sure that there's-- are you aware at all that one could have that reaction to you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I am. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. OK. 

SUBJECT: OK, thank you very much, too. 

INTERVIEWER: You're welcome. 