MORRIS GILBERT: You think I going to have a sun tan by-- when I going to go out from here. 

INTERVIEWER: That would be nice. 

MORRIS GILBERT: I don't have to go to Florida, if I got a sun tan in here. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. We'll rolling, Mr. Gilbert. You had talked about the coal mine. What were the-- 

MORRIS GILBERT: Yeah. This was in Jaworzno It's in-- was in Poland. And I-- you know, so we-- every day, we walk-- and by the way, while we are-- before I went to the coal mine, I work outside and a field. I don't know what they did over there, but we still working there. So while I worked in the camps and they come, for instance, 6 o'clock or 5 o'clock, you're supposed to go home. 

There's-- and if not, if something is changing, if you go out, for instance, at 4 o' clock, and go home, then you one thing you're sure is they going get their doom. They kill you. This was. But this time we left the place about 2 o'clock in the afternoon. And we didn't know what happened in this camp. And we come to the camp-- the whole-- this was the whole camp. We come to the camp, we see just in the camp is 26 gallows they put up. 

And we don't know what happened. We stay outside, from 2 o'clock in the afternoon till the next 2 o'clock. 24 hours outside. Those guys was-- there was cooks. You know, they well kept up in the camp. They built a tunnel from this camp. 

They got to finish a few inches and they catch them. And we stayed 24 hours over there. And they bring those guys. They're supposed to have to have a court-- you know, a jury. But that's baloney. They just bring them from Auschwitz-- 26 guys-- and they put machine guns all over, and just pull them up in one time. 

INTERVIEWER: They hung them? 

MORRIS GILBERT: They-- yeah. That's what I say. 

INTERVIEWER: But the coal mine? 

MORRIS GILBERT: This-- no, this was while I work in the-- in the field. But later on, I work in the coal mine. And the coal mine was a lot, for us, better because, first of all, it was warm, it wasn't cold, and we didn't see so many Germans downstairs. Then everybody wants to work in the coal mine than outside. And downstairs, it's just a foreman, a Jimmy, comes over there once in a while. The rest was Polacks. 

The Polacks, we-- they bring a pair of pants, and they bring a pant or two, or a half a pig, you know? So we got something to eat. So we're better off in this coal mine. Everybody likes to work. But every day, in the morning, we went-- 24 guys-- that's in chain. And we got the wooden shoes with the wooden sole. Until you get there-- it was five kilometer to the coal mine. 

INTERVIEWER: You were chained? 

MORRIS GILBERT: They chained the hand, you know? You know, a lot of-- by the hand. They put the chain on. 24 guys. And but the shoes were with wooden sole until we get the five kilometer. We break our foot until we get there because the snow sticks to the shoes. And we couldn't do nothing because we were in chain. So that's why-- this goes on like this for 18 months. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us what it felt like to wear those wooden shoes? Did it hurt? 

MORRIS GILBERT: It was very bad. I tell you, you break your legs till you get there. You hardly can stay because the snow sticks to the wood. And we have to go five kilometer. It was very bad, but we have no choice. You get arrest-- you arrest while you come downstairs. And one time-- one time, a guy used to be in one minute late. He threw him right downstairs with elevator. He killed right on the spot. 

And this goes like-- and then where I am? Then I got to go further up. I told you already this, no? We went to Germany, at Gross-Rosen. This was already a camp. I was already almost dead. I couldn't do nothing, from those walking, you know? They-- no food, nothing. So I was-- another medical happened. They say-- it was at night-- they give a half a pound of bread. Everybody was-- it was a big place and everybody will lay down, one on top. 

No shaving, no-- no-- swollen already. It was a big place, a block. And they all laid down, one on top of the other, and then, at night, they said, well, I give you half a pound bread, and a spoon of sugar, and you're leaving from here. So somebody dragged me. I couldn't go anymore. They put on the freight trains. And while we start going an hour, we saw the planes come over. They stopped bombed the city. So we-- so the whole German-- you know, we are running out from this train. 

So we were running to the German houses. It was empty. So we-- then we-- we come to a life a little bit. We eat-- dragged the food from the fridge of theirs. And clothes-- whatever they have over there, we put on. And after a few hours, we go back to the train. And after a bit of train, we went to Buchenwald. In Buchenwald-- we come over to Buchenwald. They took off the clothes and they put stripes again on. 

And we stay over there, in Buchenwald, I don't know how long-- for a few weeks. We go out to work. Whenever the planes come, we have to go back to the-- to the barracks. So planes help us a lot to stay alive because stay and work, we couldn't do it. So when the planes come, they want to bomb, so we go back to the barracks, so Buchenwald. 

And after Buchenwald, they sent us to another camp by the name of schwetzingen Him Like an oil-- oil-- over there is oil-- what they make in oil from stones or something. A cave. So we stay over there for another few weeks. This was already the end of '45. And then we went to another camp by the name of Bissingen. Over there, we couldn't-- from over there, the way to Bissingen is a lot to talk about. 

People-- they don't let even go outside from outside, while you're walking. They don't let the kids go out to a toilet. They have to go and-- you know? You understand what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

MORRIS GILBERT: They don't let walk out from they-- to go in the toilet, if somebody have to go. While he going, he have to do is-- what he needed. While he was walking. You know what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER: And he couldn't-- he could not clean himself. 

MORRIS GILBERT: No. Clean-- that's-- people, kids, they didn't feel like themselves either. And we come in this camp, we stay over there in this camp. This was the end already, about 1945. I don't know how long we stay over there. A few weeks. And then the Seth, he got a piece of bread, a spoon of sugar, a spoon of coffee, and we close up this camp. But he said, I don't know how long this is going to take. It takes maybe a week or a day, you go. 

We didn't know where to go. So we go, we walk. We walk in the woods with the Germans, of course. And kids, they eat grass. Whatever they have on the road, they eat. And finally, we passed by-- I remember, this was a Saturday. At night, it was so pouring. Unbelievable. We passing by all woods, but we see that something is fishy or, rather, something is going on. 

We were soaking wet. And 50 guys are on our way from us. They went in the woods and they shot them after, but they don't find nobody. In the morning, they-- all the time, they just-- they count us all the time. Whatever is left. So left-- was missing 50 guys. So we stopped in a town by the name of Ostrach. And they put us in a barn. We stayed in this barn. This was in the morning. 

And I went up-- and I went up on the second floor, in the straw. I was soaking wet, dead. And I said, I'm not going to go because I have a lot of experience. Because before, in a town, in a camp, there was I guy-- I don't remember-- who told the stories that he don't want to leave with the-- with the other guys, he want to-- he hide himself in the camp. And while he hide himself, he got free before everybody got free. He went free to the Russian. 

But later then, I might find out the Russian come too late and he-- he have to go anyway. But that's why. I took from this time. I took. I say, I'm not going to go, I got to stay over there. No matter what happen because I'm dead anyway. So I stayed. And I see everybody is leaving. This was by 12 o'clock, at midnight. It was Sunday, the 22nd of April. And I stay over there. 

But I see everybody-- nobody is in here anymore. And I say, well, nobody is here, let me go down. And I go down. I see nobody is around anymore. The kids have the guns. And everybody's dig-- digging in, in this stuff. They left-- the Germans, they left the whole, big pots, you know, with the food. They got noodles. When you put a spoon in those noodles, they stay. So the kids get up in the pots, and they're digging in those, and they eat those noodles. 

And from those noodles, they were sick. They got dysentery. So it was 1 o'clock, the 22nd of April. And we got over here-- we went to hide. Now was the worst time because nobody was in town. No-- no French, no Americans, no Germans. They all run away. So we went in the Germany houses. We stay over there till 6 o'clock. The French army comes in. And then we are free. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think now about this experience? What do you think about it now? 

MORRIS GILBERT: I-- it could happen again. It's not-- Yeah. That's-- according to me-- I-- when we left this camp, I figured this world going to be different. But so far, I can't see this. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any friends or anyone that you knew-- have you seen anyone ever again that you knew at that time? 

MORRIS GILBERT: Oh, yeah. Sure. I was in this camp, in the coal mine-- no, in the Kreising I used to-- I used to be-- I told you-- very strong. And wherever they need work, I give it to them. So whatever camp I came, if they need work, I was the best worker. I went-- it's up to work. Nothing else. So I come to-- so I work in this-- so I come Kreising to Poznan I just look for whatever they need to work. So I make myself a name by the Germans. 

So everybody works. And I was-- they make-- so we used to take off these cement pipes-- what they going underground, the water. I supposed to take this off from the truck. So when they give me a place over there and I do this every day. And in the meantime, I got friends. Of course, we have friends, all over, in the camps. In the meantime, was, in camp, friends what they used to be cooks and used to be peeled potatoes. 

And the people there, they was still a kid. So the guy that cooked told me, Morris, this kid, they're going to fire from the potato-- from the potatoes. He's still a kid. Can you do something for him outside? Yeah. And one more thing, I don't like to work. I could have a job inside, but I don't want to. I know the German. The German, if they tell that you are lazy. I never wants to work in the inside. I know, when it comes to work, I can do it. 

I can tell you so many stories about work that your hair going to-- but I tell-- so I tell them, all right. I take him my place. He is now in Toronto. And knew-- he knows that I was alive and thanked me he's alive. But when he heard this-- I am alive-- he cry like a woman. He couldn't stop it. Even today, when he see me, he cry. That's right. I don't believe it that a boy can cry so much when he knows that I am alive. 

When it comes to work, I did a lot work. But if they want to destroy you, you can do nothing about it. Just the opposite-- I was even stronger. What more I work, the stronger I was. And I help a lot of kids, too. I used to got-- I used to got a lot of power in the first camp even. I used to got jobs. I used to clean up the German cots. In the morning, I give them breakfast, and I make the beds, and I wash the floor. 

After I finish with them, I went to the kitchen and I gave out the breakfast for 300 kids. And they tell me to stay in and I say I don't want to stay inside. I finish with this and then I go. And I went to work with them 7:00. Say it was at night we go home, and I went with them 7:00. And over there, in this camp, was a-- they make-- they used to cover a river. And they-- the Germans, they didn't want to waste the time. 

So in the morning, while we covered this river and the machine put the sand in the wagons, why we have to put the sand at night-- two guys in one wagon. Just, in the morning, when the people going to come, they have, right away, to spread the sand. They didn't have to wait for the machine to put out the sand. So I feel that I am a better worker. And I met another guy who left his wagon stay empty and I went home to the camp. 

And I went to camp, I took a shower. And 10 minutes later, the German foreman come back. He said, Gilbert, I'm sorry, the kids are complaining that your wagon is still there. So I took a shower. We are ready, went back-- I walk. We walk over there, to the-- to the field. And we fill up the wagon. We are a whole 10 minutes before the whole gang went out. And if they have a job in the-- in the town, they call just me and another guy. But I help a lot. 

INTERVIEWER: You're saying that the work-- 

MORRIS GILBERT: Oh, yeah. What? 

INTERVIEWER: The work kept you alive. 

MORRIS GILBERT: No. This is just-- no, the work didn't keep me alive. I feel-- I was physically born to work. But the-- 

INTERVIEWER: I wonder if it saved you. 

MORRIS GILBERT: But whatever-- the less-- the less months doesn't help you work. Because dead. Just a snap of the finger you die. Just-- your life is-- you can be a too smart You're just miracle when you're alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Gilbert? 

MORRIS GILBERT: It's just-- yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question, but how old were you when you-- when the war was over? 

MORRIS GILBERT: 24-- oh, over? 

INTERVIEWER: When the war was over. 

MORRIS GILBERT: When the war was over, this was in '39. I don't know what-- I was 30. 

INTERVIEWER: You were 30 when the war-- 

MORRIS GILBERT: I went in 25. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were able to survive those five years. 

MORRIS GILBERT: Oh. And, you know, just talk is easy. Talk is easy. In our ghetto, in the Warsaw, the bombs-- it's not-- if you survive, it's just a miracle. Nobody can be too smart because-- unbelievable. I can't believe it myself. If I talk to you, I tell you these stories, but I can't believe it, as a human being. I told her-- I told her, if I ever write the book, I got the title already from the book. That's The Human Being Is Stronger Than I Am. 

That's right. But smart-- no. You can't be too smart because this is something-- it's you-- your clock is punched. You're supposed to live. That's all. I believe in this. I believe everybody's-- persons-- the clocked is punched. No matter if you rush or you go slow. I didn't work easy the whole while I was in the bakery either. I worked plenty hard, but this doesn't kill you. 

INTERVIEWER: Wow. OK. Did you get the number on the arm? Just stay as you are. 

MORRIS GILBERT: That's all? 

INTERVIEWER: We just want to-- 

MORRIS GILBERT: I'm sitting now. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. I mean, just stay as you are for a moment. 

MORRIS GILBERT: I was-- I got-- I met a guy in this camp. I know it's-- the German. He was a very nosey guy. But this guy, he was-- he was killed. He used to-- when we cleaned up the guards, he used to-- he put up the radio that he can hear something from England. 

You know what they say? You book, right away, a bullet in your head. There's no, without everything. And they know that you will listen to the radio from another country, they-- no. Everything. They already will have a bullet. 

And he put up-- right when they come to work, he put up-- we were over there, by ourselves, in the room. He put up the radio from-- here, listen, from England. And he got the killed in another camp. 