[BEEPING] CREW: We have to keep rolling. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I've seen this happen. 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT: With the Jewish people, you know, on the border. I was witnessing-- some family came back on the border town. There have been ghettos, around 150 people. Adults and children. 

And we have tried, it was in 1943. We have tried to contact Budapest, the so-called, it was a special unit who controlled foreigners. Controlling foreigner units was police controlling foreigner unit. A unit of controlling foreigners. 

And we got the promise saying we will- we will stay there. That was on the border who belongs to this unit, belonged to this unit, and he was no-- everything. He could do what he wanted. 

Before we got the permission, he took them on special trucks. It wasn't far. It was around 20 kilometers from the border. The whole transport was transported back, you know, to the border, and they had been killed on the other side. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean the Hungarian police man? 

SUBJECT: The Hungarian, they came back, 150 people. They have been returned in terrible misery. When I-- I was not with to seen this. I will not lie. But I was-- I have heard, you know, the working people, the workers, you know, the lumberjacks, they have seen many times complete not showing as real people. Something, you know, some bewildered, some monsters, with long hairs, and with beards on the womans, you know? Torn clothing, who has had an occasion to come over there? 

But they have been afraid, because on the border, the gendarme, or the nearest gendarme from the town would catch them, and right away throw them back, you know, to the-- over the-- the border. 

INTERVIEWER: Does the Jews-- 

SUBJECT: Jews who was in 1941, who was deported, who were deported, you know, to Poland. 

One person I met-- she was there at the gendarme headquarters, gendarme headquarters-- was three, four gendarmes in a small town-- lying in the mud and eating from the garbage can. She did not look like a human being. 

She was caught on the border and brought to-- to them. What happened to them? And I blame myself also. We have closed our eyes. This wasn't in '43. I have to correct, in '42. Because in '41, and '42, in the end of '41 also, started from '41 down to '42. 

But more than a year. It came little by little, some people. How they came back is what's not a question. Some Ukraines have taken away their clothing also, you know, for the-- the pay to give them, you know, the way away. 

And we have not learned-- Hungarian Jews, first of all, that we have not learned anything from that. We have heard about the European Jews. We have heard about the Polish Jews first, the Hollands Jews and other Jews. We have not-- not-- we haven't done anything, waiting like lambs, you know, to be sent, you know, to be killed. 

Most-- although the Jewish people was taken them away from them, you know, all the permission to make businesses, one, clandestine, they have made better business than before. 

I was, you know-- I made a fortune-- 

INTERVIEWER: That-- that brings us to March, 1944. 

SUBJECT: That brings March-- March 19, 1944. In the meantime, there was no-- March '44 they came in and created the whole situation, starting all nice, started to supply the people, you know, who was already in the ghettos. 

And it was, in April, it was already not so cold. You know, but it was terrible. In a such a room, there was three, four families. You know? Unbelievable. No facilities at all. They cooked outside, you know, on some bricks made, you know, artificially. No cooking possibilities in the one. 

But they had arrived, you know. Once I had walked to go, you know-- a couple of people to go in the market to buy some-- some food, you know, on the free market. You know? The peasants, you know? 

Certain people had their own. But there was supplied, you know, there was a common kitchen, and there was no private everything. Nothing privacy. We have built there a hospital, and survived everything. But that's all-- but it was temporary, because, you know, after, uh, the second week, it was-- the, uh, a rumor that they would be delivered people away. 

I could escape. I had all the papers. I have also, you know, there was, you know, a transporting company. We transported for the railroad, especially. It was a good friend of mine. He said, Mr. Goldberger, they are-- they have been sent all the transportation [INAUDIBLE]. 80 people in one wagon. 

You couldn't-- not sleeping. Sleeping only one like, the herrings, you know, in our van. You know, in one van, the railroad van. A bucket of water. Another bucket to do your necessity. Regardless if this is-- if this is man or woman. 

The door was closed. Only you know, there is where it opened. You know, the window. There was also that barbed-- barbed wires-- wires. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't you escape? 

SUBJECT: There was a reason. I could escape, you know, because he told me that I can give you a possibility I would rent a truck with-- for wine-- with empty wine barrels. And I will give you a certificate. You are-- Hungarian name. 

The name was GL. Goldberger Ladislow, Goldberger Laszlo Hungarian. Your name is [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] Laszlo. Because I had all the papers in [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] Laszlo. First of all, my boss was the head-- the head of the Judenrat. He was afraid, you know, when Goldberger will disappear, then something will be wrong. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you were also in the Judenrat. 

SUBJECT: --in Judenrat. And secondly, and this was the most important, that don't leave me alone. I lost my son-in-law. He was arrested because he-- he was accused, and this was the truth. He was accused that he treated a parachute, a Czech parachute, who fell and who broke his leg and treated him. Hidden. He was arrested. 

And one son was in Budapest. And in Budapest-- from Budapest, he was sent to a place named [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] There was a place where they gathered the-- arrested the Jewish people who-- later on, he escaped. This is also another question, but I don't want to go. 

He was shot. I met him after the war. He was shot in the neck-- in the neck. They thought, you know, he's dead, and the bullet came out here, not in side. And bleeding, he ran overnight in December naked, complete to the Jewish hospital. And he-- he hide in there, you know, in the morgue for two weeks until the Russian came. 

INTERVIEWER: So you did not leave because the boss-- 

SUBJECT: I didn't-- he said, he said, I have here, you know, all my daughter-- 

INTERVIEWER: The boss of the Judenrat asked you not to-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. The boss were my boss also. He was the head of the congregation also. The head of the congregation. The rektor. The president of the congregation. And he was-- he was the-- the president of the Judenrat also. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you asked to do in the Judenrat? 

SUBJECT: All the orders were [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] we got not from the gendarmerie or from the Hungarian authorities. We got this from the Germans. One day, he asked, you know, I need 10 kilogram of green-- this is unroasted coffee beans. 

Imagine in '44, we haven't seen coffee beans. And I had to go from one pantry to the other, and to find out, you know, if somewhere somebody has still coffee beans. And I found. 

One day, he said, I need a 15 by 12 oriental rug. And I said, you know, there are-- it was before the emptying all the Jewish houses and the synagogues. The furniture was put one on the other, and they were stolen, the most. 

Where shall I go? And I went to a family, and they didn't want to give me. Said, people, you have been-- you are here in your home. But how long you will stay there? Even then, they didn't believe this is the end of the road. Why you don't want to give your Oriental rug? You care for the rug? 

Shortly after a couple of days we start to make the ghetto. Did not believe it. I needed medications. I went to-- to-- the pharmacist, who was a Jew. Said, give me medication. I don't have money. 

Said, why? Do you want to enter, you know, my pharmacy? What do you think? You will stay here? I had an argument with the people, you know, to make, you know, in order to-- to-- to wake up. This is the end. 

He promised. He said that he will, the last minute, he will finish also the Hungarians. The Hungarian Jews injuries also. Deportation started every minute. And the deportation went on and on, and this guy's told me, you know, I will give you a truck. And then I couldn't go. I paid for it. Substantial amount for the truck. He hired the truck from another city in order not to know me. 

And I got, you know, to the city. And then he called me up because we had one telephone, the Judenrat had a telephone at the office, in order to get, you know-- I went-- one time, there was a doctor who was a-- had turned to Christianity 30 years before. He was a real Christian. 

And incidentally, he wasn't in the ghetto delivered. At once, I get a call, come. He said, the order is ordered. Come. You know, you can't be shot, by the way. It was there, you know, on the railroad station, having shot many people who found that some of the people, they're youngsters, Hungarian youngsters, you know? Have made, you know, the-- the-- the-- the judgment what you can take with you, what you cannot take. 

Although everything has been left as we arrived in Auschwitz. Everything has to be left on the van, and only you step out as you are. And uh, I go. Why is this Dr. Lakatos not delivered in-- in the ghetto? 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: The SS man who called you from the Judenrat? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I don't know. We go in. And I went there for a while. He had a wonderful house. You probably understand the Latin was written on the house. [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

[? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] was a modest home. [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] is quieting. And [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] great. Great quiet. To an old woman, his wife. We came in in the hall in the front. Such a wonderful altar, I haven't seen. Real Christians. Such wonderful nips, and different kind of person, or nips. You know? Religious. I haven't seen. 

Naturally, Dr. Lakatos came right away, you know, and he is bowing, guten tag, guten tag, like, you know, an old man he knew that. And he took-- he always took with him-- he had, you know, a whip made of leather. 

INTERVIEWER: The SS man? 

SUBJECT: The SS man. He took the whip, and he hit the altar complete. All the porcelain, very everything broken, everything. Said, Was bist du-- what are you? He said, I am a doctor. 

I didn't ask you your profession. Are you Jewish? No, I have already turned to Christianity 30 years ago. And he was saved by the other people, by the Gentile people, because he had relation. Therefore, he wasn't, you know, delivered, because they tried to-- to hide him in the gendarme, did not attach him, but he-- somebody had told the SS sturmbannfuhrer that is a Jew. 

Said, yes, you have turned 30 years ago to Christianity. And he said in German, A herring bleiben a herring. A herring remain a herring. Even when he will be baptized three times a day, he will never be a fish. Naturally, he was delivered in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: And? 

SUBJECT: In the ghetto. He came with us, you know, to-- to-- I have seen when he went to the left. 

INTERVIEWER: To the gas chambers? 

SUBJECT: In the gas to the left. And we haven't been delivered, you know. After-- after Pentecost, Jewish Pentecost, we have arrived exactly in Auschwitz. It was around June 5 or 6. I cannot remember exactly. 

And everybody was surprised, says Goldberger. They knew I have no family, because everybody, you know, had the reason, I couldn't leave the family. I couldn't run away. Goldberger was complete by himself. He was a bachelor. Why couldn't he escape? 

And everybody knew Goldberger will escape. So Goldberger arrived. Because there, you know, we went through-- we went-- when we stepped out from the wagons, they came, you know, mostly Polish Jewish people who arranged. Everybody has to leave, you know, everything what they have in the vans. 

Men separate. Mother and children separate. It didn't take five minutes. We have been already in a line. There was, you know, a road going in line. We have seen only men. The other side, there was. And they started to holler, if somebody has a child and is young, leave the child to the older people. Somebody had done; somebody hadn't done. What happened here? 

INTERVIEWER: The Polish Jews? 

SUBJECT: They said to leave the child to the older people. To the older people. We came on a crossroad. There was Mengele. And he stand, you know, in front of us. I have seen only the men, but the women, I didn't see, you know, the other side. 

And the men, he said-- he has shown, the other side, the front, like you and me, he showed. Nothing else. To the left. To the right. To the right was, you know, for work. To the left, there was even prepared Red Cross autos. If somebody couldn't walk, everybody can get up. You save him time, to save, you know-- they have been sent to the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: The Red Cross ambulance would take them to the gas chamber? 

SUBJECT: To the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: Now the Polish Jews advised that children to be left because-- 

SUBJECT: Be left, because they knew that if some youngsters, younger woman, if she had a child, she was-- she would be also directed to the left. 

INTERVIEWER: The gas chamber? 

SUBJECT: Which, you know, ended in the gas chamber. They didn't know that. They thought, you know, this is actually not a gas chamber. This is only a washroom. And I went, you know, to the right. And I have seen on the road somebody has started to say Goldberger Ladis has arrived. This is something that I-- because they're from that. You know. 

And I have heard my three sisters crying. But I did not recognize them, because they have been complete sheared, you know. The hair for the woman, there was complete, you know-- you don't recognize it. And imagine, you know, when the woman was taken complete shave the hair. 

INTERVIEWER: Shaving. 

SUBJECT: And I had a loaf of bread. And they said-- somebody throw the loaf of bread. You will not get it in the washroom, you know. And I threw the loaf of bread, but there was there a big ditch. I couldn't throw over the-- over the wire. My loaf of bread fell, you know, in the ditch there. 

But it is not a question, because, uh, in the-- in the concentration camp when I was, you know, in Melk, I've seen somebody who didn't have, you know, pockets, and a piece of bread was actually your whole daily-- daily bread, really. 

And we had only-- uh, uh, uh, we didn't have a belt, only the stripe-- the striped, you know, clothes? And diarrhea was, you know, the most common disease while taken away, because you did not get any fat. It went through your body without it. Diarrhea, had taken a lot of people away. 

There was a professor from Bratislava. How he came in this camp, I don't know, in this concentration camp. And he ran-- there was only a latrine. You know? He ran in the latrine. And excuse me, and he took off right away in order not to poop, you know, in the pants. 

And he forgot that he has here the bread in the shirt. A piece of bread, leaving for noontime. Naturally, when he took the rope-- he had a small rope, what kind, or a wire, whatever. When he took off, you know, his pants, the bread fell, you know, in the latrine. 

What do you think? He didn't take it out? He took it out. Ah, this side is a little bit-- only dirty a bit. And he ate the bread. We became complete-- complete, you know, animals. Complete animals. A father could still have stolen from the son the bread away, or vice versa. Or the father was sick, do not eat because you have diarrhea, in order he shall eat the bread. 

Or the father died. He said, I told my father he had, you know, a lot of golden teeth-- at that time, you know, golden teeth, you know, to pull-- I have to pull it out, you know, with a simple piece of iron-- my-- my wisdom tooth was, you know, covered by a golden crown. No? Cap. 

It was a little bit cut, my mouth. But I got 30 cigarettes. And 30 cigarettes, you could buy, you know, 15 uh, uh, ratio of bread. 

INTERVIEWER: In Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: No, not in Auschwitz. In the concentration camp. In Auschwitz, we have arrived, and this didn't take, you know, a long time. A short time, we get in the washroom. Everybody has to take off, you know, his-- his clothes. And only the shoes. You will be sheared. There was, you know, uh, uh, a Polish Jew who sheared me with a simple scissor. And he cut me. 

I am very hairy at all. He cut me. I said, you know, you don't have compassion. You are a Jew. Yeah? I am here since 1941. We are in '44. You worked three years, you know, in Budapest probably on the Andrassy Street. He knew the street. This is the most famous street, you know, like the Fifth Avenue. 

And you did not realize that something has happened with you Hungarian Jews? You did not realize? That you thought you will escape? You-- you are something special? 

You made a living, and I lost here my parents, my family. And I don't care. You see? Don't worry. I cut you, the devil will not take you. You see there the chimneys, the five chimneys, this will take you away. 

I have seen the chimneys, and I have seen-- naturally, I have seen also-- I have heard, you know, crying in through-- from a far distance. In a-- there was a small forest, you know, where greatly I found out that there was, you know, people who are being killed. Where there was-- if the gas chamber was filled up, they took the people right away, and they shot them, you know, on the-- there was the so-called two Jewish people, or the other people who have cut-- they have been undressed. 

They have taken them by the arms, invalids and so on. And from behind, there were sharpshooters, and they have shot them in there. It was a lucky if you had been shot in the head, you know, and behind, if he was dead. If not, he-- he was thrown in the ditch where there was the big fire, and he died, you know, half alive. 

We have smelled the whole time, you know, burned meat. The whole time we have smelled burned meat. We have seen-- we have been near by the Czech lager. Czech lager was 30,000 people. And some people was-- were-- were very happy. They have seen that the Czech people, they have been with families, with children. 

Now you see-- you said there is-- there is a-- a-- a-- a gas chamber, and the children and the mother, they have been killed right away, it's just not true. You see there-- with one day over night, the whole lager was empty, for they have been sent to the gas chamber. 

The other day, we came on appell. This appell was, you know, to stand, you know, and to wait until we are counted. You can stand one hour, two hours, three hours, four hours, five hours. Whatever you will wait, you have to stay there. If you have the necessity, you could do that later, but you have to stay there. 

And in Auschwitz, from Auschwitz, we have been sent to Mauthausen. Taken away. We have been in the-- in the-- first in the Gypsy lager, with the gypsies, later they have been liquidated also. And the gypsies with the children, there have been, and they have beaten us, you know, to death, even the children for [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER: The gypsies? 

SUBJECT: The gypsies are, you know. They have been, you know, I was in gypsy lager. I was beaten by the gypsy's children. Yes, then we are gotten-- you know, how we were gotten in line-- I don't know how many people we have been. In one hand, a piece of bread-- dark bread that bread. Yes. 

In Auschwitz, we have slept in stalls for horses. No straw, nothing. Only on plain boards. We have been our-- we put our shoes under our hat in order not to steal it. Because over night, you have found out, you know, you have stolen from the shoes, and then you are barefoot. 

And we could only sleep-- so many people have been there, when somebody want to turn, then all the people had to turn at once, one after the other. And everybody said, even if you have gotten something in dirty, very dirty bowls-- no-- of work, I don't talk of work. But at least something, you know, to take-- you know, it's called the [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] something uh, uneatable at all. It's for horses, was made, sometimes. We couldn't. 

Only a simple bread what you can-- could eat. Nothing else. And everybody sipped a bit-- a little bit from the bowl. No spoons. Everybody said, only away from here, we have been happy that we have been sent, you know, away to work, because probably, the possibilities, you know, will be better, because it was unbelievable, intolerable, you know? 

You couldn't sleep. You couldn't stand. When we stand, we stand like herrings. And everybody, you know, appell, the appell, it took, you know, hours and hours. We arrived in Mauthausen. In Mauthausen, I have been sent to work with a group. 

And then we have-- there we have-- we have built-- it already started to build an underground factory. I told you kugellager. What is the-- what do you call this, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Ball bearings. 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Ball bearings. 

SUBJECT: Bearing. Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Ball bearings. 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: Ball bearings. 

SUBJECT: Bearings. Yeah, bearings. German factory men have been there. They have been forced labor camp, but they have not been the lagers. They have gotten their salaries. They have gotten what we-- this was in-- around in July. 

In July, we got a bombardment for a couple days, before we went to work, you know, by mistake, by English-- by the English Air Force. They have killed a couple of hundred people. It doesn't matter. It was a mixed lager, from Greeks to French. Everybody was there. And Jewish people. There was no more a different treatment, you know, for Jewish people. 

When we came to Mauthausen, they told me, you know, one guy who was actually in there in Mauthausen several years, he said, you are lucky. When you would come, you know, two years ago, you could live only maximum of one week. You had to be killed. This was the order. 

And we went to work. Eating nothing. Nothing. And because-- and there was 8,000 people. Every month came a supply for 1,000 people. This was, you know, the ratio. 1,000 people died within a month. Mostly over 40's, they died. You know? They couldn't stand the work. Going to work, coming from work. 

In summertime, we got something to eat, but later on, it was very miserable. Almost nothing. One incident, for example, of the treatment was, you know, that the couples, so-called couple, who was, you know, the lageralteste, or the blockalteste. They had been all Germans and criminals. They have taken-- they have been taken out from the penitentiary. They have been put in the lagers in order to become-- there have been murders. 

One case, one guy, you know, said, what have-- what have you done? Nothing. Nothing? He started-- he had a big stick. He started to beat him, and he fell. The guy fell. Stand up. He couldn't. He take the stick, put on his neck, and danced on his neck, and he died. And nobody was responsible. 

Overnight, we have there, you know, a lot of reservoirs. The water reservoir, overnight, you have seen swimming that, you know, dozens of people, no questions. Somebody has thrown them out in the reservoirs. We have-- and we've got to drink water from there. 

I began-- I got so full with furuncles on my neck. And once I went, you know, I had to ask permission to go in the revier. The revier, that was such a treatment dispensary. 

Imagine they cut-- there have been doctors, but they didn't have any facilities. With a single knife, they put it in iodine, dilute it in water. This was for the disinfection. He cut, and he pressed with-- you didn't have cotton. There was paper cotton. With paper cotton, you'd put there. You know, it was squeezed out, and started to overlay over the paper cotton to make a bandage. 

As soon as you get out from there, you know, the whole bandage-- bandage cotton fell down. And the whole blood dried up. You have been full under the arm, everything has been full. I had, you know, striped clothes, striped shirt. The shirt hasn't seen, since October to March, hasn't seen water. My shirt was like-- like tin iron from pus. 

Beside that, we became so full with lice, two people slept in the-- in one bed, actually, in order to get warm. Besides that, you know, it was not enough place. When we became warmer, then the lice started to bite us. 

But I could-- I was a very good sleeper. I could break through the hunger through sleeping. We walked 6 kilometers to the ward. And there was five people in one line in [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] to keep, you know, an arm with another, in order when you go through the gate to count. I was the smallest in the middle. Walking, I slept. 

From there, we have been-- we have been transported, located, to Ebensee. This is a complete different story, in three transports. We have been delivered by train. Some people have been transported by ship on the Danube. It was terrible. They were so full when the ship sank, and no eating nothing. A friend-- a best friend of mine died. 

We came to Ebensee. In Ebensee, we didn't get to eat at all. Soup was only-- if you got, you were happy, only the peeling of the potatoes. Because potatoes have gotten the SS. The peelings were there. If you got more, two or three more piece, you have been lucky. Otherwise, you ate only water. Nothing was given to us in the last couple of times. 

I became so sick, and I went, you know, to the so-called schreiber, the schreiber who wrote-- who kept the number of the people. Because, you know, when our people went out of the gate, you know, there was transport of 3,000 people, they had to become-- to come in 3,000, alive or dead. But the dead have been carried, you know, on two boards. You know, the head and the racks was hanging. But the number has to be exactly, in order not to escape. 

We have been, you know, sheared here with a razor in the middle. Even when you escape, you couldn't escape, because you know, here in the middle of was, you know, complete with a razor made, you know, a stripe. Everybody could recognize you. Besides the clothing, you know. 

And there, once in the evening, you know, I said, you know, I want to go-- I cannot-- I was in high fever. I didn't know I have an [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] on the nose. You know, I don't know how you call this. You know? In German, you call this [? [GERMAN]. ?] This was actually, this is a blood-- a blood, eh, poisoning. 

No-- in-- in-- in English, I don't know. In medical expression, it's [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] this is-- this is a poison. I didn't know. I was almost, you know, complete swollen. And I went to the schreiber and said, you know, I want to go to the-- to the revier. Revier they called it, to the dispensary. 

You? You look so good out. They didn't know what the lies were. I went in desk because I was in high fever. It was terrible I couldn't stand more. 

One evening, you know, I couldn't climb the third bed in the room. It was very terrible. You know? The last couple weeks was terrible. I couldn't get up on the bed, and I told you-- I repeat. 

And I asked who was underneath, a guy, said, listen, I cannot climb the bed. Was one bed, second, the third bed. I cannot climb the bed. Said, you cannot climb the bed? I will not climb either. Beside the point, there is the light, and here, underneath, you know, we are covered. If it is darker, then I can sleep better. 

But have compassion. I cannot climb. And this evening came in two SS with two German Shepherds, drunk complete. You know? They made a fuss to wake up everybody. Well, they're not, because we have been-- went, you know, 6:00, 10:00, 11 o'clock in order to wake up at 3:00 and 4 o'clock, you know? Because we have to make the lines, and so on, to get out of the-- and make an appell, a whole story. 

Every second Sunday, we had free. And he was bitten to death. If he would have compassion, I would get the bed-- this bed-- his bed, I would be dead. In Ebensee, I went in the hospital, and I got sulfas, prontosil. You know what prontosil is? Today, they don't use. You have antibiotics today. 

At that time, you know, was-- was a different kind of-- how do you call? It was also a big discovery against, you know, disease-- pneumonia and so on. Prontosil was the German name. 

It was a red-- a red medicine. Dilute it in water. Put on your nose. I found-- then they found the nose is red. Therefore, they call this in German rote nase. After five days, the fever is gone. 

How we have been-- we have been four people in one bed. Four people in there. And we had four people in one bed. Imagine, where one person could sleep so far. There was not a meter wide. Four people in one bed. And we got, you know, soup in one bowl, and everybody, you know, sipped. And look, everybody, do not sip big. Sip less, because you sip more than I. And a piece of bread. 

And afterwards, after five days when I was-- I didn't have fever-- they took me in the [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] The [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] is a so-called a block where you-- recovering blocks overnight. And I didn't know-- they put me right away in a dark room. 

I lie in the darkroom. I didn't know what this is. You know? I have found that, you know, it was dirty. We didn't have-- we didn't find out that-- I-- in the lager, I was lucky. I found Czech workers, Czech workers, who have been designated there to work. You know? There in the lager in Melk. 

And I got sometimes from them, you know, onions from their kitchen. Because they have a soup wagon. And I took the onions. It was very dangerous to took in in the lager. And I took this in the revier, and I gave this to the doctors, and the doctors gave me bread. Remaining bread from the peop-- from the people who had gotten their-- their ratio, but in between, they died. 60-70 people died every day. They had their now bread. And they have been hungry off a piece of-- of-- of onions. And a piece of bread was very important. 

And I am there just sleeping. I feel something caught. I took more. But it was complete dark. In the morning, I found out, you know, I was closed in in a morgue. I slept on-- on-- cadavers. 

I didn't know that. And I was complete naked. Complete naked, you know, they put me in-- I have to wait-- I have to wait, you know, if such a bed were empty. There are four people. Until then, we have sitting on this the floor. This was in the Alps. And they had all the-- all this 1,200 people was there. Every day died, you know, there, at least 50, 60 people. 

And there was, you know, people who carried, you know, the-- the dead people out from the bed. He came out, and is here some dead? They took him and threw him out right away, you know. From the bed, throw them down. Then they put them in together, put them on-- on a piece of wood, and they carried them out. 

And there was, you know, people-- we have been naked. And everybody, you know, was going in and they kept us. OK. What shall I do? I can finally-- we have been now liberated by the American people. I was 70 pounds. I found out, you know, my father was in Auschwitz. My brother was in Auschwitz. My three sisters have survived until April. In Bergen-Belsen, they caught the typhoid, and they-- they died in Bergen-Belsen. 

The smaller brother has said to-- goodbye to my father. My father had hidden him out $300 in paper, and he have given for the foreman, you know, money, work. He was a-- although he was 59 years old, he came to Mengele, and Mengele asked him, what are you? Said, I'm a painter. 

Can you work? Yes. He sent them on the rack. And he broke his hip. He broke the hip, because he had only to do-- otherwise, he didn't do anything, because the foreman has taken care of him. He gave him $50 again. He was-- when the Russian came and liberated, he had still $100 bill. 

And he broke his hip because somebody came-- he was on the second floor, and somebody came and said-- and had to climb right away, you know, the ladder. And the ladder then slipped, and he fell, and he broke his hip. 

It was exactly the time when the four of the five chimneys in Birkenau was bombarded and exploded. And so he was not sent to the gas chamber and to the-- to be burned also. He was left there. My brother, before he was sent to Birkenau from Auschwitz-- Auschwitz was, you know, the factories. When he was then-- he brought him two baked potatoes from where he took it, you know, knowing that the father is going to, know, tomorrow to be, you know, exterminated. 

In change, my father went in Birkenau. And then the Germans evacuated Auschwitz. And when evacuated again, they came a German soldier, or an SS. Konnte hier jemand laufen. That means, "could somebody here walk?" And everybody was afraid if he will stay there, then he will be shot. 

Many people tried to get up from the bed and to walk. My father wasn't able, because nobody has taken care of him. And they hurt only the people-- the people who went back-- went out from the hospital, out in the court. They have been shot. My father was left, then, for two weeks, until the Russians had came. 

They didn't have-- he said, you know, he had three or four times something to eat. And he came home in January to Munkatsh. In Munkatsh, he stood until the Russian came. And I spent in '47 a lot of money. 

I-- in the meantime, I-- I, by accident, I found, you know, a son of my previous boss. And I was, you know, sick. I had 70 kilograms-- 70 pounds. I weighed 70 pounds. And in Budapest, I went in a sanatorium. And I was 13 days. And there I met, you know, my wife what I lost now. 

And later on, I came to Romania because, you know, my boss's sons-- my boss's daughter got married to somebody who escaped to Romania, and he came back. And this place became Romania. At that time it was Hungary. 

I, thought, I went, you know-- after, when I got better, I went to this place, you know, to recover. And I went, you know, to Oradea Mare. This was, you know, a Romanian city already at that time before it was Nagyvarad. And I met my wife because she was, uh, descend from a family Ullmann. It was a big family, the Ullmann family in Oradea Mare. 

And I stuck there. I did not intend it to be there, and I stuck there, and I couldn't get out. I get married. And therefore, you know, I stood there until the the end, you know. I tried in 1950 to get a passport. I didn't get. 

In between, I was arrested in '48 because I was a stranger and that's all. And then I was arrested in '62 by the Romanian, because I asked-- not in '60, '59, because I asked for a visa. And I 13 months in jail. And they found some foreign money fund. And that was when, you know, I came to America. 

INTERVIEWER: And your younger brother? 

SUBJECT: Younger brother, he was evacuated. He is miss-- he missed on the road. Nothing. My father came home. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father-- 

SUBJECT: My father. In '47, I brought him over from Russia. It cost me at the time $1,000. And he was smarter than I. He said, I don't stay here. The communists have taken over. And he went, you know, to Czech-- to the Czech embassy, and he presented himself to say, I cannot do anything. 

He went to then to the-- to the authorities in Romania. Said, I'm a Czech. I have no right to stay here. Give me a passport. They gave him the passport. He went, you know, to Israel, and he died in Israel in 1949, when I was in the jail. 

INTERVIEWER: We can, but we have to leave the place. 

SUBJECT: OK. I made it short. I had a lot to tell you. 