INTERVIEWER: OK. Mrs. Teichner, if you would go back and tell us about-- give us your name and where you came from and your family. 

SUBJECT: My Name is Genia Teichner. I come from Poland. And I'm here 30 years. And then Hitler comes into the city. My mother died. We was eight kids. My father didn't want to remarry. 

So then Hitler comes with our small city. He took, right away, my husband, to the army, right away. Then I was living in the ghetto. We was to wear such white bands, because we're Jews. 

Then I was working for the army, for the soldiers for the army-- I was making the buttons to the, to, for the army. I left my husband at the house, and my father was in the house. And it was eight kids-- six sisters and two brothers. 

So then I took, I went to work in the morning. I come home, I didn't see nobody. So the next day, my father called up. He says, Genia, bring me the shawl, the praying shawl. 

(CRYING) And I run, you know, when the German soldiers almost killed me, because I want to give my father the shawl. He was a religious man. Then I come home, I didn't got nobody. Then they took me to the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's stop a moment, Mrs. Teichner, and think back to before the Germans came into Poland. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing? Where were you living? 

SUBJECT: In Chrzanow, in Poland. I come from Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: How big a city was it? 

SUBJECT: Not too big, not too big. It just was a very religious city, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Lots of Jewish people lived there? 

SUBJECT: Believe me, I don't remember. My heart is so heavy, I don't remember, was not too much. It just was such a small city, a religious city, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Religious city? 

SUBJECT: So then they make a ghetto-- there was all Jew in two streets. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's just try to remember before they made the ghetto. Describe your house and your family. How old were you? 

SUBJECT: Oh I was, I was young. I was maybe 25-years-old, 24-years-old, you know. So then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you married? 

SUBJECT: Yes. So they took my husband, they took him to army. 

INTERVIEWER: In the Polish army? 

SUBJECT: In the Polish, army, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What was his job before he went in the army? 

SUBJECT: A carpenter. 

INTERVIEWER: He was a carpenter? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So then they took him, and I was with my father, you know, with the sisters. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were-- 

SUBJECT: And-- 

INTERVIEWER: --wait, when? 

SUBJECT: So then Hitler comes in, the first thing was, was a baker. He was, maybe, about 65-years-old. They took him, you know, and they hang him, middle of the street. The music was playing. You come at the middle of the night, the soldiers, they knock on the door. 

We used to have cards, because we're Jews. You used to have cards to go in the street-- not in every street. Just was a couple streets that you can go. 

So all right, then they come in the middle of the night. They took the cards. They says, you have to come tomorrow, you're getting the card back. So we come. They hang this baker, this Jewish man with two sons. 

The music was playing. I don't know how we survived. I don't know where was God, I'm telling you. 

INTERVIEWER: Why, what do you mean? Who was playing music? 

SUBJECT: Soldiers, German soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: Were playing music while they-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and they hanged this baker. He was 60-years-old, maybe 65-years-old, you know. It's 30 years. You know, you think-- 

INTERVIEWER: They hang this baker? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and two sons. 

INTERVIEWER: And his two sons? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And you saw it? 

SUBJECT: I saw this. Sure, I saw this. 

INTERVIEWER: Was everyone from the village watching? 

SUBJECT: Everybody has to go, because we've got such cards. We was Jewish people. So without a card, you can't go out in the street. Was a couple stores that you can go shopping, you know, so you have to have out the cards. 

Just like, a cattle-- they call cattle car, you know. And then we used to wear such a wide band, here. It's-- you're a Jew, you have to suffer. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any children? 

SUBJECT: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you working before this happened? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: I worked in a shoe store. 

INTERVIEWER: And you didn't know that this was-- something bad was going to happen? 

SUBJECT: No, in the morning, my husband was in the house. And my father, who-- the kids was all mattered, and he got the kids. You know, and now, into work, they make from a synagogue a factory. 

And we used to make buttons for the soldiers, you know. And I used to work. Another way they would take me, maybe more, before, in the camp. So I went to work. Everything was fine. 

Then two hours later, I hear shooting. Terrible. That's all, I didn't see anyone. My father, just when I give him the praying shawl, when was Judenrein, you know, everybody out. 

So I run. Like I told you, the soldiers almost killed me. I don't know how I survived. So I give him this shawl. And I saw my sister-- the kids, they passed by the street. 

(CRYING) And I come home, and they took me right away, in the camp. And I was, about 4 1/2 years, almost 5 years, I was in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were they taking everyone? 

SUBJECT: I was in Bernsdorf. This was somewhere in Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER: They took you away to a camp. What kind of a camp? 

SUBJECT: Bernsdorf. This is somewhere in Czechoslovakia. In that, I was working. I was working. I make the [? sig ?] for the army, for the soldiers, you know-- I make 3,500 a day, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: 3,000-- 

SUBJECT: It was something. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you making? 

SUBJECT: You know, for the army, what they sleep, how would you-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mattresses. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And I make this, and I was working like a horse, believe me. Just then comes Yom Kippur, and I don't want to eat. 

They didn't give me three days to eat. And she told me, they did the-- how you call this-- what she takes care of us-- you're going to fast, you're not going to get-- I says, I don't care. I don't care, I'm not going to eat [INAUDIBLE] Just I want-- it's my holiday, I have a right to fast. 

It was problems, you know. Young girls, they took to-- who got nice jewelry, they took it down-- who got nice hair, they cut it. But I was older, so they leave me alone. 

INTERVIEWER: You were older, and so they didn't cut your hair off? 

SUBJECT: No. The young girls would they have to cut their hair, you know, what's-- who got nice, long hair, you know, young girls. I was with girls, they was from my country, you know, they pushed themselves to my room. 

Because was the room, half like here, was 14 beds, 14 girls in one room. It has to be, every time, clean. Make the bed, because the Germans were going to come. You know, I forgot, when we come to [INAUDIBLE] Officer, before they took us to the camp, we have to take off our everything. 

You know, and we stay. Who got a little thing-- left, right, left, right. And you were sitting with the glasses of beer. I'm telling you, what can I tell-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who was saying, left, right? 

SUBJECT: Because when they say, left, I know that I'm going to the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: You were-- 

SUBJECT: When they say, right, they-- to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You were naked in front of these-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, sure. It was five-- such big German soldiers. And just, left, right, left, right. They make our [INAUDIBLE] for us. 

INTERVIEWER: This was before you went to the camp? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this, do you remember? 

SUBJECT: This was, I think, by 1940. Could you remember everything? 

INTERVIEWER: And then you were-- 

SUBJECT: History is over. It's for good, when I come from camp, today, I would, three times, from that-- Just it's terrible, you know, a family of eight, and to lose everything. Believe me-- 

(CRYING) That would cut my heart from [INAUDIBLE] to lose such a family. No matter how you feel, America is a beautiful country. Just is missing something. It's missing a sister, a brother. 

OK, I couldn't say my mother. My mother died. Passover, I have [INAUDIBLE] and my mother. Just is a terrible thing. Just I want to know something-- where was America? They kill 6 million Jews. Now-- 

INTERVIEWER: I want to hear what happened to you. You were in the camp. 

SUBJECT: Yeah 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? 

SUBJECT: I was working. 

INTERVIEWER: I can't hear you. 

SUBJECT: We went, every day in the morning at 5:00, with the SS, you know. We didn't go alone. We went, they took us, in the morning. They took us, in the barrack, in the barrack by 5:00, 6:00. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: In the barracks that we used to live. And then at 12:00, we got lunch-- a little bit of bread and a little bit of water from what they cooked from potatoes, or something like that. 

Once a week, we got a piece of meat-- it was a holiday-- just because I was a very good worker, you know. So I got, every Friday, about 3 kilo. You know, by us, it's pounds. Over there was kilo-- in Europe was kilo, you know. 

So they give me potato salad or herring salad, every Friday, 3 kilo. So I'd bring this to the girls, and we got a holiday. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in that camp? 

SUBJECT: I was about 4 and 1/2 years, almost 5 years. 

INTERVIEWER: Five years in that one camp? 

SUBJECT: In one camp, I was. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the name of the camp? 

SUBJECT: Bernsdorf. 

INTERVIEWER: And where exactly was it, do you know? 

SUBJECT: This is by somewhere in Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were the other girls? Were they all girls? 

SUBJECT: Was younger ones, was married womens, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Only women? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Was also mens, also. We was working, just we couldn't talk to them. Another way, they take you away. That's all, you wouldn't see anymore, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: There were men? 

SUBJECT: You couldn't speak to them, no, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: There were men in this camp, also. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I've got a man-- I was surrounded by machines. They had a very big machine. So he took away this work from me. I didn't speak to him one word, one word. He wants to speak, I shut my mouth. I didn't open up my mouth, because I was afraid. 

I didn't know that my family is not alive. I not, and either way, I don't have what to lose, just it happened like this. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in the camp for four years, and you never knew where your family was? 

SUBJECT: No. I saw they took my family, right away. Just I didn't know when, I don't know. I didn't know when they're going to kill him. You know, I saw him. When I went out from my house, I run to see my father to give him the shawl, the praying shawl. 

I saw my sisters. I saw my father, just I didn't know that they go to death. 

INTERVIEWER: So for four years, you were in this camp, thinking your family was somewhere in Poland and you would see them again? 

SUBJECT: I talked somebody-- going, they took him in a camp, when I come home, I'm going to see him. So 1945, the Russians come in. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back to the camp a little bit. Let's finish about the camp. What was your, what was the daily life, there? What did you do, how did you live, what did you have to eat? 

SUBJECT: In the morning, they give us a piece of bread, a little piece of bread. And they give us coffee, if you had to go to work. By 12:00, by 12:00, they give us [INAUDIBLE] potato, a little bit soup, and also a piece of bread, or something. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the work? Was it hard for you, or what? There's guards? 

SUBJECT: Sure, it was hard for me. I never saw him, and then he put me through such a work. I never did it. You know, it was hard, When the machine broke, I have to fix myself. Such a thing, you know. It's just I have to work. I have to suffer because I'm Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Other than working, were there other favors that the girls could do, or-- 

SUBJECT: This was [INAUDIBLE], you know. It was machine what they make [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: No. To get extra food for Fridays, were there, were there other ways to get food? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Other than being a worker? 

SUBJECT: No, you couldn't go out, because you went to work with German soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I meant with the Germans. Were there favors for the Germans? 

SUBJECT: And you went home with them. They didn't let you go out. 

INTERVIEWER: Were some girls friendlier with the German soldiers than others? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they was. They was friendly. I used-- I worked just with German people. It was very difficult. They feel sorry for me, just they couldn't do nothing. What could they do? 

INTERVIEWER: But they didn't torture you or hurt you in this camp? 

SUBJECT: No, no. They didn't hurt me. They hurt me enough that they kill my family, so I got enough. Did you have to kill me more? 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think they didn't kill you or they didn't hurt you? 

SUBJECT: Because I work like a horse. So that's why. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't hurt anybody in this camp, anyone? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, they hurt. You know, was, like, young girls, they don't know how to work, they don't how to do it. They were suffering. They sent them away. They took them away, nobody knows where. You know what is-- it's not so easy, believe me. It's not so easy. 

I can't talk and talk, just-- you know, it's 30 years over. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, so they-- 

SUBJECT: What can I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were the officers-- 

SUBJECT: You would ask me right away-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were the officers men or women? 

SUBJECT: Some was men. Some was women. Just the women was worse than the men. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about that. 

SUBJECT: I tell you. For instance, was Jewish girls from my city. It was a little city, just very religious, you know. So all the girls, I was older than them. They pushed in my room. You already know me from my city, from Chrzanow, OK. 

Some of them was very religious. She wouldn't get up in the morning, she shouldn't pray, you know-- very religious, she stays and prays. So in the morning, you have to make the beds, you have to wash the floors, yeah? 

So I didn't get her to doing nothing, because she was so religious. She was, anyway, very young, maybe 15-years-old or 16-years-old, you know. It was a Jewish woman, what she was-- she was not too far from my city. 

She was worse than the Germans, I tell you the truth. So she comes in, she comes in. She says, Mrs. Teichner why she doesn't wash the floor? I says, Sophie, what is a difference? I'm going to do for her. 

She says, no. She took her by the hair, she, she put her on the floor, you know. I got so sick. I says, listen, when is a God in the world, I pray you should come with me to work like this girl worked. 

And that, it's true, I'm telling you. She went to work. You know what she did? She took from us the rings, she took from us the earrings, and then a week later, the SS come in, you know, and they catch her. 

She wants to take everything for herself. And then the SS comes in. And they catch her-- she wants to, to put away some [INAUDIBLE]. The next day, she went to me, with me to work, she cleaned up the sicks for me. 

I told her, Sophie, see, God punished you, because you threw this girl on the floor. 

INTERVIEWER: What was her name? 

SUBJECT: Sophie [? Perchik. ?] She was from [INAUDIBLE] I tell you the truth, when my husband comes from the Army, 1945, and I meet him, I saw, on the street, and I told my husband. And my husband was still in the, in the [INAUDIBLE] from the army. He could kill her. 

Just I says, no Marcus, I'm never going to talk to you. I leave you, and I'm going to run away from there. I says, listen, I'm Jewish, she's Jewish. Let somebody-- what I mean, let somebody punish for mine thing. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any other women? What were their names? 

SUBJECT: I remember, I tell you, was a woman, a German woman? 

INTERVIEWER: What was her name? 

SUBJECT: This wo-- I don't remember. How can you remember so much, impossible. So was a German woman, you know what she did? She took the beautiful girls, was such a young girls, such young chickens, I'm telling you-- 15-years-old, 16-years-old, 17-years-old. 

She comes every night into the camp, and she took the girls, maybe an hour or two. I don't know what she did. What she did with this, I don't know. Just the girls come out, they was half dead. 

She was worse than a man. I couldn't look at her. When I saw, I went in, and didn't-- I, I couldn't look at her. I hate this woman. 

INTERVIEWER: She came at night and took the young girls. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And-- 

SUBJECT: She keep them somewhere an hour or two. I don't know what she did with them. 

INTERVIEWER: But when they came back, what did you see? 

SUBJECT: They was half dead. They just didn't want to say nothing. They was afraid to say, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they have scars, or would they have wounds, or did they-- 

SUBJECT: No, no. I wouldn't say that. No. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think happened to them? 

[LAUGHTER] 

SUBJECT: What I think, I can't express myself what I think. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she alone with these girls, or-- 

SUBJECT: She was alone, yes. They are alone. And her sister, you know, was SS, and she was so nice, so nice, really. Not all of them was bad, you know. They got heart, they feel sorry, also. Just they couldn't do nothing. What could they do? 

INTERVIEWER: You mean SS women who sympathized with you who felt sorry for you couldn't help you? 

SUBJECT: No. What-- couldn't help me. They was afraid for themselves. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the SS men come in to take the girls, also? 

SUBJECT: Not too much. I tell you a fact-- where our bedroom was, in the bathroom was maybe 10 miles from here. You know, you're just a human being-- you have to go in middle of the night, out. 

So sometime I was so sick, because a girl died in my room-- she was so religious. And I says to the, to the SS, I says, I feel sorry for this girl. I know where she's from, my country. 

And she got one son, and he was in the army. I says to her, I forgot the name, so many years. I says, please, I want you do me a favor. She likes me very much, because I was very clean in my room. And the SS come-- the first thing was my room, to look how I keep up. 

I says, please, do me a favor, this girl died. And by Jewish people, you have to make a dress or something. She used to pray every day. So the SS brought me one sheet. And I, with her sister, make-- you know, how do you say, service when somebody died. 

INTERVIEWER: A shroud. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And I wash her a little bit-- that was the whole night. Not light, now nothing, just we've got a flashlight. I sew, with her sister, we make a dress. And I put the praying book under the head, under the head. 

I took a piece of glass, and the straight, I put under eyes, like Jewish people used to do. And we took her three times to [INAUDIBLE] where our bedroom was. And then after the war, I went with her where the camp-- I says, come take your sister. 

And she took her to my country, and she, she buried her. I do lots of things in the camp for the younger girls, what I am, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: You are saying that the lavatory, the bathroom was very far away. And so what-- 

SUBJECT: You know, one time, in the middle of the night, I was so sick. I have a very bad heart. My nerves, when I get sick, I throw out, or I couldn't sleep. My neck was so-- or I can cry the whole night. 

I went in the bathroom, I come out. It was a very light night, I see soldier stays. Oy, I says, they gonna kill me, what I'm going to do? I don't care, I don't care. Was everything is so-- and he say, don't say nothing, we're from England, we want to help you. 

They got cigarettes, they got chocolate, they want to give me money. I says, please, leave me alone. You know, so many years-- I was young, really young. 

I went in, and I went to the-- not to the SS, to the Jewish girl, what she was-- I said, Sophie, outside there's soldiers, they have chocolate, they have cigarettes. 

So she called up the SS, and they come, they put the poor soldiers in the, in jail. I feel so sorry. I-- listen, they want to help us. Just they would help us, we would go to Auschwitz. They would kill us, anyway. I says, ugh. 

That was part of fate. You know, it was not all things. It was a barrack, like the soldiers have, here. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you meet the leaders in the other barrack rooms? You took care of 12 or 14 girls. 

SUBJECT: There was 14 girls in one room. It was, you know, beds like soldiers have, ones under other one. Yeah, it was 14 beds, 14 girls. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you, how did you urge them to do the work? Did some people not want to work? 

SUBJECT: Every girl has to do another day, you know. I don't have to do, just like I told you before. I got a couple girls-- they were very young, and I feel sorry for them, so I did for them. 

Maybe that's why I, I'm survive. I don't know why, I don't know, which I really don't care. I just live for my niece, for she's a niece in army-- three small kids. That's why. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go after this camp? 

SUBJECT: After this camp, I was with a friend. She was also with me. You know, and when the Russian soldiers come in, you know, they did a very bad thing. I couldn't express myself what they did. 

They pick up the young-- you know, they're such pigs, the Russian soldiers. So I says to my friends, we couldn't go right away, the next day, because still were shooting the German with the, with the Russian, you know. 

Just a couple of days later, I says to my friend, you know, let's go. Just I didn't got shoes, I didn't got nothing. How to go, such a dirty dress? One dress, I got, so what should I do? 

My friend says, OK, Genia, let's go, let's go. So we start to walk, no shoes, no shoes, just-- it was some summertime. We start to walk. Was horses on the highways, you know-- tanks, automobile. 

I says, where are we going to go? They're going to kill us. Just the Russian people went on the tanks and on the truck. I says, [INAUDIBLE] it's no, it's no good. They're going do with us-- they see two womans, they're going to do with us what you wanted. 

I says, let's go. Just we was on the [INAUDIBLE], when we saw a tank, a truck, we went in somewhere-- in an empty house, or something, you know. So finally, I come to my city where I was born. 

I says, the first thing, I want to see my mother's grave. (CRYING) I come to the grave, I saw-- what they make from the graves, for horses, a thing. I didn't see my mother's stone, I didn't see nothing. What can I do? 

I didn't was too long over there, because it's nothing what to see. And they punish people who are not better than they. She says to me, our lady, where I used to live-- our landlady-- oh, you're still alive, I thought they killed you? 

This was enough for me. I says, no good. Then I meet my husband. My husband says. Genia, it's no good to stay here. Let's go somewhere. Where to go? No money, no dress, no nothing. 

So my husband got a dream that he has a brother in America. And he wrote a letter, and we got answer. And really, that's true. In dream, he find a brother. And we got answer. And he says, Marcus and Genia, I'm going to send for you, [INAUDIBLE]. You will have to come to America. 

And then 1948, I come to America. And that's it. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you not want to go to Jerusalem? 

SUBJECT: Why I don't want to go to Jerusalem? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm, you were very-- instead of America. Yes, because you were very religious. 

SUBJECT: I tell you the truth, my husband wants to go to Australia. Just I think maybe somebody alive in Israel. I'm going to find a sister, a brother, a kid. I got a feeling that somebody is alive. 

INTERVIEWER: How many children were there, now? 

SUBJECT: Eight, two-- six sisters and two brothers. 

INTERVIEWER: And so you thought they'd be alive? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And then I was here in America, and I was looking for somebody. I didn't sleep all night, I was so sick. I'm telling you. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you not want to go to Jerusalem, though? I still don't understand. 

SUBJECT: Then I find out that I have one niece in Israel. I wrote, right away, a letter. And I says, I want you should come. She says, Doda, I can't come, because I'm in the army. She was in the army, also, in Sweden. 

Can you imagine they took her to the, to the camp-- she was with her sister. And a day before was, after the war, the sister died, the other sister. She's now about 42-years-old. 

INTERVIEWER: That's too bad. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, so every year, she couldn't come. She has three kids-- one boy goes, now, in the army. He's 17-years-old. He don't want. I want to take him, here, to send him into college. 

He says, no, Doda. I was born in Israel, I have to, I'm joining the army. So I can do nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Let me go way back, before. When you were young and before they came in invading, you said that you had to have a card, because-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, we have to have a card. 

INTERVIEWER: --you were a Jew. And you had to live on a special street. 

SUBJECT: Yes, was three, four streets-- they make a ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: When did that happen? What was the first time you felt that strange things were happening? 

SUBJECT: That was, maybe, 1940. 19-- it was 1940, I don't remember. Believe me, I didn't remember what I eat yesterday. It's, it's-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember anything other than the card or the white armband? Do you remember there were things you could not do because you were Jewish, or-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, when you went in our street when you you were not supposed to go, they kill you, right away, like a dog. Just you have to go in this store, where they, where you can go. And they put so many people in two, three streets. 

INTERVIEWER: What was before that, though? Before everyone lived wherever they wanted, before? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, sure. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your mother ever say anything to you about-- 

SUBJECT: My mother died when I was very young. My mother die at-- 

INTERVIEWER: 24-years-old or 25-years-old, you were, when she died? 

SUBJECT: No, I was younger than that. Yeah, I was younger than that. My mother died the first day of Passover. I have a good remembering of that morning. In the camp, I didn't go eat when I have [INAUDIBLE]. 

You know what this [INAUDIBLE] I went to [INAUDIBLE] cellar, I got a piece of candle, and I lighted it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your father ever give you a reason why all this was happening? 

SUBJECT: He didn't get time to, who knows? Poland was-- how long-- oh no, we're not going to get nothing. In 24 hours, was Hitler in my country. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't think he would come? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't think so quick. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing had changed up to that point? It all happened in two hours, to the best that you know? 

SUBJECT: You know, that was really-- I, I, I don't know-- overnight, overnight. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there communication with radios to other parts of the country? 

SUBJECT: How could you have a radio, how could you have-- you can have nothing. You can have nothing. Even the streets was dead. Try to go out there in the street and forgot to put the white band, you got enough. 

INTERVIEWER: One last question, Mrs. Teichner because I don't want you to feel too upset. How were you-- now that you're here, now that you're in this country, how do you feel about people? Do you trust? 

SUBJECT: Who, American people? 

INTERVIEWER: People. 

SUBJECT: American is a wonderful country. God bless it. They should never feel what we feel, believe me. I can tell you, from today, just my heart is so beating, I'm telling you, it's terrible. 

I cried a whole week. I was three weeks' sick, I couldn't come. I'm not afraid to speak, just I want to ask you-- one war, 50 people is sitting-- they're hostages. All right? So the whole, the whole America is think. Where was America when he killed 6 million Jews? 

They took the older people. I just have-- in the house, I have a book, what the rabbis from my country, this I showed to my friends. The first thing, they killed them. Just where was America when they killed so much Jews? 

I can't understood. Why did they do nothing? We couldn't do nothing. We was in the murderers' hands. Just they can do something. 

[SIGH] 

INTERVIEWER: Well, thank you. I hope you won't, uh-- 

