SUBJECT 1: OK. When I arrived in Langbielau in 1939, there was nothing there. There was just the empty space. The German's SR-- you know, that was the SA-- the brown shirts, they were our guards. They showed us where we going to start building our barracks, where we going to live in it. 

So we did for six weeks long. That's all we did is build barracks for ourselves. There was nothing-- no bunk, no bed, not even straw. And it's just four big walls. And they supplied us with blankets. And that was the beginning of that camp. 

They started to build the Audubon from there on. Where it went, I couldn't tell you because I don't remember. I didn't care. And there were-- I got mine, you know, they gave everybody a job. You do this, and you did this. And there where I started my thing like I told you before about it. 

And this was until they send me, you know, to the thing. Now, um, from there on, I got home and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In that place, people, uh, died? 

SUBJECT 1: In that place, you were fresh from home. You still didn't see any torture. People didn't die of too many-- if you got sick in that place, they did send you to a hospital there. If you were a more severe hurt, they did send you out to your own place that you came from. 

And-- when that took me back the second time, I arrived already in another camp. That was the camp that I told you, Saltptalzburg. Or there was another one, Graditz, that I went to, and a few other camps like this that we used to do all that work unloading that heavy stuff that the Germans brought in that they took away from all the other countries. 

And we used to-- our buses-- they were not army men. There were civilian Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The guards? 

SUBJECT 1: No. The guards took us out of camp. They brought us to work. At work, they were just sitting, spread out, not too many. They did handle us over to the German, uh, I would say, well, I would call them managers or whatever. And they would be responsible for us for the hours that we used to work for them. 

Most of them, they were older men. They didn't care. And they didn't know what we are doing. 

And we made up our minds. If we are going to be able to do something to sabotage the Germans, we would do it in any way because nobody cared. If you're going to get hurt enough to die or anything, it's going to happen to you. Nobody cared. 

So we used to throw in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: People didn't want to live? 

SUBJECT 1: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

SUBJECT 1: Because we knew already at that time, our parents were taken away or they were killed at home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was 1940? 

SUBJECT 1: In 1940, '41 already. And we knew that the way the Germans are going, they're going-- they're taking-- we thought they took already the whole world. We didn't know. We didn't read the paper. We didn't know what time it is. We didn't know nothing. 

We lived in one place that, like, it was like an old garage-- one big space, concrete. There were bunks in it. We came from that work into a place like this in the winter-- no heat. The water was sweating from those concrete walls that you could fill up buckets in it. There was no bathroom. If you had to go to the bathroom, you had to walk from upstairs, downstairs, across the hall. And there was just a ditch that was the bathroom. 

So nobody cared, you know. How much can you take of something like this? It was really rough. The food? Nothing-- a little soup in the morning. You had to stay in the line like an hour and a half. They woke us up in 4 o'clock in the morning. 

6 o'clock, they picked us up all ready to go to work. You went to work all day long. They gave you a slice of bread. It was made like, some part-- some people used to say that that was made out of sawdust-- no taste, nothing. 

You came back into the prison. And in the evening, you had to stay in the line again for a little soup for another two hours. If you were lucky, you found a piece of potato in it. If not, you just found, like, a little dish water. 

So that's why people didn't care what happened to them. I mean, there was-- I, myself, I didn't think I ever going to see light again. I thought, that's it. And to go on living like this, nobody cared. 

So we used to do the sabotage and that stuff that the Germans shouldn't be able to use it over. Big cannons, we used to throw in stuff into the cannon. It should explode. 

Or we would take parts of it and throw it away if we could. They shouldn't be able to find. Take the heavy locks off, dismantle them, bury them, do anything. We used to take the leather saddles from the-- they used to have for the horses. You know, the Germans use to ride horses in the army. We did cut them up into shreds. 

We used to bring them in even to the prison. And between the prisoners, there were a lot of shoemakers there. At night, when nobody saw, they would make shoes out of it. We would smuggle them out the next day if they were ready and give it to those German civilians. And they would supply us once in a while with a piece of bread or with a little soup or whatever they head-- a little tobacco. 

Some of them for older men that-- they felt sorry for us. They saw the torture that we had to take. And this was not that bad yet until they sent us away again. And that was already 1943, to a camp of Gross-Rosen. You're going to hear it all about it. 

It was at that camp, I would say worse than any other camp that I saw before. At that camp, in Gross-Rosen, everybody became sick of typhoid. Thousands died every single week. Replacements would come in as fast as the people died. 

The German soldiers-- oh, there was no German doctor, no doctor at all, not even a doctor of our prisoners because there were a few doctors from the prisoners. And they got typhoid at the same time. And they died. And after that, there was no replacements for them, no medicine. 

We just laid. I was laying there, like, six weeks. I didn't know if I was in a prison. All of a sudden, one day I woke up. How I-- where I was or how I survived, I don't know. 

And I walked downstairs. And I see those thousands and thousands, naked bodies laying all over, one on top of the other like big mountains because the prisoners who became a little bit back of their strength, they were able to take those dead bodies and throw them down, either through the window because they couldn't carry them, or there was a place, you know. It was, like, when you walk down the steps, you have those handles that you hold on to it. There was empty space in between it. You know, when you look down from the third floor, you have a space right through, through the basement. They must have taken those dead bodies and threw them down from the third floor because when I woke up and I was trying to go downstairs to wash myself after all the time, I-- you know, I didn't-- I must have been like mud-- I saw those dead bodies piled up right to the third floor, the steps full with bodies. You go out through the door, you couldn't open the door-- full of dead bodies right in the front of the door. They were thrown out from all different directions. 

And this was in that camp. But I-- I would say I never saw any bigger torture or anything worse that this. If somebody was trying to escape at work, you know, when the kommandos went out to work, he knew he wouldn't have a chance to go any place. So a lot of them took chances to do it because they didn't care. They were praying to get a bullet in them, you know, to die. But they wouldn't use a bullet. They said that the bullet is more expensive than the Jew. That's all that they used to say. 

Like at one time, I used to work there in a field to pull out sugar cane-- and not sugar cane, Zuckerruben. Whatever they call it here, I don't know. It's like-- like a big carrot. So I was working at that place. Then we used to throw this in-- in our-- we used to tie up-- you know, we wore the striped uniforms. We used tie them up on the bottom of the pants and take one or two and throw them into your pants and hope you're going to be able to sneak it in to help out somebody else. Because while I was working there, I could grab one from dirt and eat it. But the other guys who didn't work there, they didn't have the chance to do it. So we were trying to help each other with everything that we could. 

And at Gross-Rosen, we walked in every day from work. We used to see people carrying-- and they looked like stretchers made out of wood-- dead bodies out of the blocks. You know, every-- each kommando, each group had his own barrack and his own, you know, there were about 18 or 20 in a room like this here, piled into those bunks like sardines. 

And they would carry out bodies and bodies. And all day long and all night long, as long as I remember that prison, from there, that was already towards '44. The Russians must have start coming closer towards Gross-Rosen. This was part of Oberschlesien, I think. 

And they started to bomb some of the German barracks. They must have known where the storm troopers lived because they didn't seem to hit us. And there were-- it wasn't too far away. You know, we saw the planes coming down, very low, and dropping those bombs. And we used to wave to them. They never hit us. 

And then the Germans came and started to call all the prisoners who were able to walk out on the appellplatz, you know, where we used to get together. And they would put us in lines of five across and start marching out of camp fast. And we used to march for weeks. And at that time, we marched in as far as Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What, uh-- you begin telling us about the formation of the ghetto in your town. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was 1941. 

SUBJECT 2: You had to go to get from one side to the other. And then, I didn't go to-- I-- you know, my mother, probably left my two sisters. But me and my other sister, we didn't go to the ghetto because we grabbed ourself on the train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean, your mother didn't take you with her? 

SUBJECT 2: She took us to go to the ghetto. But the time, there was a railroad. And going by the railroad, she said to us, left avec kinder. [YIDDISH] Yiden nisht sehen. Efsher emetser bleiben [YIDDISH], gyen. 

So me and my older sister grabbed me. And we hung ourselves on a train because there was the Germans going to the front. And we , figure, we always used to sit home and talking. If somebody survives, if they knew, they killed. The Hitler comes and kills. So we should go here and there. 

And so Ukrainian people, and maybe they save us. My father gave them some money, gave them things. We should-- if somebody survived from our family, they should keep us. So we went on a train, like, me and my sister. And then, when a train passed by, we fall off in the woods. However, I come from Ukraine. Ukraine is all woods all around. 

So the Germans start shooting at us. They knew that somebody was there. But we laid in the woods. And then that time, when they used to make ghettos, so the Ukrainian people and the Polish people, they called them [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] the name. The guard banned such groups that had them you know guns and everything-- you know, organized themselves because they knew they were going to kill Jews. So the Jews going to run away. Not everybody is going to just go like this. So they stripped. And they took away the clothes from them, and then they killed him. Those were-- 

SUBJECT 2: Ukrainian. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ukrainians-- 

SUBJECT 2: Ukrainians and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --living in Poland. 

SUBJECT 2: Polish people living around our town-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --who organized-- 

SUBJECT 2: --to organize-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --groups? 

SUBJECT 2: To organize themselves. To organize groups to get from the Jews, what the Germans going to kill them. And they going to run away to get the-- they said gold or things or money-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: To capture the runaways? 

SUBJECT 2: Capture, uh, things, just, and then kill them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what did-- you were laying in the woods-- 

SUBJECT 2: I came with my-- me and my sister, Isolde. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in the woods. 

SUBJECT 2: We were laying in the woods. And then we decide. And then on the same train was my mother-- my father's sister with three-- with a couple other kids. I don't know if they were on the same train, but when we fell down and we, with my sister, stopped going. 

We think we we're going to go see maybe we ask somebody how to get to that Ukrainian guy which is going to keep us from-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew where you were? 

SUBJECT 2: We-- no, we didn't know, but we figured we'd start asking. We didn't know. We just fall down in the woods. But we figure, maybe-- let's go someplace. We didn't know where to go. 

So we go away like for a couple hours walking, walking going with my sister. And all of a sudden, we see a group of Jews. And that was my aunt, my sister. Were there a lot of kids? They run away, too. 

And they said, we-- me and my sister, [INAUDIBLE], we got so happy. We said [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] We were going with them. And they chase us away. And my-- she says to us, I'm not going to [INAUDIBLE] and she cries [INAUDIBLE]. But I just paid the guy for four or five people, for four people. If I bring you, they kill us all. He just said-- I gave him so much and so much money just to keep them. 

And we-- because me and my sister, I'm a little, and she's older than me. And we crying, say, look, what an aunt you are. How you don't want to take us? We don't know where to go. We didn't know what to do. 

And so-- and she didn't want to take us. She said if she brings us there, that they're going to kill her. She just-- all right, so we say you go your way, and we went away. We're going if we're going-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let me ask, you-- I see that many people ran away from the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: Ran away, sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they know about the Germans killing at that time? 

SUBJECT 2: Sure. They were talking. They said they're making a ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: But we hear in other states that they're killing. They just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you hear? 

SUBJECT 2: They hear they were saying that in this town called [INAUDIBLE] It was a town [INAUDIBLE] they killed so many Jews again. So we didn't believe it's a ghetto even. We thought that's the killing. And who could run, runs-- run away, you know. So she went away her way, my aunt. And me and my sister went another way. 

We're going up to through the woods maybe a whole night. And we slept there. We didn't know where we are even. 

And all of a sudden, we see some Ukrainian people came over with guns. And they tell. And I had a leather jacket. And she was-- we were dressed up. And I had boots. And they say, take it off. Give us. 

So we said, OK, look. They're going to kill us. And that's all. And I take off everything. And she takes off everything. All of a sudden, one jumps up-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In that group? 

SPEAKER 2: In that group. The whole commandeer-- what he was, the whole big shot from that group-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, what-- 

SPEAKER 2: --jumped-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That group was what? 

SPEAKER 2: Ukrainian. Ukrainian, what they were going to catch Jews and take away from them because they were, you know, taking the stuff. He jumps up to us. And he says-- he recognized my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who? 

SPEAKER 2: That Ukrainian, that-- one from the band, from the group, you know? From the Ukrainian. A [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] They used to call them [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

SPEAKER 2: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] They used to call the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] So he comes up. And he says, are you, you know, you know, Ukraine-- an Ukrainish, they say. Are you [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] That's Ukrainian. It's not even Russian, but it's [INAUDIBLE]. 

And my sister says, yes. Oh, yes, we are. 

So he says, I tell you something. Your father was so good to us. I remember he put me in the room to sleep. And he gave us-- and he was so good to me, I tell you something. Give them back. He told all the boys to give us back the clothes. We put on back the clothes. 

And he said, don't go this way. Because if you go this way, another group is going to catch where they wouldn't know you. Go this way. There is no groups. 

And we asked-- we said, where lives this and this Ukrainian. We remember his name. My sister remembered. I didn't remember. And we went there. And we were going and going and, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those were groups of [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

SPEAKER 2: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] organized. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Outlaws? 

SPEAKER 2: Outlaws, where they were going for Jews to kill them, too, and take away the money, take away anything they were. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Already in 1941? 

SPEAKER 2: Oh, yes, sure. Like my-- my aunt, what she went, she paid before. [INAUDIBLE] Ukrainian that they going to keep her, you know? It's not-- but then to find out that we survived, they took away all the money from them and they killed them themselves. They killed them even-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Killed anyway. 

SPEAKER 2: Killed them anyway, took away the money. So we said, see? We're lucky. I get mentioned we should be alive. Because if he would go with them, he would be dead, too. 

So finally we came, days and nights, and you know. In days in Ukraine, you didn't starve because there is tomatoes and a cucumber from the woods you pick up and you eat. And we were gone maybe for a couple, maybe a week, until we got to that guy. We came to that guy-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know what direction to go? 

SPEAKER 2: They showed us. They tell. We asked. We asked. Where lives this one and this one? Where lives this? They told us. They say, go this way. You catch them. Go this way. We came there-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You asked people on the way? 

SPEAKER 2: We asked Ukrainians. We know Ukrainian. We were born there. So we know Jewish, but we know Ukrainian, too. 

So we came to that guy. And that guy was a very nice guy, but he was afraid himself. He said if they find out, some from Ukrainian could squeal to the Germans and tell them that he hides out Jews. So they would kill him, too, just like us. 

He was afraid. But he was good. He had a good heart. 

So during the night, he used to put us in the-- at the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

SPEAKER 1: In the barn. 

SPEAKER 2: You know, in the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] in the thing to sleep. 

SPEAKER 1: On the straw in the barn. 

SPEAKER 2: On the straw in the barn during the night. And during the day, he used to take us in the woods far away. And every day, he used to do this. 

And he had-- that Ukrainian had connections with partisans. The partisans used to come to him. You know, he was a-- he wasn't, but he had connections with them. And he, you know-- and he used to keep in contact with them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that-- 

SPEAKER 2: But we were too little. The partisans didn't want to take us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that the middle of a town, of a village, or--? 

SPEAKER 2: No, this wasn't [INAUDIBLE]. This was an [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] You know, that's after the village-- one house here, one has here. They had [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] they called them. And they were all separated. 

And they, the partisan, just started to organize. It was Jewish. People by themselves, they started getting arms. And they started getting organized-- men, mostly men. 

And then he told us that, you know, one night, when we came, we were late. He says, you'll stay tonight here. I got in touch with the group partisans. And they might take you. But I don't know if they're going to take me. I was young, so they're not going to take me. They take my sister because they used to take girls to cook for them, to wash clothes for them, you know, to do things. 

And we stayed for a long time. Oh, one time they came, and they took us away 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember of that night? 

SPEAKER 2: I tell you, I don't-- I remember that they came-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who? Who are they? What-- 

SPEAKER 2: A group of Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they-- 

SPEAKER 2: Even boys, young boys. And they came and they said-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: how did they look? 

SPEAKER 2: Oh, they looked really like partisans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe? 

SPEAKER 2: They looked ... mostly we thought that's Russian because they got the Russian heads with the Russian [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] you know. And they used to this-- they, you how to say, you know, what they used to do? Everything-- first of all, was very small partisans, just a little group. And they used to go at night to the villagers and bring everything to-- food-- you know what they did? 

They had, like, three, four wagons, you know? And they were going around maybe 10 full times the same three, four, five, maybe 20 times just to think-- the goyim, you know, the Ukrainians should think it's a lot of partisans. Because they were so little, they were afraid if they not going to know, they could catch them right away and kill them off if they just know it's a few. But if they going around and going around and make such a big tumult, so they should think that's a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] army. It's a lot of partisans all organized, you know? Or, you know, they should think like that. 

And, finally, they got in touch with the really partisans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no, wait. What happened at night? You saw how many people came? 

SPEAKER 2: Oh, they came, like a few people came. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many? 

SPEAKER 2: Like, two three boys. And they said-- first of all, we got scared. We didn't know that's them. And the-- but the goy prepared us. He said, you know, tonight is going to come partisans because I'm very afraid all the goyim are talking to me. And they're saying the Germans are going to come. And the Germans are going to kill you for hiding out Jews. 

He says, I am connection with partisans. And I have to say you should get away from me because they kill me. They kill you. 

So he organized a group. And they came, some three-- I don't remember exactly how many. And they took me and my sister away in the woods. And then they had already like-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they came-- what-- where did they take you away? 

SPEAKER 2: Right in the same Ukrainian-- right in the same doth in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SPEAKER 2: --the same place, but in the woods. They had already a few more people there. And they had over there, you know, like, every night they brought food from the villages, organized. And they-- and you see then all the time more Jews run away. And one got in touch, find out with other, and they got organized, and got more and more all the time, were our bigger partisans. 

And then, like, shortly after that, they find a big organization. The partisans, they used to organize like this. Every night they used to have munitions and go put on the trains. You know, from-- 

SPEAKER 1: Dynamite. 

SPEAKER 2: Dynamite. And when the trains used to go by, the-- 

SPEAKER 1: Exploded. 

SPEAKER 2: Exploded when the Germans used to go to the front. And then they used to come in back in the woods. But it took days. They didn't-- it's not so short. It's was like weeks and weeks that they send out a whole group. And they did it. And they came back. And they were so happy that they did-- 

SPEAKER 1: Oh, they send them out on missions. 

SPEAKER 2: On missions, they used to send them out. And then all of a sudden, got a big-- was like a lot of Russians got organized in the back. That's what the Russians send them in. The planes used to come at night and brought in parachutes with the Russians. And the Russians-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Russians? 

SPEAKER 2: Russians. And they had [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] You know, what they got connected to-- 

SPEAKER 1: Supplies. 

SPEAKER 2: Supplies, everything. Even when they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: eh 

SPEAKER 2: --used to go on the things to pick up the trains, you know? So they used to get some of them killed, some of them [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would be wounded. 

SPEAKER 2: So wounded. So the Russians came and picked them up and took them to Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Russian planes landed. 

SPEAKER 2: Planes came at night. Yeah, we used to make [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] little woods, you know, and give them signals where we are. 

SPEAKER 1: It doesn't land. They just drop it. 

SPEAKER 2: They just drop. 

SPEAKER 1: They just drop the parachutes. 

SPEAKER 2: And they picked them up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They dropped supplies in parachutes? 

SPEAKER 1: Supplies, yes 

SPEAKER 2: Supplies, supplies. And they used to pick up, [INAUDIBLE]. But they used to not land, but something they picked up. And they-- they handled that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The wounded? 

SPEAKER 2: The wounded. And they was, really, like a big [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] with all the news giving back from Russia radios. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Radio transmitters and [INAUDIBLE]. 

SPEAKER 2: Everything, they knew what's going on because it was [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] I remember, even, his name. He was the commandeer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

SPEAKER 2: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] he's not-- a he was a commandeer from the partisans, from that group that I was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A Russian? 

SPEAKER 2: A Russian man, a Jewish-- a Russian Jewish man. [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how big was the group? 

SPEAKER 2: Oh, it was big. It was a lot because he had the-- we were one that had the [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] but they had groups sent out all over the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were in contact with all these groups? 

SPEAKER 2: Oh, they weren't-- I was a little kid, you know. They kept me because you know what happened? After a while, what a small [INAUDIBLE]-- my brother came to-- he was in the army. And he will find-- he came home looking for the parents. And everybody was killed. 

So he went to the [INAUDIBLE], tried this one, this one told him that's partisan [INAUDIBLE]. And he [INAUDIBLE] became a big commandeer for one this, uh, partisan group. And he was going to for a-- for the mines and everything. And one, just before the war got finished, he went [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] We used to say they're going on a-- 

SPEAKER 1: On a mission. 

SPEAKER 2: On an mission, yeah, on a mission. So he went with a whole group of them. They all went in. After the mission, you know, the Russians like to drink. So they went into a house. And they started drinking. And my brother was to stay outside and watch them. Maybe, you know, somebody is going to come or see what's going on. And the-- it's not the Germans. No, the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] The-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

SPEAKER 2: But Ukrainian. There were two groups, but they were against the Jews and the partisans. And they start shooting at them. The other ones heard shooting. They run out from the window right in the woods. They couldn't catch them. My brother got killed right in the front, watching them on the door. 

I remember right now, they went back next day, all the partisans. They brought my brother back. And they made a big funeral in the woods. And, you know, that's, I said, I remember, like, this I remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, what-- how big was a group of partisans? 

SPEAKER 2: There were a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many Jews were in it? 

SPEAKER 2: There was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do during the day? Can you describe a day? 

SPEAKER 2: During the day, you get up in the morning, and you are cooking and preparing for them. And they were all preparing going to a mission. The whole day long, that's all. They were gone at night, at night. 

And some of them, one went to a mission, one, a whole big group, went to-- in the-- to the little [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

SPEAKER 1: Village. 

SPEAKER 2: Villages, to collect food, to get all everything. And the villagers were pretty good because they were afraid already for the partisans. And some of, you know, in the-- once in a while the villagers will squeal to the-- to the Germans that here and here are partisans and groups. So they were from us [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] where they find us out-- 

SPEAKER 1: Someone would go out and kill them. 

SPEAKER 2: No. No, no, they were coming, and let us know, and tell us that I think it's going to be [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] tonight. Means-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] means the Germans is going to go, and they're going to ring ring in the-- 

SPEAKER 1: They surround you. 

SPEAKER 2: Surround you. So we packed everything on the things and schlepped everything and went away in another place. But this was just woods. So you leave everything. You burn everything. And you leave everything. And then you go and you get-- 

SPEAKER 1: To another hiding place. 

SPEAKER 2: Another hiding place. You get all scratched up. You had nothing, you know, and you were so wear out. And, really, you get used to our life like this that you think it's always going to be like this. And you're going to live forever. And you're not going to see no light. And that's our life, you know? 

SPEAKER 1: That's what-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you sleep? 

SPEAKER 2: On the grass, on the ground, you know. They had like-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you wash? 

SPEAKER 2: You washed. You did the best you could, you know? You washed. You hanged up clothes. You did your best. You made fire there. 

You know, the men used to go in the village and bring all this food. And we used to prepare for them and wash for them the clothes. I mean, you would be amazed how you could live when [INAUDIBLE] 

SPEAKER 1: Like I remember-- I remember myself-- 

SPEAKER 2: Honest, you don't think you could live like this. And you live. 

SPEAKER 1: And-- and-- and in Gross-Rosen, you didn't have any water. You were waiting to go to work already, you know. And you got to work, you will try to catch a little water always right near the place that you were working. 

If not, in the winter, we would go out. We would grab snow to wash yourself, to drink it, to eat it, to do anything with it. That was-- that was at camp. And, you know, from there on-- like, I told you we went to Dachau. And then we came into Dachau-- 

SPEAKER 2: He-- plenty died from us, too, you know. 

SPEAKER 1: When we came into Dachau-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the march to Dachau like? 

SPEAKER 1: What was the march? That march? Just that the Germans were trying to escape from the Russians on one side. And they were trying to escape from the Americans on the other side. 

Dachau is near Munich already. So you could hear already from the front lines near Munich already a little noise, too. When we came in to Dachau, I was already smart by then. I was already like a real, you know, old-time prisoner. 

SPEAKER 2: A partisan. 

SPEAKER 1: No. 

SPEAKER 2: By smart, what do you mean? 

SPEAKER 1: By smart, what I mean is like when I came in through the main gate in Dachau, you had a big sign, "Arbeit macht Frei." On the left-hand side, not too far from the main gate, there was a crematorium. You cannot miss it even now if you go to visit Dachau, the big chimney there. 

But it smelled like hell. So soon, you would-- you came near Dachau, near the main gate. And that funny smell, not like it would burn wood or like a factory, but a big stink. At that times, I knew already. You know, you heard that what Dachau was doing, all the sick people from the other prisons that were taken to Dachau to put them in the oven there. So when we came in there-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know know about that? 

SPEAKER 1: Oh, sure because-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SPEAKER 2: And you believed that? 

SPEAKER 1: --from all the other camps, you know, nearby, Dachau had a lot of smaller camps with different names. Dachau was like the headquarters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you arrived on a-- on a march. How did you know this, that Dachau-- 

SPEAKER 1: Because we knew where we going. And when we got into Dachau, it says Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You heard the name before? 

SPEAKER 2: Who didn't? Children could hear about Dachau all over, even not in Germany, even all over the world already. Even in Poland, they heard about Dachau because Dachau became a concentration camp, I think, as soon as Hitler came to power, which it was even before they start taking Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when you-- they started, uh, you on the march, did-- did you know you were going to Dachau? 

SPEAKER 1: No. We didn't know where we were going because daytime, we would march. At night, the German troops-- the stormtroopers would be tired. You know, they had to march, too, watching us. 

So they would take us to a big field, someplace where there would be water on one side and just a field on the other side. There were thousands of prisoners. People would have to sit down on the grass-- dirt, wet, hungry, nothing to eat. 

We bend down. We were, you know, with our own-- just like a cow bends down to eat grass, that's what we did. We ate raw, plain, dirty, filthy grass. People became sick from that, too-- diarrheas, deaths, all over through the march until we got into that, Dachau. You know, we finally made it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you-- only then, when you came to Dachau, did you know that you were in Dachau? 

SPEAKER 1: I knew I was in Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SPEAKER 1: So somebody came in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SPEAKER 1: I didn't think nothing. We didn't think. You-- what are you going to think? We didn't think anything. We didn't think. We didn't care. We didn't care where we going. We didn't care if we die. Nobody cared. 

But when we came into Dachau, they called out Jews on one side, other nationalities on the other side. You know, Gross-Rosen had all different nationalities in it. And Dachau had it, too-- maybe seven or eight different nationalities. 

Somehow I said to myself, I'm not going to go out with the Jews. Either I must have wanted to live, or I thought for a miracle. I don't know. And I stood at the lines with the other nationalities. I knew when they called out Jews on one side, that they're going to be put away-- if not all of them, most of them, into that stinky factory in there were the crematoriums. 

And then they asked names. Dachau didn't have any numbers at that time with the tattoo. They asked the name of every person. I came towards the table where they took the names down. And it came to me, Baransky Stanislow. That was a friend of mine who I went to school together in Poland. And they thought that I am Polish-- speak the language. 

SPEAKER 2: He don't look Jewish. He didn't look-- 

SPEAKER 1: And I wound up with them in that block, that not Jewish prisoners. And that was the thing that I'm alive today. And we were in Dachau until the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- you lived in a block with the non-Jewish prisoners. Did they know that you were a Jew? 

SPEAKER 1: I didn't speak Jewish to anybody. I had nobody to talk Jewish to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they-- what did they talk with you then? 

SPEAKER 1: Polish, German, French, I didn't understood. So I didn't-- if that-- if you asked me for something, I just shook my head so I don't understand. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what did you say to each other? What kind of things? 

SPEAKER 1: You didn't-- in a prison like this, there was not much to say. But what are you going to ask? You're going to ask your buddy, are you going out with a date for tonight with somebody? There's no dates. 

You haven't got time for any of that stuff. You're tired when you are home from work. You're tired from doing nothing. You're sick of sitting, doing nothing. In Dachau, we didn't go out to work anymore. That's all we did in Dachau is just clean the barracks, wash the barracks, go over to help clean out the crematoriums. And then was it until the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do? 

SPEAKER 1: What did I do? I just sat in the block, you know, in the barracks. And every morning when they came to pick up some people to do work, they would take us to-- over to the German barracks to go down on the knees with the little scrub brushes and rub on the dirty floors all day long. And they take you back to work-- uh, back to the block again. And that's all you did every day. 

Dachau was more like a prison for political prisoners. You know, there were a lot of Germans in there that were against Hitler or they said something against Hitler-- anything. That was at Dachau. 

And every morning, the Germans came in to pick up maybe 100 or 200 people to take you away to Munich or to-- there were cities that were bombed at night to clean up, you know, from the bombing because the bombers came every single night. 

Sometimes I was lucky enough that they would take me. You had to be lucky because they picked certain man. They looked at you to see if you're healthy enough to do the work. So if they took you, you were lucky because you went to clean up the bomb-- the bombarded railroad station. You always could find something to eat, you know, from the-- because they were shipping food towards the German fronts for the German soldiers or whatever it was, you know, some other places. And we used to do this until the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- do you remember one such time that you went? And what did you-- when you saw that destroyed German-- 

SPEAKER 1: Yes, I was-- that was the happiest hour for us, whenever we saw anything like this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For you? 

SPEAKER 1: For me, for-- for every prisoner. Anything we could see. We didn't care if we going to get killed. If this-- if the dive bomber is going to come down and even hit us, so long he's going to hit something moving of the German trains or German vehicle or something like this. 

SPEAKER 2: but they did, the Jewish people, they put in crematorium there, right? 

SPEAKER 1: Yes. 

SPEAKER 2: Oh. 

SPEAKER 1: I had-- there were-- you know, there are a few more survivors here from Dachau. Not in New Haven. There was one, you know, who died. 

SPEAKER 2: Mayer was with him. 

SPEAKER 1: Mayer from the M&T-- you know, the delicatessen store. He was with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, among the Jews, or-- 

SPEAKER 1: He was with me among the Jews. I got separated, but I knew-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SPEAKER 1: --that he was there. There's another one but-- in New Haven here. I don't know if-- if you know about him. 

SPEAKER 2: Maybe he talked to-- 

SPEAKER 1: He was in [INAUDIBLE], and he was-- 

SPEAKER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. Martin [INAUDIBLE]. 

SPEAKER 1: Martin [INAUDIBLE]. 

SPEAKER 2: You didn't talk to him? Martin [INAUDIBLE]. 

SPEAKER 1: He was with me in a few prisons, too. And in Dachau, I was there until 1945. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, um, weren't you-- were you afraid you might be discovered as a Jew? 

SPEAKER 1: No, I wasn't afraid. I was afraid of dying. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But, uh-- 

SPEAKER 1: I just took a chance. I thought, you know, if I'm going to be able to pull it through, all right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about the other prisoners? You didn't-- 

SPEAKER 1: They were pointing fingers, but that was already too late. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They are pointing fingers. 

SPEAKER 1: Yes, that was already towards the end, the last week. 

SPEAKER 2: They knew you were Jewish by then? 

SPEAKER 1: They must have found out. Either I must have said something in Jewish from the sleep. You know, the 24 people in one little room, which it can happen. I never found out, but somehow I found out they were pointing a finger at me. At that time-- 

SPEAKER 2: They told the guards? 

SPEAKER 1: No. Because in Dachau, it wasn't so easy to get to a guard unless you went to work. And not too many went out to those kommando works, you know, to clean up. But when I discovered about it, I wasn't afraid anymore. Because at first, I knew it's going to be another day or another week, and something is going to happen because the camp and around the front, you know, like 10 meters from the camp, they kept pounding it day and night. 

You know, there was a railroad track where they had supplies going through there. And just the planes didn't stop coming, all day and all night. By the dozens, the dive bombers would come down and hit. So we knew if they're hitting so close already, something is going to happen very fast. Maybe it was a miracle. That's all I can say, that I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What precautions did you take not to be discovered? 

SPEAKER 1: I didn't take any precautions. There was no precautions to-- there was no way of taking any precautions. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about going to the bathroom? 

SPEAKER 1: Nobody looked at you. You know-- 

SPEAKER 1: --everybody is half dead. 

SPEAKER 2: Just you survive because you were young 

SPEAKER 1: Everybody was half dead, working, dead. You looked, you didn't know where you're looking. I mean, you're walking around like under-- under dope or something. You don't know. You don't care what's going on. You don't know what day it is. You don't know what hour it is. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had no concept of time? 

SPEAKER 2: None. 

SPEAKER 1: No-- no contact whatsoever, nothing. Just like an animal I was-- when the-- one day that was the last day, even, we came out to go to wait for a kommando to be picked up like any other day. I walked out at 5 o'clock in the morning. And we waited for the storm troopers to come and pick us up. 

It's already 8:00. And it's already 9 o'clock. We stayed all by ourselves. You don't talk to each other. You know, as a prisoner, you're not allowed to talk in the concentration camp. Even when you stay and wait, you couldn't even talk. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There were no guards around. You're just standing and waiting? 

SPEAKER 1: At that time when we was waiting to be picked up by guards, there are no guards around because there was no way of escaping from there, Dachau. But there were-- I don't know know if you saw pictures. There was four walls, four corners. The first is electric barbed wires five feet deep. This is all electric wires, the barbed wire, maybe about three-- or maybe about two or three yards high. There's no way even of climbing it up. But a lot of people didn't care. 

After that, you had a deep wall-- concrete walls all around maybe 15 feet deep filled with water. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A ditch, you mean. 

SPEAKER 1: You know, it's like you built a concrete footing for a house. This is for water, maybe 15 feet deep and maybe about 12 feet wide. So even if you made through the barbed wire, you had to go into the water. Did you ever try to climb up 15 feet on a straight concrete wall? There's no possibility, right? 

Even if you would make that, there's another barbed electric fence all around it. And it's all electric. As soon you touch it, you burn to death. That was Dachau. 

Then you had the guards all around, the machine guns on four different sides. There was no way of escaping from there. 

So we stayed and wait like this. All of a sudden, the sky gets black from cannon bullets, you know, where they shot from cannons, they sky get those big, black spots. We see from inside the camp, all of a sudden the sky is getting, like, black. So we knew we are-- that the Americans or the Russians-- we never saw either one of them before in our lives, how an American tank or how an American soldier looks or how a Russian looks. 

About 11 o'clock that morning, the main gate, you hear it cracking, ripping it down. Tanks came right, ripping it through, into the prison. We start running towards them like wild dogs because we knew it's not the German tank. We saw a green color. You don't know the language. You don't know what they are. We jump those tanks, and we ripped off machine guns from the soldiers, which they let us do it. 

The German storm troopers are still in those booths high up with the machine guns. And we are like wild dogs running over those ladders, cutting them down to pieces of meat. We were so full of hatred. Where we got the strength, I don't know. 

We saw some of those soldiers falling in in pieces to that water. The water turned red from their bodies that we did try to kill. A lot of them were already prepared for it from those storm troopers. The most of it night already went, shaving off their hair because we didn't have any-- we weren't allowed to wear hair. 

In Gross-Rosen, what we did, in the camp before, we had to wear our hair shaved, two inches across this way and two inches across this way. So in case somebody went to work and tried to escape, he would get caught first by recognizing him. 

And when the Americans came into Dachau, we all thought, we are free already, you know, liberated. Everybody runs to the main gate. There are already soldiers that br-- staying on guard, fixed bayonets. And I'm already near the gate. What-- wanted-- I want to go out to see if I'm really free. I'm getting pushed back with a bayonet-- 

SPEAKER 2: Yeah. 

SPEAKER 1: --through the gate. 

SPEAKER 2: Germans. 

SPEAKER 1: No, from the American already. And I thought to myself, what do I do? I cannot go out. I'm still prison. I'm tired. So I just, you know, like a tired dog, I fell down near that main gate. And I'm sitting there all day long. 

The soldiers thrown me in food, crackers. 

SPEAKER 2: A lot of them died from the eating and drinking. 

SPEAKER 1: That was already-- you know, for the first time, we're eating something. Finally in the evening, one guard got off duty. He calls me out. He opens up the gate. He takes me out from the other side, takes out a can of disinfection powder, starts pouring in the powder into me on my body because we had lice as big as an inch long and all other things. 

Then he took me, and he showed me to the place where I could wash myself. He gave me one of his uniforms to put on. He took me out to give me something to eat. That's all on his own time already. He got off duty. And we became very good friends with that America soldier. 

He was shipped away from Dachau a few days later to Munich. It took me with him. We lived like-- like I would be one of his best friend. And he must have thought he got-- he-- he's doing something for the-- for the bad things that he saw because most of the soldiers, when they came in, they cried like little children. What they saw happen-- still bodies burning in the crematoriums, tons and tons of piles and piles of ashes, hundreds and hundreds of bodies still laying there to be thrown in the oven to burn-- dead bodies, some of them still moving. 

He must crying. And all the soldiers that came in-- that's front line soldiers-- you never saw men crying like they cried. 

And we became very close friends, me and the soldier. Finally, I find out that he speaks German. And I started to kind of, you know, at least I know I can talk to him. Then I found out he's Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SPEAKER 1: I asked him. And I told him that I'm Jewish. He was shipped away from Munich-- from Munich to a place not too far from Munich. I cannot even remember the name of it. It's a small town. And he took me with him there. 

And we stood like this, close by. I-- I couldn't live in the constraints, you know, with them, but he put me up always in a place until he went home. 

SPEAKER 2: He brought him in this country. Mm. 

SPEAKER 1: And he got home, his mother was so happy to see him home alive. He was the only son. His father was dead. We start to correspond. And she-- she asked me if I have any relatives here. I knew I had nobody here. And she asked me if I would like to come over to this country. I said, yes, but I thought it's a big joke because you needed somebody to sponsor you at that time. 

From-- a few days later, I get a letter asking. If I really want to come, she's going to try to make me papers to come over here. And she made me all the necessary papers. And she brought me over to this country. And when I-- when I went down, they were waiting for me when I arrived in New York on that ship. And they kept me like their own child. I came over on a Juden quota. So it was a little easier for them to bring me over. And up until today, we in very close contact. 

SPEAKER 2: She came to my daughter's wedding. Every Mother's Day, I send her a Mother's Day gift. And I visit her. And we are really-- we-- I write to her. And I call her mother, you know. 

SPEAKER 1: And this guy, I could write a story about him, about that soldier, because something like this-- I could say it was just a miracle how I survived and how I was able to come over here. And then-- 

SPEAKER 2: You met me. 

SPEAKER 1: I-- I knew her. I met her in a displaced persons camp. 

SPEAKER 2: He was displaced person in Munich. We knew each other. 

SPEAKER 1: But-- 

SPEAKER 2: I came through a Juden quota girls, and he boys. 

SPEAKER 1: A year later, she came over here. 

SPEAKER 2: On the same boat. 

SPEAKER 1: And on the same ship, on the same army ship. 

SPEAKER 2: By coincidence, not on the same Army-- [INAUDIBLE] a year later after him. 

SPEAKER 1: And her mother-- I mean, her grandmother-- 

SPEAKER 2: My grandmother. I had a grandmother here in this country. 

SPEAKER 1: --was still alive here. 

SPEAKER 2: She came to the wedding. 

SPEAKER 1: Her daughter, who was my wife's mother, was killed in Europe. But the grandmother was here, still alive-- 

SPEAKER 2: She came along here. 

SPEAKER 1: --to greet us. And she made our wedding. That-- that soldier's mother, because we came over here, I had $7 exactly with a few pennies that the Joint gave us aboard the ship. 

SPEAKER 2: The same-- I had nothing. 

SPEAKER 1: And we had to start it off. I come over here not knowing the language. 

SPEAKER 2: To night school, we went. 

SPEAKER 1: Right away, started running to night school to pick up a little bit. Otherwise, I had to stay in New York. 