INTERVIEWER: OK, give me your name and either your date of birth, or the place you were living, or whatever. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: My name is William Rosenberg I'm born June 15, 1918 in Poland. When the war broke out, September 1st, 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you living 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I was living that time in Czestochowa. 

INTERVIEWER: Where is that? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: We used to call that congress Poland, in the middle of Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the place that you lived? What your family was like? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes, I will. But before I start that, two days later, I tasted, already, the Nazi German brutality. Then when they came into our town, they ordered all the Jews to come out to a certain place, kept us there overnight in a certain place. They were shooting over our heads. I think almost 100 of them lost their lives. The next day, they let everybody go back to their house. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me a bit about what your house was like, and the city was like, and what your family was like before this. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: In 1939, in my city, used to live by 40,000 Jews. The overall was 150,000, I think. I'm coming from a family of seven children, three sisters, four brothers, and my parents. We live an average life, but a religious life. My father was an Orthodox Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to cheder? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: And I went to cheder. I went Polish school. And I learned a trade. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends that you can remember? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I have friend. I was always active in the Zionist movement, and even had taught about that maybe the day going to come I'd able to leave Europe, and go to Israel, to Palestine that time. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of trade did you learn, and-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I was in the shoemaker business, shoe business. In Europe, we used to make the tops of the shoes. I was not a shoemaker, but the tops was a different trade. And 1939, I come back to it, the Germans, a few months later, they ordered that all the Jews should wear Star of David. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends that weren't Jewish before this? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes, I had. 

INTERVIEWER: Many friends? Do you have any memories of those friends, special moments that you had pleasurable memories about? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Not special, because I had a friend which I went to school with him. And in the '40s, you need a Polish man to do business. If you have a man who was an Aryan. It was easier for you to do some business. And in a short time, I'm not ashamed to say, because that time, everybody owned in the black market. We made some money. In the end, he gave me over to the SS anyway. 

INTERVIEWER: You made the money with him, and then-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: With him. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm pressing you to find out what life was like before you tell about what happened when the Germans came, because I am trying to get you to paint a picture of what your living circumstances were, so we see the contrast. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: You mean when the Germans came? 

INTERVIEWER: No, before what life was like. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Before the Germans came? 

INTERVIEWER: Before the Germans came, the life you lived. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I personally lived a social good life, I would say, the average life. Because at that time, I had a good trade, and I was making family. So that time, if you had enough to feed yourself, and to buy for yourself nice clothes, and once a week if you were able to go to a movie with your girlfriend, that was a luxury. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you live with your family? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I lived with my family, yes. I had a girlfriend. And if the circumstances would be different, maybe I would marry before the war. But in Poland, you had a lot of respect for your parents. And I was the one what I was supporting my family, my parents, my sisters and brothers. I served in support. And I knew it. If I going to leave my family, and I going to get married or I not, my family is going to be in a very difficult situation. And because of that, I said, let's wait another year, another year, another year. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of things did you do with your girlfriend? Did you go on picnics, did you go to parties? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: We went out, like I said, to a movie. We went out to Zionist meetings. We once, on a Sunday when we had time, we went to a picnic. But even when you went to a picnic, you never know how you will not be in a little trouble. What means by trouble? The antisemitism in Poland, especially in my city, was the biggest antisemitism, I would say, from whole Europe. 

Why? In Czestochowa, in Polish, you say Czestochowa, that was the biggest church in Europe. And because they felt so proud of themselves, the Polands, maybe because of that, I don't know, but anyway, whoever you talk to, and he's going to tell you the same thing. And Czestochowa was the biggest antisemitic city in whole Poland. I remember, 1936 was a problem in Czestochowa. 

Why was the problem in Czestochowa? A fellow came into a Jewish bar to buy something, whatever you buy in the bar, you know? And after that, he took out a knife, and he wants to knife the owner from the bar. And the owner from the bar was a Jewish man. The owner of the bar had a license for a gun. 

And he saw that his l life was in danger. He took out the gun, and he shot him. Because of that, next day, we have a problem in Czestochowa. I was, at that time, a teenager. I would say maybe in the 16 or 17s. I would say, my father used to call me all the time that I have too much guts. And I spoke the language well, because I went to the Polish school. 

When I was young, I had very blonde hair. And I didn't look like a Jew. And I used to walk a lot of times between the Poles. And they didn't know I'm Jewish. And when the pogrom was in Poland, and the busies street, and the busiest places where they were knocking the windows and taking out the goods from the stores, I was walking down with them, and witnessed what they did. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that what had happened in a pogrom? That they smashed windows? What else happened in a pogrom? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: They smashed windows, they took whatever was in the windows, they robbed the stores. And the police didn't do nothing for two days. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they hurt people? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes. They hurt a lot of people. And I don't remember for sure but I think they killed a few people. On the third day, the way we hear the rumors, the police stopped. The police came in. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the difference between that and what happened in 1939? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: You mean when the Germans came in? In 1939, like I said before, Germans came in. It was worse. Soon, they created the ghetto. Six or seven months later, they came into Czestochowa, because this was only 30 or 40 miles from the German border. Then, we start to feel how difficult it is to get food, to get the first aid. 

And a Jew was not allowed to leave the ghetto. We had some rationing from the Jewish. They created Jewish Administration. And I would say, used to get 900 or 1,000 calories for each head. That was in the beginning. Later was even less than that. And between young people had to go and to work for the Germans. The Jewish Administration used to point out who has to go to work. And they know I was a young man. They had my name. 

In the beginning, I used to work for the Germans daytime. In the beginning, they used to let us come home. That was in the beginning. After that, they sent me, and I think that was in the end of 1940, beginning of 1941, they sent me to a labor camp that was near the Russian border. They called that labor camp [NON-ENGLISH]. It was near the border, four miles from the Russian border. 

I came to this camp from our city was maybe 2,000. But the overall in this camp, I would estimate, was maybe 15,000 or 20,000. What did we do there? Build roads for the German army. We are working 12, 13 hours a day. We used to in the morning, get up, 6 o'clock in the morning, get a little black coffee and a slice of bread. We worked the whole day, we came home, we wind up with a soup. Potato soup or something else, was more water than potatoes, or whatever dish. 

INTERVIEWER: And that's all you had to eat the whole day? Black coffee, bread, and soup? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Black coffee in the morning, a slice of bread. And if you came home, sometimes they brought something at 12 or 1 o'clock. 

INTERVIEWER: Noon? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Not every day. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean at noon? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: That's right, that's right. Sometimes. Not every day, not all the time. But when I came to this camp, and I was there only a few days, I saw that it's very dangerous to survive out there. Why? First of all, at night, the German soldiers used to shoot into the barracks. It was a game for them, a play. After the shooting, they used to come into the barrack, laughing and asking, how many did we kill? How many is injured? I saw that the situation is grave. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: And I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You could change the tape now. 