INTERVIEWER 1: OK. All right. We wanted to just-- you were saying something about you've blocked out in the car. 

SUBJECT: I-- I don't remember many thi-- I remember going in. I remember hearing the closing of the door, the-- the-- that metallic click of the door being locked. I remember my parents being concerned about my grandmother, myself being concerned. And we found out that she was in the next, uh, train-- next-- in the next wagon. 

This is basically what I remember then, and I remember Joey. I remember that very well. That was sort of a piece of home, piece of my childhood. And I really didn't know where I was going at this point. 

Everything looked-- you know, it was-- you're going somewhere, but you don't know where. You're going to have experiences you that-- that's going to be totally new to you and unexpected. But I remember the opening of the doors and this smell and then the rapid succession of events-- these prisoners coming up and yelling, move, get out, form lines, form lines, get in line. 

And we all got in line. And they were chattering away in Yiddish, which I didn't understand very much of. My father understood a little more about it. And I remember seeing my mother looking for my grandmother. 

She found my grandmother. The women were on one side, lines of five, in columns. The men were on the left side, lines of five, in columns. The German soldiers and their submachine guns, dogs in the-- on the perimeter. This tremendous smell. 

The fences-- I didn't know they were electrified. There were some watchtowers on the side. These were all momentary impressions. I was able to look beyond the-- the fences and see more prisoners walking about. 

Then somewhere along the line, I saw chimneys. But all this came in-- in fleeting moments. And all throughout this time, we were walking. 

We were making advance. We were in the line, we were in the column, and we were going. And I remember my father telling me that-- give your age 16. That's all. 

And the next thing I know, we are the next five, my father and my brother and myself and two other people. And, uh, I give my age as 16, and they tell me to stand over to the side. My father and my brother went to the other side. They just walked away, said goodbye. 

The man making the decisions is a very nattily dressed, handsome German officer with a coat on his shoulder, waving a finger to the right or to the left. And I'm standing there, waiting. I see the German soldiers. I see the dogs. 

And after a while, they, uh, take me with a number of other youngsters my age, and they put us in a line. And we are marched off. We are marched off between-- in a road between two camps, basically, the fences on both sides. 

The Germans-- now there are no more prisoner guards, no more prisoners working with us, only German soldiers with machine-- submachine guns, with dogs on leashes. And it appears that anyone goes to the side, these dogs could tear you apart. And, uh, you end up in a-- in an area where, at this point, all our belongings are left on the train. 

We have nothing except what we are wearing and what we carry. We end up in a delousing area where they tell you to undress completely, keep your shoes. They shave you, they disinfect your shoes, and they tell you to take a shower. And we take a shower. 

And people hang on to their passports, to their photographs. And as you are going as if through an assembly line, they tell you, get rid of this over here, get rid of this over there. And you see a mound of passports and photographs and birth certificates. And you throw yours on the pile. 

And then, uh, you get a uniform. And now I'm a prisoner. Now I'm a halfling. I'm the third rank. 

And, uh, this was a, uh, shocker to me. I had a youngster my age who we befriended. We didn't know each other before. We were of the same age, of the same height, and we sort of held each other-- other's hands. 

And, uh, we slept next to each other in the several days after we were placed in the barracks. We were wondering, what's happening here? The barracks hold about 600, 800 people. You sleep on the floor. 

And the food, the sloppy breakfast we just unable to eat. Now, in time to come, we realize that people would fight over that food. But at that time to us, it was just total garbage, and we wouldn't eat it. So we didn't eat for several days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had no bed at all, no bunk? 

SUBJECT: No-- no bed, no bunk. It was just the floor of this barrack, earth floor. And there were 800 of us, and we're lying one to the other, one next to the other with our clothes and our hat and our shoes. And there was a bathroom at either end of the-- of the barrack. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No blanket, though? 

SUBJECT: No blanket, nothing. This was the end of May. Wasn't too cold. Uh, during the day, we were able to walk the streets-- the street on the barrack of the camp. Each camp in Auschwitz was a rectangular area with about 36 barracks, with a central, uh, street. 

And later on, in the next day or two, we found out that we were in the gypsy camp. This was a camp where the Germans have accumulated all the gypsies that were roaming around Europe. And they were living there with their families, and they had barracks where the gypsies were living. 

And I remember, second or the third day, walking with my friend and looking around trying to find our bearings-- where we were, what was happening. We asked one of the kapos. Kapos are the Kameraden Polizei. 

We asked him, what is happening to our-- where-- where are our parents? We came two days ago on a transport from Hungary. Where are our parents? 

Well, this fellow was very upset at that time for some reason or other. He said-- pointed to the chimney and said, that's where they are. And, of course, the chimney was spewing flames. 

And, uh, he-- he got very angry, and he started to beat my friend. And he was beating him until he died. He just beat him about the back until he just was coughing blood, and he just died. He had-- at-- uh, at that-- he had no more responsibility at that point than if he would have stepped on a fly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You couldn't stop him? 

SUBJECT: Couldn't stop him. Couldn't do it. The man had a large cane, and he was just beating-- whenever I got close enough, he was beating me, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- was he a German soldier? 

SUBJECT: He was a, um-- the-- each individual in the camp had a different sign or symbol for what they were. There were Jews. There were the political prisoners. There were the criminals. 

I believe this was a criminal. I think he had the black triangle, if I'm not mistaken. And he just beat him to death. 

To me, this was the introduction to camp life. To me, now it was a matter of knowing that my life was really not worth very much. It was not accountable, certainly, to anybody. And what the man said was probably true, that that's where my-- I've heard since I've been there that, yes, in fact, that there was a gas chamber, that here there were gas chambers, and here these were crematories. And these here is where they were getting rid of the people who were gassed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do when you saw your friend dead? 

SUBJECT: Didn't do anything. There was nothing I could do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had to watch? 

SUBJECT: I could either run away or stay there. I stayed there, as I expected that I'm-- he was going to be venting his spleen on me next. I really couldn't move. But he didn't. He just walked away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do then? 

SUBJECT: Then, um-- the next set of, um, events occurred when the, uh, boys in these barracks-- there were 600 of us in each barrack or maybe-- maybe more, maybe 800 in each barrack. Being 15, 14, to 16 years of age, we had an epidemic very soon of measles, mumps, and chicken pox. And the two barracks were quarantined. 

And, uh, for the next, uh-- let's see, for the-- June and July, these barracks were totally quarantined. That means really no one went out or in, only on permission. And, uh, we waited, and we all got the diseases, which we did not have immunity to. 

We ended up with mumps. Some had chicken pox. Some had measles. But diseases were just going around. 

And, uh, there, I-- I made friends with a German physician. He was a German Jew, elderly man, who was the physician for these two barracks. And he and I had long discussions. I ended up, uh, doing some of his sanitation work, that is, getting rid of the, uh, chlorinated excrement that was-- that accumulated each day. 

And this was a good job because I had a chance to get out of the barracks. And if you got out of the barracks, you could always get some food. And this was the beginning of the time, really, while I was in the camp when food became a very, very important thing. 

Being able to get some food, it was almost akin to living. Because some of the people who worked-- some of the people who worked on the trains, the Kanada Kommando-- Kannada Kommando took care of the trains that arrived to Auschwitz. And they were able to get food that people brought with them-- tinned food and cakes and cookies and jams. And they had so much when they brought back with them that if you went out of the barracks and they asked somebody for some food, they would give it to you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's Kanada Kommando? 

SUBJECT: It was called the Kanada Kommando. The Kommando that worked the incoming trains, the arriving trains were called Kanada Kommando, just as the Sonderkommando was the commando that took care of the people in the gas chambers and the crematories. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were just names? 

SUBJECT: They were fr--. They were just names. 

INTERVIEWER 1: "Sonder" didn't mean any-- 

SUBJECT: "Sonder." 

INTERVIEWER 2: "Special." 

SUBJECT: "Special." But, uh, that was the name. Now, the Kanada Kommando, although it was a good job, did not carry any stigma. The Sonderkommando, later on we found out, were terminated, right, with-- with-- with regularity. They were executed after three months or so of work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened next with you? 

SUBJECT: Well, in, uh, the-- the-- you know, the home doctor and I had a very good relationship. And all these Hungarian boys, uh, would not eat the cheese that was given us, the [INAUDIBLE]. That was the-- the-- the-- we got each day a slice of bread or a piece of bread-- I don't know how many grams it was-- and something, either a slice of salami or a slice of cheese or something with it. 

And the Liederkranz cheese that they gave us, they just couldn't eat it. It smelled funny to them. And this doctor was telling me that-- how that's the only protein these boys are getting. And I'm sorry that they are not eating it, because they are not going to survive if they're not eating that protein. 

And I started to beat the drums and talked with my friends to start eating the cheese. And it-- it was in large boxes because nobody wanted-- everyone would have been entitled to a very small piece, really-- very small piece. But it would have been a-- something. And nobody was eating it. 

And it was just sitting there, almost rotting in these boxes in the middle of the barracks. So I started eating it, and soon some of my friends were and others-- eat the Liederkranz cheese. And then July, August, we were still hanging around. 

Transports came and transports went. Auschwitz, or rather Birkenau, was a transport camp. People came there, and then pretty soon when they were put into uniforms, those that were weeded out were weeded out. 

They went to the gas chambers. The ones that were going to work were put into transports. But we were hanging around in Birkenau. And, uh, our numbers were being decimated by selections. 

And the selections came in late August, early September during the high holidays. Rosh Hashanah, there was a big one. Yom Kippur, there was a big one, uh, where we knew, after being there all these months, after seeing the flames of the crematoria, after seeing the gas chamber, knowing where it is. 

Because after Lager E, which was the Zigeunerlager, the gypsy lager, was the crematory and the gas chamber. And we knew what was happening. We also knew that, uh, you could walk down the street of the camp. And if a kapo didn't like you, he could beat you up and kill you and really not be held any-- accountable for it. So life was really not-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were taken to the-- Rosh Hashanah, to the selection? 

SUBJECT: There was a selection at Rosh Hashanah, and I believe the Rosh Hashanah selection is where I-- when I got selected. The Rosh Hashanah selection was a-- unusual. Normally they just had you lined up to-- and you take your clothes off. And somebody went, usually Mengele, went in front of the line and picked people. 

And they were taken out and taken to the side and-- they knew where they were going, and they were going. On Rosh Hashanah, they used a different method. They took a piece of, uh, board, and they nailed it to the soccer goal post at a certain height. 

And, well, they told everyone to go under it. If you hit it with your head, then you were all right. If you didn't hit it with your head, then you were too short. You had to go in the-- and I didn't hit it. And I went on the wrong end. 

And, uh, I ended up in my previous barrack. But this barrack was now slated to go to the gas chamber, because it was full of the selectees for that particular selection. And, uh, I was the beneficiary, as it were, of a game that was going on. And the game went like this. The Blockalteste, which is the head of the barracks, goes out on the street. 

Now, he has a barracks that he has 450 people who he has to account for. These are selected. They'll go-- he knows-- two days or one day from now. He goes out on the street, and he picks anybody who walks in front of his barrack. And he just says, you, come in here. 

Now, this poor, unfortunate individual was just walking from one barrack to another. All of a sudden, he finds himself in a barrack that's slated for the gas chamber. Now, he does this with an idea that he'll trade people. And anyone who is in this barrack who has someone on the outside with some influence or money or gold or alcohol, he'll trade. 

And, uh, what actually happened was-- I didn't have anyone on the outside. But shortly before the time of the Germans coming to surround-- usually they would make the disappearance in-- or rather the removal of these people-- at a time when no one would be watching, say at 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning. Everybody was asleep. 

They'd come-- they'd come at 12 o'clock or at 1 o'clock, and they'd surround the barrack. Well, at 11 o'clock, the Blockalteste was aware-- was aware that they were going to come. He had 452 instead of 450. 

He's not about to send 452-- not that he really cared. But he was held accountable for 450, and 450 is what he had to give the Germans. 452 would have made him-- put him in trouble. 

So, uh, he looks around, and I was sitting in a spot where I usually was sitting before. Because this was my barracks from before, and I used to be the night watchman in the barrack. I would shut off the light if there was an air raid. 

And, uh, he just recognized me. He said, you, run across the street. And I ran across the street into another barrack. And, uh, four hours would have meant that I was going to the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like for you to wait for the-- in the barrack for the gas chamber? 

SUBJECT: Horrendous. That-- that-- that was the-- the-- the-- probably the most horrible of-- of-- of times. It's-- the-- the-- the fear of being selected, the-- the-- being terrified during the selection is-- is horrible. 

But once you are-- once I was selected, there was just no-- nowhere to turn. There was just nowhere to go. The-- the doors were there, but you couldn't go out. 

And you knew that here it was. Your life is going to come to an end, because reason said that all the people who were previously selected went to the gas chamber. Extremely frightening. Just-- just-- just terrible, terrible fear. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you imagine the gas chambers? 

SUBJECT: Could I imagine it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: No. I really couldn't imagine it. I-- I-- I didn't-- I really didn't think of the process at all. I was thinking of the fact that I'm going to die, and that it's going to be with certainty that I'm going to die. And this was the horrible part of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned a soccer field, and that seems a contradiction. 

SUBJECT: Well, the, uh-- each camp, at the end of a camp, had a soccer field. And, uh, people who were, for instance, in Kanada Kommando, they were eating pretty well. And they were playing soccer on Saturday or Sunday afternoon, or other people who had good jobs in-- at that time. As a matter of fact, sometimes they would be playing against the kapos. Sometimes they would even be playing against the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And could they ever win? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I don't-- I think I-- I don't think I watched too many games, but they were playing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Weren't you weak? 

SUBJECT: Well, don't forget that I came from a totally normal environment, totally normal nutrition. And, uh, although by the time that Dr. Mengele looked at me for the last time in October, when I did go on a transport out of Birkenau, I was-- I'd lost weight. I was skinny. 

But I wasn't-- I was weak, probably. I was weaker than I would have been. But I'd learned to eat the food. I'd learned to eat the Liederkranz. I'd learned to eat whatever I could. I learned to steal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned Mengele. What did he look like? 

SUBJECT: The way I remember him, he's-- he was a very nattily, very spic-and-span dressed individual, always with a coat over his shoulder most of the time, with a little cane or a little, uh, riding crop and boots, who would, uh, walk by very efficient. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did anyone look at his face? Did you? 

SUBJECT: I looked at his face. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And? What was it like? 

SUBJECT: Looking at his face? No, I didn't-- I didn't perceive anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember his face? 

SUBJECT: Do I remember his face? Very handsome guy. I-- I don't remember. I couldn't describe it to you exactly. But on this occasion, when I was in the barracks, I remember on the first day-- this is the barracks that's selected-- a German-- an SS soldier came in, into the barrack and looked around. 

I don't know whether it was my imagination, but I thought I could see tears in his eyes. He looked, didn't smile or didn't do anything. He was-- just walked out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know the names of anyone else? Everyone knows Mengele. No one knows other names of the officers of the kapos. Why does everyone know about-- 

SUBJECT: I suppose because Mengele was the only one at-- at Birkenau did apparently almost all the selection. And the name we-- we-- after a while, it came, you know, Mengele is coming. We-- the rumor had it Mengele will be here today. And, uh, that, uh, brought up a lot of terror and fear. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was-- there was a selection that you went through on Yom Kippur, too? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tell about it? 

SUBJECT: The Yom Kippur selection-- just the fact that it was Yom Kippur and just the fact that a lot of people-- some people were fasting, some people were praying. Of course, the Yom Kippur prayers are extremely sad. There is a lot of crying involved. 

And at this time, it was very apropos. Didn't have to be urged to cry. Most of us did, especially when the-- one of the rabbis started with a Kol Nidre, everybody cried. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew there was going to be a selection? 

SUBJECT: We-- we knew, yes. We knew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And how did it start? How did you get to the table? 

SUBJECT: Uh, it was-- it's-- it's blurred to me, that-- that selection. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. And the-- and the last, the third one? 

SUBJECT: The last one, um, Mengele looked at me-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it? What-- 

SUBJECT: Well, we were-- it was selection for a transport. We knew that. And we also knew that the people who were too thin are going to be weeded out, people who could not possibly work. And we were told to undress. 

And, uh, we were lined up in lines. And each line had their picks. The picks had to leave. The line moved forward. And Mengele walked in front of the next line with all their clothes off. And I just stuck my stomach out and prayed and looked him in the eye. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- that moment-- what did this-- 

SUBJECT: That I wanted to live. I knew that this was it. I-- I didn't expect that I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he look back at you? 

SUBJECT: I don't really know. I-- I just looked in his eye, and-- and I was afraid. I was afraid to tremble, which I wanted to do because I was terrified. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Had you been working? You said those who couldn't work-- had you been doing some work after the, uh, measles epidemic? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We-- we were taken out of the camp a few times. And we were moving rocks from one place to another. I-- I really-- now, that's-- I-- I-- did not make terrible impression on me. We-- we were just marched out in the morning and marched back in. And I think were moving rocks one day from one pile this way and then from the same pile back to the other pile, that type of work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Didn't bother you? 

SUBJECT: To work? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Not at all. As a matter of fact, uh, working-- interestingly enough, the large gates at Birkenau and most other German camps, uh, had a sign-- a very, very large sign that said, "Arbeit macht Frei," "Work makes-- gives freedom." And, uh, to me, my philosophy or my point of view ever since this thing occurred was that as long as I was working, I would probably be allowed to live somehow. 

And if I can-- the only way I could survive, really, is if I was working. And, uh, once I-- they put me on a work detail, I thought, all right. I thought, OK, I'll go right to work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember music? 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember-- not-- not at Auschwitz. Later on, I remember music at another camp, just singing. That was after I left Auschwitz and I went to-- I was taken to Kaufering, which was a group of camps near, uh, Munich. 

And here, in the spring of '45, there was a time when we were just lying. The war was really coming to an end, and we were probably at the point of starvation. Uh, there were kids singing. 

As a matter of fact, the song that was played there, the song that these-- these youngsters sang, I just recently got a record of it. It's a Yiddish song. Um, the words escape me, but, uh, "Koyft zhe papirosn". I don't know if you know that song. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-uh. 

SUBJECT: Uh, "Buy-- Buy Some Cigarettes from a Poor Orphan." And, uh, it's a very touching song. A kid who is in the rain and he's cold, and he wants to survive. And he wants to sell cigarettes. 

And, uh, that-- that to me was probably the low point, one of the little points of my existence there. Because I remember feeling that here I was at the end of my rope, probably not going to make it. No-- I was-- I was an orphan, or at least I thought I was at that point. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You thought you were? 

SUBJECT: I thought I was an orphan. I didn't think my parents had lived until after liberation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. And what happened? 

SUBJECT: After liberation, I started hoping. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. But I was-- because I didn't see them die. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-huh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the tune of that song? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, it's-- it's on the record. I just got it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you sing it? Can you hum it? 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there dogs where you were working, moving the stones? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I believe so. I don't remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do-- 

SUBJECT: And this is-- this was my work at Birkenau. I left Birkenau in October. And really, the work time of my camp existence was from October until March. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me, it was '45. It was springtime. The war was about to end. And why did you think you won't make it? 

SUBJECT: Because I was weighing in at about 55 pounds-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you weighed in? 

SUBJECT: --or so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they weigh you? 

SUBJECT: No, but that was my weight at liberation. I was becoming what was known one there, a, uh, Muselmanner. Uh, it's the German word for Muslim. 

And a Muselmanner was someone who became so thin that he would not live. He would die. And he was automatically consigned to the gas chamber, if there ever was a selection. Or if there wasn't a selection, he was going to die anyways. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there particular experiences-- not only what you saw. What is it to become a Muselmanner? What did you experience? 

SUBJECT: Well, a Muselmanner does not become a Muselmanner overnight. He gets that way slowly from slow starvation. He thinks about food all the time, and he becomes totally emaciated, with really no flesh on his bones. Uh, he's a walking skeleton. And he would eat almost anything. 

In, uh-- in this camp, the Germans would have fun by cutting up a loaf of bread into small pieces and throwing each piece out from the watchtower. And maybe 400 or 500 people would go for each piece. And after each piece, there would be two or three that, uh, wouldn't get up anymore. 

A Muselmanner doesn't walk very fast. He-- he falls down at a small shove. And many times he dies without you even being aware of him dying. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember yourself walking slowly and-- 

SUBJECT: As a matter of fact, uh, just before liberation, I-- we realized that things were being-- well, no, this was in Kaufering. The camp was becoming a little more chaotic. They were going to move us out of Kaufering. And we were-- naturally, what does a Muselmanner do? He looks for food. 

So we-- some of us were gravitating toward the kitchen. And for the first time, I happened to glance at my own reflection in a window. And I looked behind me to see who it was, because I didn't recognize myself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And liberation? 

SUBJECT: Uh, from Kaufering, we, uh, were taken to, uh, Dachau. And this was a-- a very unusual, uh, trip, in that our train, which was open flat-bed cars, pulled next to a German troop train or a German supply train. I believe it was a supply train. 

And this was in, uh, April of '45. The liberators-- the-- the American planes were on top of this train just as soon as it stopped. And, of course, we were strafed with it. 

Now, in one of the cars, in one of the cattle cars of our train, was a group of women who had their children in the concentration camp. They were Jewish women who arrived in the camps pregnant a month or two and did not become a parent until later. And they were somehow or other shunted to this camp, and they had their babies. 

And, uh, we sustained many casualties. Of course, everybody jumped off the train as soon as the air raid siren was sounded. And, uh, some of the babies-- and I wasn't aware of this until when I walked about the train-- some of the babies and some of the mothers were killed. And I saw a woman whose baby was killed pick up a baby from a dead mother and take it as her own and just go about like if nothing had happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened at Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Dachau, uh, was, uh-- [SIGHING] Dachau was pretty bad because it-- we thought it was the end of the line for us. Most of us were Muselmanners. I, in particular, had another problem. 

I also had scabies. I had scabies for four months at this point. Scabies is a very bad skin condition where you itch very badly. And, uh, in the concentration camp, because they didn't treat me and my friends, we became infected from head to toe. 

And we were a mass of boils. There were three of us-- and youngsters. It was, um, painful, very uncomfortable. You'd wake up in the morning, and the blanket would be stuck to your body. And you'd move, and you'd take off half of your skin with it. 

So here I was in-- in Dachau with scabies and infected and becoming a Muselmanner by the day. Food was almost nil. And, uh, I just couldn't really get up and walk around very much. 

And, uh, the ever-present fear of getting diarrhea was there. Because if a Muselmanner got diarrhea, he was finished. And there was a lot of diarrhea going around, and there were a lot of people who were falling by the side. The guy sleeping next to you, uh, wouldn't get up in the morning. And you knew that he just died. 

Uh, at this point, I felt that I am just letting things happen, I'm just waiting out my time until I was going to die. And then I-- as I'm standing there, I see these strangely dressed, or differently dressed, people with guns going for one of the watchtowers. And all of a sudden, I see somebody coming down, some shouts, and the German gets shot in front of me and-- a German soldier. And the Americans took over the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you feel anything when you saw him shot? 

SUBJECT: I-- I didn't feel really anything. I didn't even feel that elation that I thought I was going to have. See, the-- my-- my fight with the Germans began when my friend was killed. I looked at him lying down. 

And I-- I said that, I understand why I'm here. I know I'm a Jew. If Jews are going to die, I've got to be here. If Jews are being killed, this is the place for me. 

There is a very vast army that's assembled for my destruction. I'm just a little Jew from Craidorolt, Transylvania. And I was angry. 

Now, what if I were to make monkeys out of them and survive? Just daffke. Just because they wanted to kill me, they wanted to annihilate me. And this was their total purpose, this very large army, this material. 

And here I was. I should have seen that I'm winning the battle, and it really didn't make any difference. I-- and so we are liberated. So what? 

I didn't have the-- the strength. I didn't have the will at that point, really, to-- to want to live. But I was all right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. Full account. 