INTERVIEWER: Um, Mrs. Colbert. Mrs. Colbert, what was it like for you when you were, uh, in France before the war? As a Jew, what was it like? Did you have any problem with being Jewish in France? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No problem? 

SUBJECT: As I said, the French-- if they like the person, they will not ask you your religion or your identity. They'll invite you and you'll be their best friend. Whereas in England, where I was brought up, I was never invited to a gentile's home. In France, my best friends were the French. They never asked me what religion I was-- never, never. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you had to-- when the Germans came and you had to wear the Jewish star, how did the French people act then? 

SUBJECT: There were-- there were two parties. And they were very much afraid to give their true feeling. Because in our home town, those that gave their true feeling against the Ge-- about the Germans. 

There were nine in a row shot in our home town. And that's what was going on. So everyone was afraid to say a word, even those that were for the Jews. 

But I remember one day a French worker saw me with Jew here. And he felt very bad about it. He said something. I don't remember what, but I know he felt bad about it. But people-- people did not dare say what they really thought openly. 

INTERVIEWER: You mentioned that some people were selling Jews for money-- for food, rather. What did that mean? 

SUBJECT: They were giving them away. Those that were on the other side, the collaborators, were for the Germans. And they were-- they were giving away Jews to have the money. 

The Germans, when they arrested a-- even a Jew, they tortured him until he gave some of his friends away, some of the other Jews. We were in Lyon, and we had family there. We had three addresses. 

They didn't know where we lived. In case they were taken, they were tortured to give other Jews away. So we never, never told them our address. We went to see them frequently. 

We were very close friends-- close relatives. But we never told them where we live. And one day, we had three addresses. And one day, we were afraid-- there were raids all over, so we were afraid to sleep in any place. 

So my husband said, come to the Salvation Army. We'll ask them to put us up. When we got there, they said, it's very dangerous. They come to raid all the time. You know, in-- quite in danger in here. 

But take these keys. We have an apartment opposite for the officers that pass through this town. Take the keys. We don't know you. You don't know us. And stay there. 

I went back to a witch-- one of my three addresses. She was nice when I paid the rent. When we bought things in the black market, we played cards and drank wine at night. 

The next morning, she say, when are you getting out of here? She had reasons. She only had two rooms. And we had reason to keep that place, because she never knew that she had to have a register and go once a month to the town to the police to say who's living there. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like for you to be running all the time, changing your place of residence? 

SUBJECT: It was dreadful! I sat at the window with a wet rag to my head. I had migraines, dreadfully. And then I was bleeding. I had a cyst on my ovary. 

And one day in Lyon, I saw the doctor. And he said, you must be operated on, but you have to take sheets and pillowcases along with you. So I made the valise, and my husband accompanied-- accompanied me to the hospital in Lyon. 

And when I got to the door, I said, I'm not taking chances. I'm not going in. Because if they raid, they'll recognize my accent, that I'm not French. So I did not go through with the operation. I only went through with it the first week I arrived here in the USA. 

INTERVIEWER: So you suffered with this-- this hemorrhaging all those years? 

SUBJECT: I-- it could have been cancerous. But thank God it was not. God was with us. 

INTERVIEWER: How many years, how many months, how many years were you hiding and living in this very different-- 

SUBJECT: Two years. 2 and 1/2 years in the south of France and 1 and 1/2 years in my hometown, in-- in fright and danger. 

INTERVIEWER: You never knew what was going to happen next? And you never heard from your daughter? 

SUBJECT: Every moment of my life, day and night of our lives, were like on a thread. We thought we could be taken any moment and done away with. In fact, one day, in Montlucon, my husband said, come and see a lawyer. 

We passed by and we saw a lawyer. He said, go in and make an appointment. I said, no, I'm not making an appointment, because I don't know which side he's on. We-- we-- days went by. 

My husband insisted, go back and make an appointment. And then-- then I gave in, and I made an appointment. And we saw this Maitre Berton in Montlucon. 

And he-- that day we told him our story. So he wrote to Paris, not knowing the laws exactly in Paris. He wrote for our cards-- bread card, sugar, tobacco. He did not know the laws exactly. 

When his letter arrived in Paris, there was a notice out to arrest us. And he got to-- he-- he knew about it. One day we went further. 

We took a bus. We were sick and tired. I couldn't make a little hot water I used to make on charcoal. And that's what gave me the migraine-- migraines, the little hot water. And we ate all our food out. 

So one day we took a bus somewhere out to where we lived, a few miles out. There was a policeman there, but I won't speak about that. So when we came back, the landlady, the lady from the hotel, said-- said, the lawyer came to see you. 

A lawyer never comes to see a client if they are home in France. I don't know here. But never, never has it happened. So we-- we said to her, no doubt he has our cards. 

We went straight away to see him. He said, there's a notice out for your arrest tonight. The Gestapo is coming to pick you up this evening. Go home to the hotel. Make your luggage. 

Put on a few double clothing, have everything. And I'll have someone pick up your luggage. And I said, my false identity card-- I'm afraid to travel with it. He said, you take it and travel with that. 

INTERVIEWER: Can we see that? 

SUBJECT: A 3 o'clock in the morning, we were supposed-- there was a hotel next to the station. He said, you'll go into that hotel. You'll fill in, uh, a form. And the hotel manager-- if the Gestapo comes, if the police comes, he'll let you out through another door. 

If they don't come till 3 o'clock in the morning, you'll take the train. He'll keep your luggage. He had a whole wall of luggage covered up. 

JACKIE: Na, and when you-- 

SUBJECT: It was 3 o'clock in the morning. We took the train. And whom should I see but the boy that was-- 

JACKIE: Oh, Pierre? 

SUBJECT: --blackmailing us. 

JACKIE: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: We were afraid of him. We had took the-- he told us that, go to Lyon. And from there, not stay there, but go to Switzerland or Spain. 

When we saw that boy, we went to the end of the car so as he didn't-- doesn't see us. I arrived in Lyon. My husband made friends with anyone. He could speak to the Lord-- anyone. He made friend-- he went to the townhouse and made friends with a Mr. Paravelle that worked there. 

And this Mr. Paravelle made this new identity cards, a different name. This is the second one. This was the first one, and this is-- this is the second one made by-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold that up? 

SUBJECT: --Paravelle. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold them up for the camera? Can you hold them for the camera to see them? Just in front of you. Put the-- Jackie, perhaps you could hold it-- 

JACKIE: You mean-- 

INTERVIEWER: --hold the glasses. Then she could hold. 

JACKIE: Oh, nanny, let me hold your glasses. And then you can hold them up in front of you. To facing you? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, facing us. 

SUBJECT: Can I put my Joan of Arc? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. First show the-- first show them steady, so the camera can get them. This camera. 

JACKIE: Nanny, now this camera. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. And then-- and then will you turn the card around that has the Joan of Arc on it? 

JACKIE: This one, nan, that has Joan of Arc. 

INTERVIEWER: And that-- 

SUBJECT: This one saved my life. 

INTERVIEWER: Joan of Arc saved your life? That's fine. Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Finish? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, that's fine. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, Mrs. Colbert, when you were at the station and the boy was there-- I mean, when you were with this gentleman and the boy was there-- you were at the station when the boy was there-- did you show that you recognized him? Or what happened? What did he do? 

SUBJECT: We avoided for him to see us. We were afraid to see him. We went to the end of the station. And arrived in Lyon. We changed our identity on account of him. 

JACKIE: Did he see you? 

SUBJECT: No, he didn't see us. 

JACKIE: Didn't see you. 

INTERVIEWER: This process of running all the time and changing your place of location-- was that your pattern of living the entire 2 and 1/2 years? 

SUBJECT: The entire. And that's not half what we went through. We left certain things in-- in-- next to the station. So my husband said, you go to Montlucon and get the things that we left at that hotel over to Lyon. 

At first I refused, as usual. In the end, he arrived to make me go. I went. I took carriage and went. The whole town-- one street was the whole town, the principal street. 

What did I do the first? I went to see the lawyer, Mr. Maitre Berton. He said, how dare you come? How did you take such a risk? 

The-- the street is small. The town is small, the whole street. And you are in danger here. But one thing I'll ask you, to go and thank the lady where you were staying at the hotel. 

Because she knew who came-- the Gestapo came to fetch us. And this lady knew who come for our luggage. I paid up the rent. I had letters for my son-in-law, how we took my daughter to the hospital to be confined. 

A beautiful letter I kept-- like my eyes-- I had a few letters, two or three letters, and did not dare tear them. I put them on the floor in the bathroom. 

I didn't dare tear them. They meant all the world to me. So yeah, I thanked the lady. I brought her a bouquet of flowers and thanked her. And she told me the Gestapo had been there, and they was supposed to arrest us and send us to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you knew about-- they knew about Auschwitz at that time? They knew about Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Yes. There was another name. I don't remember the other name. The-- the lawyer told us-- 

INTERVIEWER: Treblinka? 

SUBJECT: --where we were supposed to be arrested and sent. That's why we left right away. 

JACKIE: What-- when was this, nanny? How many-- when-- you know the year when-- when they did this? When this was? 

SUBJECT: In Montlucon? I have a letter from the maitre. That's when-- when I-- when I arrived in Lyon, then I went to [INAUDIBLE]. 

JACKIE: So it was in '44? 

SUBJECT: About fort-- 

JACKIE: Oh, no, because I had just been-- I had been born. 

SUBJECT: No, '44, it was finished. 

JACKIE: So-- no, well, I had just been-- it was-- this was when you had received a letter. Pa-- daddy was just-- 

SUBJECT: But that I kept from Paris with me. 

JACKIE: Oh, you kept. So then it was probably about-- 

SUBJECT: I kept it from Paris. 

JACKIE: I was born '42. 

SUBJECT: But that was about two or three years later. 

JACKIE: So, yes, for-- just before the end, I guess. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents did not know what was happening with her parents during all this time, Jackie? 

JACKIE: No, not at all. 

SUBJECT: Would it have been Diane? No. 

JACKIE: No, because Diane was born in 1945. I was born in 1942. 

SUBJECT: That's true. 

JACKIE: And you didn't hear-- mother didn't hear any news of you until maybe 1943. I was one-year-old about. 

SUBJECT: For a year and a half I had letters from the hospital and from the ambassador. 

JACKIE: How long did you not-- how long were you out of touch with mom? 

SUBJECT: About 2 and 1/2 years. She never knew whether we-- whether we were alive. And we never knew about her. 

INTERVIEWER: She was your only child? 

SUBJECT: She had a second child. We didn't know. We didn't know our son-in-law. When we arrived, we found the son-in-law and two children. 

JACKIE: Was the only child. My mother was the only child. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother tell you, Jackie, about her concerns about her parents during-- 

SUBJECT: She was four when I arrived. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, but-- but now. Did she-- does she talk about how she felt about-- 

SUBJECT: Four or five. 

INTERVIEWER: --her parents during that time? What she worried about? What she thought? What she did? 

JACKIE: Well-- 

SUBJECT: Ah, I'll tell you what she said to me. And then when I arrived, I passed by and then saw a house to be sold. So I went in with her. She was about five. And I asked the price of the house. The woman told me the price. So she said, my nanny hasn't that kind of money, because the Boche took it all away from her. [LAUGHING] 

JACKIE: Because I was four when my grandparents-- 

SUBJECT: She was-- 

JACKIE: --came to live with us for the first two years. Oh, well, they lived with us for two years. 

SUBJECT: In '46, we arrived here. 

JACKIE: And-- 

SUBJECT: In April '46, we're the first mili-- we came on a military, the [? Texarkana, ?] a military boat with 14 civilians only. All the rest were military. We were the first amongst the civilians to come over. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to your house, the house that you lived in when-- 

SUBJECT: We gave it to the UJA. We-- my husband was-- he was outspoken. And he told what he thought of the French, those that were against the raid, against-- 

JACKIE: Those who were collaborations. 

SUBJECT: Collaborators. 

JACKIE: Right. 

SUBJECT: So one man, a friend of ours from the townhouse, used to come often. And my husband told him what he thought of the French. So what did he do? 

Oh, that's later. That's later. We gave-- when we left, my husband said, he doesn't want any money. He doesn't want to sell it. He feels that he should do something good for the Jews. 

So he gave it to the UJA for two years with no payment. And they put 40 children in there, because it was a very big house, a double house. And they taught them a trade. 

JACKIE: It was for orphans. 

SUBJECT: Orphans. Jewish orphans. And they sent them out to Israel, to different countries, once they'd learned their trade. When the two years were up, the head of the UJA wanted it for himself, which we did not agree. 

Because we had to pay all the repairs and everything-- lots of expenses. So we didn't give it to him, though the house remained empty. The man from the townhouse that had it against my husband, that was outspoken and told him what he thought of the-- 

JACKIE: Collaborators. 

SUBJECT: --the French-- he put in a family with six or eight children that you could never, never get him out-- never. And we had to pay all repairs. 

They made the house in a mess. My husband went back in '56 to sell it. He selled it next to nothing because we couldn't get that man out of the house. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever go back to France? 

SUBJECT: The-- in '57 I went back. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- did you meet people that you knew before? 

SUBJECT: I corresponded with my-- those that done a lot of good for me in the south of France. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your neighbors and your-- 

SUBJECT: Neighbors, too. I corresponded. I had no time. I had arrived when my sister-in-law died. And I was-- I was living in Paris with a sister-in-law. 

And my home was in-- 17 miles from there, from Paris. When I went to see my brother-in-law I had no time to see my friends. But I did correspond for some time, and I sent packages to all those that they were good to me. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel now about the French and their behavior? 

SUBJECT: I always feel that they're wonderful people. They have wonderful hearts. One day, we were afraid to go home. 

We were sitting in the cafe. And there was a man next to my husband. He got in touch with anyone-- anyone and everyone. He start speaking to him. 

He said, I'm-- we have nowhere to go tonight. He said, that's all? If that's all, you come to my home. My wife is out on a bicycle running around for food, and she won't be home tonight for a couple of nights. You come home. 

We met him in the cafe. He could have been against us. He invited us, made a table, gave us a clean bed to sleep over. We slept a night or two. The wife arrived. 

She made a wonderful table, a better one than her husband-- after all. She brought food back, and she made a wonderful table. And-- and we invited two American soldiers that we met, and she received them. And we had a wonderful evening there. 

INTERVIEWER: This was during the war? This was during the war? 

SUBJECT: During the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were American soldiers there? 

SUBJECT: They came in! I was there when they came in. I was in the underground at one time. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in the underground? 

SUBJECT: There's so much to speak about. I'm afraid I'm taking your time. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, just tell us about the underground. Well, how did you-- 

SUBJECT: The underground. This friend-- my husband met a young man that was married and had a little store. He was not quite himself. But he wanted his mother that was a chirurgie dentiste. 

JACKIE: She was a dental surgeon. 

INTERVIEWER: Ah. 

SUBJECT: Dentist surgeon in Lyon. And she wanted to meet us. He had spoken to her about us. 

So she said she'll make a lunch dinner and we should come. She wants to meet us. She had a home in Loyettes on the Rhone, a country home. 

She made a wonderful dinner for us, and she took a liking to me. And that day she gave me lemon, because I was suffering from migraines and didn't have a little hot water. And I told her about it. She gave me a lemon. If, uh, someone would give-- give me a million dollars, wouldn't be-- you couldn't find it for money, love or money. 

Anyway, later she invited us to her home, to pass a few weeks in her room in the country. Her home was on the Rhone. There was a gate, uh, a railing on the Rhone. And there was a bridge from-- from the railing, you could see the bridge. First of all, we were-- we were bombarded by the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she going to hide you in her home? Was that the idea? 

SUBJECT: No, she wanted to make us feel a-- a little better, to pass some time in the country. There, they caught collaborator. They tortured him. I'm not going into that. It's a dreadful story. And then they shot him in the square in the town. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? Who caught the collaborator? 

SUBJECT: We had the underground. They came to install in her home because it was on the Rhone. And you could see from the-- there-- the-- 

JACKIE: From the other bank. 

SUBJECT: --the-- 

INTERVIEWER: The window? 

SUBJECT: --the bridge. Whether it was the Germans coming or the Americans, we're supposed to come in. But in the meantime, the Germans kept on bombarding. 

The [INAUDIBLE] wasn't further out. The underground were making place-- room for the Americans to come in. So there was one sitting very high. And we had about 20 that drew-- derailed trains and brought this little sugar, some white flour. 

Whatever they managed to take from the trains that were destined for the Germans they brought to us. And when they made the-- and then, again, the preach-- prie-- the priest came and said, the Americans on their way to come in. So we set to work. 

She had the hand machine. And she gave me all the aprons and all sheets, and I made a flag-- an American flag, a French flag, an English flag from pieces. I didn't know how many stars. 

I cut out white stars from the sheets and sewed them on and also made a-- a-- a thing this wide and this long. "Welcome, boys," for the Americans. So the priest came and said, the Americans are coming in. So we hung up the flags. 

This we had no time hang up, but we would hold it by hand. He came running back. He said, the Germans are still around. Take down the flags because you're-- you're done away with if the Germans see those flags. 

We took them down, and I rolled them in a sack. And we buried them in the ground. The next day, he came running. "The Americans are on the way. You can take the flags out." 

We took them out. He came running again. "Take them in. Those Germans are still bombarding." So we-- instead of burying them in the earth, we put them in three now sheets, embed between our sheets. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in the underground when you were doing this? 

SUBJECT: In the underground. This lady-- we had the underground staying. They didn't ask if they can come and stay. They just came in and planted themselves there. Whether you want it or not, they didn't ask permission. One-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did the underground care that you were Jewish? Wasn't that a risk for them? 

SUBJECT: We-- we didn't-- no one asked what we-- the lady that we were staying at never knew what we were. She was my best friend. I had the most wonderful letters from her. She called me "little sister," and she missed me enormously. 

JACKIE: But what did you think she thought? 

SUBJECT: She didn't want to know! She liked the-- 

JACKIE: She didn't know. 

SUBJECT: She liked the person. 

JACKIE: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And so when the-- I-- one of the underground-- a young boy of about 16, he said, you come with me, to me. He took his bicycle and his sack, and he's got it on. He said, come and see the peasants, how they'll fork it out with a gun, when they see the gun. Otherwise they-- they won't give anything. 

So I went with him, and they filled the sack with butter, uh, chickens, cheese. Whatever they had, they gave, uh, because they saw the gun. When we came back, we had food. 

Then a few days later, the-- this boy died. He was killed later-- not while he was with us. He was only 16. 

He was with the underground. Torn shoes, no clothes. Torn clothes. They were not dressed as soldiers. When they left, the Americans start coming in. When we saw the Americans in our town-- 

JACKIE: [LAUGHING] Yeah? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Mother said I shouldn't. 

JACKIE: [LAUGHING] 

SUBJECT: But-- first of all, the three and four s-- stripes-- 

INTERVIEWER: Stars? 

SUBJECT: --the stars came and installed themselves in the place where the underground was. They didn't ask permission. They just came and installed themselves. 

Big tables. They brought their food. They brought wood. They brought everything, and they gave us a little of everything. 

One day we said we're going to-- they were there in the-- across the bridge we saw the soldiers coming. The flags were up, and we were hiding this "Welcome, boys." And when I saw those boys, I said, one of them must be my son-in-law. 

I didn't know my son-in-law. I said, he must be in the army. So I stopped the most beautiful boy. 

First of all, I asked him if they knew my sister in Brooklyn by so-- such and such name, Silverman. There are so many Silvermans in Brooklyn. I thought that it was a little town. 

Then I stopped the most beautiful boys. I said, are you my son-in-law by any chance? He said, no. I found another one, a beautiful one. 

I said, are you my son-in-law by any chance? I didn't know my son-in-law. He said, I'm not even married. [LAUGHING] Your mother told me not to tell you this. 

JACKIE: [LAUGHING] Yeah. Nanny picked out the most handsome and went to each of them, because my mother is very pretty. 

SUBJECT: One day-- one day, the lady and I said, we must make the four stars very comfortable here and make them feel as if they were home, in their own homes. This lady had a beautiful home. And I had all my jewels in my-- I had the pocket in my corset, and I had all my jewels. 

And my money I carried in my pocket in my corset. I took half my jewels. I put all my jewels on. And she dressed up in her best, I in my best, to make them feel as if they were in their own home. And we made a beautiful dinner at the table in the home-- in the house. 

And they brought the chickens. They brought the wood. They brought the butter. They brought everything, because we hadn't had it. So we made them comfortable. 

INTERVIEWER: This was liberation? 

SUBJECT: And then when the Americans came in, in no time, they from woods, they set up an airport. And they came to fetch us every day, as we spoke English as interpreters. So every day they came to fetch us. 

Each soldier I saw, I asked him if he knows Albany, where my daughter lived. So one day, I came across a boy that was from Albany. I said, good morning, Albany. 

I called him Albany. He meant all the world to me. So through this boy, he wrote to his father that he met someone that has a daughter living. 

And they have a plant in Albany. And I told him the name, and his father knew the doctor that took care of my daughter. And through them, she got to know that we were alive. 

When the Americans came in, we left a little while afterwards for home. We had to have a pass to leave our home. This is the pass. This is my husband's pass, and this is mine. 

INTERVIEWER: You had to have a pass to go back home? 

SUBJECT: Open. 

JACKIE: Nanny, you had to go-- you had-- you needed the pass to be able to get back to the Le Vesinet? 

SUBJECT: To get back to my home, we needed a pass. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold that up? Jackie, perhaps you could hold it for her. I see. And that was your husband's pass? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Who issued those passes? 

JACKIE: Who issued them, nanny? 

SUBJECT: The townhouse. The townhome. 

JACKIE: But in Lyon, because you were going from the southern sector to-- 

SUBJECT: --to my home. 

JACKIE: --to the liberated. Mhm. The 9th of October, 1944, from Lyon. From the head police officer. 

INTERVIEWER: That's a wonderful ending. Jackie, I would like to conclude by asking you what it is that you feel, what it is that you-- what are your concerns about your grandmother and your grandfather's experiences and the need for others to-- to know about them? 

SUBJECT: May I tell you another experience we had in Lyon? We were sitting in a cafe. There were three men that came in, two men with a German accent and one, uh, Frenchman. 

My husband say-- got in touch with them. And he told me how he likes the Germans and what he thought of them. And then he asked them where he can find a Beaujolais, a good Beaujolais, a good wine. 

He was-- liked a good wine. He had wine with his meals. So they said, come, we'll take you to a place where you'll have a wonderful Beaujolais. 

So I kicked him. I said, we have an appointment at 7 o'clock. Don't you remember? I-- I was afraid to go with them. 

So he didn't accept. I said we had an appointment. That night-- we used to live-- eat our food always in the same place, [FRENCH] in Lyon. That night we thought we'd go to a better place. When-- that was a good place where we ate every day. 

But we-- we thought that night we'll change, go to a very smart place. We went there. And whom should we see walk in the front-- the two men dressed as Gestapo. Can you imagine that? 

JACKIE: The ones that you saw from the cafe? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

JACKIE: From the cafe? 

SUBJECT: In the cafe. 

JACKIE: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: In the re-- in the hotel, where we went to eat. 

JACKIE: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Those two men dressed up as Gestapo. We hid out, of course. They should recognize us. 

INTERVIEWER: It was just-- 

SUBJECT: Had we have gone with them, they would have arrested us. Because my husband told them what he thought of the Germans. There are so many, many things like that that come back to me. 

JACKIE: Well, nanny and papa came to live with us when I was four. And those are among my earliest memories, because our free time was spent in the garden. And the stories we heard-- 

SUBJECT: There was a-- 

JACKIE: --were their escape adventure stories, which to us sounded very exciting as adventure stories. But I think that we grew up having very strong feelings about Germans. And-- 

SUBJECT: About Judaism-- 

JACKIE: I-- I-- 

SUBJECT: She's become a very pious Jewish. 

JACKIE: Well, I won't say that I'm pious. I'm-- I'm interested in-- 

SUBJECT: She wants to-- 

JACKIE: --in Jewish history-- 

SUBJECT: --bring up her children. 

JACKIE: --and bring up my children so that they know that this has happened, that they have a heritage, and that it can happen again. And I never-- to me, I-- I-- it was not a matter of forgiving the Germans or forgetting. And I never bought anything German. 

It was just second nature, because it had hap-- I had heard about it so early. And one day I had bought my mother a birthday present, a very beautiful vase. And when she picked it up, I realized that I had forgotten to pick it up and check whether it was made in Germany. And it had been made in Germany. 

And I remember that was crushing, because it was a beautiful vase and my mother had loved it. And then I know she felt very-- we both felt very ambivalent about it afterwards. And I've always kept that feeling about not wanting to have anything German. 

And as I got older, I try to, uh, balance out the views that there were some good Germans. And, uh-- but I wrestled with it for a very long time. And one day at a Boy Scout meeting of my oldest son, there was a woman who I heard speaking German. And there's just something about her. 

And I came into contact with her a little bit later, and I said-- before I knew what I was saying, she was a stranger in the community. She didn't speak much English. I said, well, why don't you just come over for coffee? 

And then I immediately regretted it. I said, this is ridiculous, for all these years, et cetera. But there was something about her. 

Anyway, she did-- I didn't follow it up, and I didn't call her. But after a while, I bumped into her in town and I said, well, you must come over. And there aren't that many people that I think that, uh-- that there's a real correspondence between the hearts. 

And I somehow-- there was a something special about her. And we talked on the same level, but it was very difficult. When she would leave, I would have all these feelings about, she's German. It was very difficult to deal with. 

And finally, I overcame it to a certain extent. And I see her often. She's a very good friend of mine. But she's still German. And she'll still be Barbara and German. 

And I don't think that I'll ever be able to, um-- it will ever be completely faded out. And her-- she has two boys my son's age, so I had to face what I was saying to the children about Germans. And here were two very nice boys whom they liked and who were not Jewish. 

And I had to sort of wrestle with the problem and put it in perspective, and yet tell them that, really-- that what had happened was of enormous importance and that it was something that, whether they accepted their Jewishness-- whether the boys accepted their Jewishness or not, this type of thing could happen again. And they were going to have no choice in it. And this was just something that they had to know. 

And they were going to have to make up their own minds as to how they felt about it, but that they should know that I felt very strongly about it. And when my husband wanted to buy a German car, he finally did. It was diesel, and he bought a Mercedes. But that will never sit right with me. And I feel that it's-- I'm just always aware of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever talk it through with your friend Barbara? 

JACKIE: I did in the beginning when I've-- when I-- as soon as I could put it together. Because I could say that there were so many other attachments between us that, really, if I was going to continue, I-- I couldn't sit there thinking, yeah, she's German, every time I look at her. She's German. 

And, uh, I did. And she said, oh, you're Jewish. And I said yes. And this came-- actually, when it came about was that she had invited us to an Easter party. 

And so I-- I said yes, and I thanked her for the invitation. And I thought, I don't know how she celebrates Easter. Maybe she celebrates it in a very religious way. And since perhaps she doesn't know that we're Jewish, because we hadn't talked-- it had-- had not come out-- perhaps she would feel uncomfortable. 

So I called her up. And I said, Barbara, I don't know how you celebrate Easter, but, um, we are Jewish. And if you have a-- some sort of a celebration-- I don't know how you feel about it. I don't want to put you in an embarrassing position, because she was having other people, et cetera. 

And it was somewhat how-- that was sort of how it came out. So we talked. And, uh, that was the beginning. And she said, no, of course I didn't. Didn't mean anything to her. 

But then the next time we got together, later on in the week, we talked further about it. And, um, she told me her experiences during the war. Her father had been a very famous surgeon. And-- but for that they-- because of that, they had not starved, because he was very well-known and hid his family. 

And, um, so we did talk about it. And she could understand some of my feelings. And I don't really know what she thinks about them, really deep down. 

I think we have a very close friendship, but there's always that little something in my mind. But we did talk about it, because I couldn't go any further without talking about it. But I think of her as a close friend. 

SUBJECT: You must forget about it. I have many friends German. I had a neighbor. She was German. She was very, very nice. 

And I belong to a senior citizens group in Larchmont. And there are two German women that I sit with at table. They're wonderful. And they know that I'm Jewish. And others-- it's a mixed group, which I like very much. 

JACKIE: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. This was quite unusual. 