SUBJECT: They refuse it. 

INTERVIEWER: They refused it? In some, there was-- 

[AUDIO OUT] 

SUBJECT: This could be a real deeply felt thing which brings me to smile. A joke won't do it. I can smile if I see my grandchild, but a joke won't do it. A cheerful movie might bring a little grin on my face, but I haven't heard myself heartily laughing. I think it's a leftover of the experience. 

But it had some good things too. When I visited Israel in 19-- 60-- no-- a little later-- '60-- it was right after the Yom Kippur War-- '60-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yom Kippur was six day war. 

SUBJECT: Yeah-- a six day war. 

INTERVIEWER: 60s-- 

SUBJECT: That was '67. 

I had a interesting flashback when I walked through the streets of Tel Aviv. I saw a Jewish policeman, and I suddenly saw a flashback of myself being just about to be arrested by a Viennese policeman, just because I was a Jew. And it came to my mind, this is one country where never in the world a policeman will arrest me purely because I have a big nose and look Jewish. And it made me proud to be there-- this funny coincident-- besides all the other experiences of history and achievement. 

INTERVIEWER: Yet this was a Jewish policeman. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he would probably arrest me just as much if I would commit a felony or something else, but he wouldn't do it because I'm-- just because I'm Jewish. And that gave me a good feeling. And it could never happen. 

You asked me also what it-- what my impression is of what all these experiences did to people who were involved in it. I think it left permanent scars in them. 

I had a very extensive experience with refugees in this town. And they choose me as their doctor. And I saw almost all of them at some time or another. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they choose you as their doctor? You don't know? 

SUBJECT: Don't know why. Maybe they had confidence. Maybe I spoke their language-- some of theirs. Maybe they felt some compassion I had. Uh, but I had a big experience with them. 

And I must say that there was hardly anybody who wasn't plagued by severe anxiety at some time or another, much more expressed than it would be under these same circumstances by somebody who wasn't exposed to this terror. And the sad thing was that this was not only the case in most of these refugees but also in some of their children, even if they were born here. And I feel-- and more so if they were born there-- and I feel the reason is probably a transference of the feeling, and emotions, and fears, and anxieties of their parents. 

That I know of one case where a young man, when his father came to my office, wouldn't go from his side. And I got to know it already. I said, "Leave your father alone. I have to do a very-- a rectal examination." I don't feel that his son should observe it. And I had to actually push him out of the room. 

And I asked the father, "What's wrong with your son?" He says, "He is afraid to lose me, and he won't go from my side." 

So I think that there are scars left, which may be under the surface, but if stress of other type comes, then that comes to the surface and enhances that stress-- makes the situation much worse. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Roth, can a non-survivor, a non-Jew, or even a Jewish non-survivor understand this-- understand you-- in your experience? 

SUBJECT: I don't think so. I believe they can believe or disbelieve what is said. They can sympathize. They be-- can be compassionate. But it's impossible to really, uh, visualize it if you haven't gone through it. I don't think you can. As a doctor I would say that. But you can sympathize a great deal, and you can-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --cooperate in preventing, if possible, such a recurrence-- whether you are Jewish or non-Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: So there is a gulf forever, almost. 

SUBJECT: I think so. And I believe your film here will also just improve the impression and keep awake the memories, but it won't be able to recreate the experiences which truly went on in people who took part in it. I can't see that that is possible. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Thank you. 

Would you like to say anything? 

SUBJECT: No. What's-- whatever you want to achieve with it, I hope it works out. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: I haven't talked about these things for the last 30 years. 

INTERVIEWER: No? 

SUBJECT: No. That's the reason why I don't go to these movies and don't watch them. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you say-- would you care to say something about it? 

SUBJECT: It's too painful to have my pain as it is. Why should I enhance it? I can't do any good to me. And if people talk or ask me, I answer a little bit. But I don't volunteer. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel after this hour and 1/2 of our discussion now? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I feel frightening memories came back, which I had here. Now they're here. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

Is it burning you? 

SUBJECT: No. No, I think there is the wholesomeness of forgetfulness and of time. Time heals almost everything-- not completely, but I don't think I can experience today what I experienced 35 years ago, even if I am the same person. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Isn't that with you too? I can talk today about it. I told you before I didn't talk much when I initially was exposed to it. I climbed up. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

Your dream is more-- the bad dreams are not going. It's more distant. 

SUBJECT: Much more distant-- like Matura Traum You know what that is? 

INTERVIEWER: Something with-- 

SUBJECT: You go through the, uh-- the final exam of your college. We had that in Austria and in Germany. And that's a well-known psychiatric thing-- that anybody who is a college graduate gets dreams that he has to take the Matura. But heaven sake, how can I do it? I'm 30 years away from it. I'm going to flunk it. I won't be able to. 

And you wake up full of perspiration. And it's a common thing. And this kind of dream comes once in a while back too-- fortunately, not too often. 

INTERVIEWER: This kind of dream. 

SUBJECT: The dream from-- or nightmares from this camp and what I went through. Initially, yes, but now it's in the background. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. But sometimes you have it. 

SUBJECT: It comes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, thank you. 

SUBJECT: Good. Now I have to get on good terms with my wife. 

[LAUGHTER] 

How do you take it? 

INTERVIEWER: My wife is here. But-- [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Oh, that lady I talked to is your wife. 

[AUDIO STATIC] 

INTERVIEWER: No. It's just buzzing when you want them to-- 

[AUDIO OUT] 

