CREW: I'm rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

SUBJECT: Unfortunately, I've blocked out so much of the things that happened to me in Germany, and also later on in England where I lived until I came to the United States. Because somehow, I had the capability of forgetting the things I wanted to forget which hurt me and were painful to me. But of course, this was a very traumatic part of my life. I lived all by myself 16 years old in London. I did speak English. We had a very good English program in our school. And I was fortunate that I did not go into a children's hostel at that time, which was a home for teenage children who had like a children's home or an orphanage if you want to call it that, which was sponsored by the various organizations. 

I found a very nice young doctor's family who had volunteered to take me into their home for a month. And afterwards, they liked me very much. And they thought that I would be reunited with my parents in December of 1939. So they said that I could stay with them until December 1939. Then the war broke out in England. And of course, Great Britain and the organizations got stuck with all these children, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of children home they only volunteered to have for a very short period of time. And there were many changes that I don't want to go into. 

But the fact is my parents remained in Germany until 1942. And they have told me very little. They both now have passed away. But they told me very little of what happened to them in Germany after I left because they wanted to shelter me from that too. And I know that they had to wear the yellow band that all Jews had to wear in the street, and that they could only go shopping at certain hours. And I remember my father proudly saying saying that when they were in the air raid shelters, and the British bombs would go off when they were flying over Berlin. And the bombs were falling, that although his own life was in danger, he would always say, oh, thank god. I hope they're coming. And I hope they're hitting hard. Because he had that hate at that time which went beyond his own life. 

And then my fiancée I guess bought-- I think he had to have money to buy it-- a train ticket to go in a closed train via France to Portugal. And I guess they must have given everything that they still had left at the time to do that. And they were able to leave, and they were in Portugal. And then the United States went into war with Germany, which-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your grandmother, where was she? 

SUBJECT: My grandmother-- this is the saddest part of my life. I felt so close to my grandmother. She was my most favorite person. And she was the best-- the best and most wonderful person and character that anybody knew. She was my mother's mother. And she was supposed to go with us. But the United States consulate lost her papers. And they-- she did have a visa, just an affidavit, just like we did. But it was never found. And by the time things could have been straightened out, it was too late. My parents had to leave Germany. And she had no way of leaving because she didn't have the papers to leave. 

So my mother didn't want to go. And I don't think she's ever gotten over this until the day that she died. My grandmother made her go. She said, you have children. And your children fortunately are in England. And you have to think about your children and forget about me. So my mother left without her mother. And she's never gotten over it. And my grandmother eventually was taken to a concentration camp and gassed. And we know that in fact because we have another relative who has-- an old sister of my father's who survived it and who was there and witnessed that it happened. 

And that probably was the most tragic thing in our life. My parents lived in the United States, and I married my husband Frank in England. And after he came back from his internment in Canada, and then we had a child. And then we were finally able to go to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother? 

SUBJECT: My brother stayed in London. He eventually joined. He had a horrible life for a while because he was 13 years old. He'd never been back to formal school. Because when the war broke out, the British evacuated all the London school children. But they would not do anything for refugee children because they were only refugee children, they weren't paying taxes. So the refugee children, which was also me at the time, stayed in London with all the bombings. I was bombed out three times. Fortunately, my life was spared, and I was never injured. 

And my brother never went back to formal school. They found someone who would teach him a little arithmetic or something else. And he finally wanted to learn a trade. And the only trade that was open during the war was the tailoring trade. So he became a ma-- became a man's tailor, not by choice. And then he joined the Royal Air Force. And he went to fight the Germans. He was a technical interpreter. He was all over Europe. 

And when he came back was just about the time where I was ready to leave to go to the United States. And he didn't have any papers, a visa, to go. And he wanted to visit us at one time. And the British-- the United States wouldn't let him in to visit my mother and father. This was many years ago. Because he had no family. He wasn't married at the time. And he had no big funds or values in London to leave behind so that they would know for sure that he would go back again, he would return to England. So they denied him the visit to come. 

And after that, he was-- he got married, and he never wanted to come. So my father-- my brother came here for his honeymoon. And that's the only time my father ever saw him from the time he was 13 years old until he died. And that's just about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question. What are you left with? 

SUBJECT: Now? 

INTERVIEWER: From this? 

SUBJECT: What am I left with? 

INTERVIEWER: How you feel about people, how you feel about law and order, police stations, or what? 

SUBJECT: Well, I've had the fear of police stations for a long time, and also the fear of an airplane flying over my bedroom window because I was all through the blitz and-- in London. And as I said, I was bombed out three times. And I've been terrified of that. But I think at this point, I've overcome both of these fears. 

I feel probably closer attachment to my kids than-- and more possess-- wanting to possess my kids because of what happened to me. But my boys don't go along with that. They live a very independent life. And they do not cater to this at all, which doesn't always make me very happy. I've always felt that especially because of what members of the neighbors did to my father and me to get me out of Germany, and what the [INAUDIBLE] did, which it was the overall agency, like the [INAUDIBLE] in this country, that it was my duty to help other people, and in any way I can. And I think I can honestly say that I've done that all through my adult life through organizations of various kinds, both interfaith and Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- do you have hate? 

SUBJECT: For the Nazis, yes, I do. I've never had the desire to go back to Germany. Although now, I'm beginning to get a desire to just once again see where I lived. But I've never wanted to go back. And I've hated Germans. I've generalized it. And I know that is wrong because there've been many Germans who tried to help, a few Germans who tried to help. But I remembered one time in my office, I bought-- I went on vacation. And my boss hired a temporary help who happened to be a non-Jewish German who grew up in Germany. She was much younger than I was, probably her parents grew up in Germany. And I know I detested her just for that. 

And I also detest the fact that people recognize my accent. I work in a doctor's office, and I deal with a lot of people. And people come in, and they says, oh, where do you come from? Because unfortunately, I have a German accent. And I-- oh, you're from Germany too. You're a landsman. And I say, no, I'm a German Jew. And I was thrown out by the Germans. And I tell them that to the day, everybody who asks me. 

INTERVIEWER: Did we miss anything? 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I'm not sure [INAUDIBLE]. 