Hamechona heita... INTERVIEWER 2: Something wrong with the machine. It wasn't winding properly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was extra machine? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mmhm, at least that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm listening to them. And It's not that I'm not-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Nuts, OK, it's cassette 15. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mrs. Robicek, tell us where you were born and what your life was like. 

SUBJECT: I was born in a small town in Moravia. There were very few Jews there. So my friends in school were gentile. We had the shop. My father had the shop with paper, all what you need for school and what you need for office but not books, newspapers and things like this. 

And I had a very happy childhood. I had a younger brother. And that's about it. I went in the school in the town, first to the-- ah, eich omrim beit sefer yesodi? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Public school. 

SUBJECT: Public school and then to the gymnasium. Royal Gymnasium, it was called. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any particular memories that you have of that early time? 

SUBJECT: Only good memories, very good life, not, my parents were not rich. But it was a simple life like now but a very happy one. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were the people friendly? 

SUBJECT: Very friendly, my father was born there. So he went with most of the people to school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where is Moravia? Where is this? 

SUBJECT: Moravia is the second part from Czechoslovakia. You have Bohemia, then Prague. And the second part is Moravia and then Slovakia. Then the big town in Moravia is Brno. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you spoke-- 

SUBJECT: We spoke Czech. It's Czech. My mother came from a part from Moravia that was, later in '38, it was Sudeten. So my mother spoke better German. But she learned Czech quite well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you speak German or any other language? 

SUBJECT: I speak German like I speak Czech. Because we spoke, my grandmother still lived in this part of Moravia. And there they spoke only German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you learn English? 

SUBJECT: Private, later in our town, and then later, and after the war here I took private lessons. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you-- 

SUBJECT: And we didn't learn English in school. We learned Latin, and we learned German, and we learned French, not English. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you notice that things were changing? What did you first-- 

SUBJECT: First maybe when the first refugees came from Austria in '38 only. And then after '38 when the regime changed in Czechoslovakia and President Benes went away. So the few Jews that were in our town, we were participating in all the things, not national things, on the day of the nation day of Czechoslovakia, of the first Czechoslovakia. 

It was 28th of October. So the children from school went from house to house and sell some pins or so. So the first time I knew I was not like the others, they told me I can't go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What age? 

SUBJECT: I was already-- the people that organized it from the school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Teachers? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, teachers, they taught me I can't go. Because I ask why. Because I knew I am, I was Jewish. And we were, at home we were traditional Jewish, not kosher. But we had all the holidays. 

And everyone knew I was Jewish because everybody knew everybody in our town. But they told me I can't go because I am Jewish. And then in Czechoslovakia, there is a very big organization. 

Like here in maccabi you have ha'poel. It was so cold. And I went there. Still I think I was five. And my brother went there, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kind-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's a sports-- 

SUBJECT: Sport, yes, sport. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A sport organization your parent's belonged to? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, very big. No, no, no-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Children. 

SUBJECT: Your parents could go too. But we went, children. My mother was very much for exercising and thing like this. 

So we went there twice a week, it was. And there were theatres from them. And we participated. And in '38, they told me, I am out. I am not a member anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SUBJECT: I wasn't already 17. So I knew what was going on in Austria and in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you, were you very upset? 

SUBJECT: I was very upset, of course. I was born there. I was always with these people together. 

And then it was, of course, later it was worse. Because they didn't greet me in the street. But it was later when we were occupied already. And we had to go with the stern. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So this happened before the Germans came. 

SUBJECT: This happened still that I, still be in school. And then I ended school '39 in June, yes, the eighth class of Gymnasium. And we were already occupied from March by the Germans. But I could end my class. Because the next year, Jewish children were not allowed to go to schools. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were able to finish the Gymnasium? 

SUBJECT: I finished, yes, I finished. I finished. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do with yourself when you couldn't participate in activities that you were accustomed to going to like this sports center? 

SUBJECT: Then you couldn't do anything. You had to sit at home. Of course, I had still my best friends. I still had, I went with to them, and they came to me. 

That came later when the Germans were already in. But still when I went to school, I couldn't participate in these things. But in other, in the social life of school, I could, of my class. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: There were only two Jews in our class, 35 pupils and one boy. And I was, and the boy wasn't from our town. Our school was the, the gymnasium was for the whole-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: For the area. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and many came with the train in the morning. And after in the afternoon they went home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you very friendly with that other Jewish person in your class? 

SUBJECT: I was friendly with him but just like with the others. I had a friend in my class that I went with her to school from the public school, from the first class till, that's 12 years. And I still write to her now in our town. We are still friends. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you become more friendly with this other Jewish person in the class when-- 

SUBJECT: No, because he went home after school. He wasn't in our town in the afternoon. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Then when I ended school, it was already summer '39. So we were already occupied. So I couldn't do, I couldn't go and learn something. 

So in the summer I went to Prague. And I went, that was still possible. And there I learned English. There was summer courses from the English Institute. And I learned there two months English in the summer. 

And then I came back. And I didn't know what to do. I was sitting at home. And then one day came to me, she was my kindergarten teacher. And she went from our town. 

And the last two years, I think '37 or sometime, she came back to our town as kindergarten teacher. And she remembered me. I was then maybe three or four years old. But she came always in our shop. And she came to visit me. And then she came to tell my parents she has the aunt in a cloister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In a convent? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, in a convent she has an aunt. And they have a private school there for children nurses, something like this. And she could arrange for me that I can go there, not in our town. She will tell her aunt that I am Jewish. But the others don't have to know. 

And I can learn there. Because it was a private school from the Dominicana. So I went there. It was a small village, quite, about two hours with the train from our town. I went there. 

And I stayed there. I lived there in the convent. And I stayed there about half a year, but I couldn't stand it. I begged my mother to take me back. 

I didn't learn anything because it was a class of 10. It was the first year of the school. And they took girls from the villages that wanted to learn some cooking and some, they didn't have any schools or nothing. So I was very unhappy there. So I came back, and I was at home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For how long until things changed? 

SUBJECT: It didn't change. Then I was already in the Zionist organization. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which one? 

SUBJECT: In the Trumpeldor, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Trumpeldor Youth? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, so they had in '40 in March, they had some Zionist seminar not far away in Moravia. And I got a letter. So I went there. It was for 10 days. And from there a group went to Hachshara 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hachshara is-- 

SUBJECT: --in Moravia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --preparation. 

SUBJECT: Preparation for the Aliyah 

INTERVIEWER 1: Preparation for coming to Israel. 

SUBJECT: For coming to Israel, yes, so I went on the Hachshara And there we were till winter, '40. But in the summer, they called me. From the Zionist organization, they called me to Prague for a course for Jewish teachers. Because the children couldn't go to school anymore. 

And they were training those that ended the gymnasium, training for to teaching them at home. So I was called, and I did this course. And then I went back home. 

In our town, there were no Jewish children anymore. But in the villages there were. So I sat in one village the whole week. And four children from the small villages there came to me. And I taught them a little. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was this now, 1940? 

SUBJECT: This was '40 in winter, year. No, this was '41, the year '40, '41. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anything change in '41? 

SUBJECT: '41 in January my father was taken. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Taken? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, by the gestapo. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How taken? 

SUBJECT: On the street, we had still the shop. And my father was going from home to the shop in the morning. And they took him on the street. We didn't know. 

But after some hours, came four men, I think, four or five men of gestapo to our flat. And they said they took father and that we have arms at home. And father was on the street after 8 o'clock in the evening. That was forbidden of course. 

It wasn't true. We had no arms. And father was never out of after 8 o'clock, nobody. But I didn't see my father anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never saw him again? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, my mother, yes. He was on the gestapo because in our town was the gestapo for the whole area. And there were no Jews in our town. My father was the last, no men. All men were already somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did the edict come out that no one could be outside after 8 o'clock? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember. I think in '40. It was before we had to wear the stern. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The yellow badge. 

SUBJECT: The yellow badge, it was before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All this time you have been wearing a yellow band. 

SUBJECT: No, that was later in '41, I think, later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When your father was taken on the street. 

SUBJECT: It wasn't still without. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was not wearing a yellow band. 

SUBJECT: No, but they knew us. There were so few Jewish. The gestapo knew us. 

We had hours for going to shops. You could go only one hour in the morning and one hour in the afternoon. And we had cards for food, not only we, all people there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ration cards. 

SUBJECT: Yes, but we had other ones. Because we couldn't buy, they said, good vegetables, cauliflowers, things like this. They are not for Jews. That we had only a few things that we could buy on the ration cards. All other were not for us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When your father was taken, was it during the day? Was it in daylight? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, in the morning, he went from, he went to the shop. We were living then not in our flat. We had a flat over the shop. It was on the main street. 

But after the Germans came, we had to go out from this shop. And we were staying with another Jew in his flat. He had to give us one room. And then they took him too. And they took the whole house. 

So they gave us a small flat. But it was quite outside the town. So my father had to go about half an hour to the shop. So he went in the morning like always. And we didn't know anything till the gestapo came to the flat. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you did know that other men had been taken. 

SUBJECT: That we knew, of course. Father was waiting for it each day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you very frightened? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I think not, not yet. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know what happened to these other men? Were there any rumors? 

SUBJECT: I know my father came to Auschwitz because we had one letter from him. That I knew. And my mother saw him one day before. She got a permission from the gestapo to go to Brno where he was held. 

And there she could speak with him about 10 minutes. And the next day or the day after, they took him to Auschwitz. And that we knew because all his things came back, all his clothes and his, all his things, what he had on him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like what? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: They sent it home? 

SUBJECT: They sent it to the gestapo. And my mother had to go there and to sign that nothing was left. And not once, she had to go a few times. 

Because once there came the, something from the clothes. Then there came something that he had in his pocket. And she always had to go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you sign, sign for what? 

SUBJECT: She had to sign that it was his and nothing was missing. She got all the things that he had on him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they give them to her? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They kept them. 

SUBJECT: No, they kept them. It was nothing. He has his clothes. This is something what he had, some money maybe in his pocket. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they tell her what happened to him? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there any announcement? 

SUBJECT: No, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They had taken your flat? They just took it, your original flat? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They just-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we had to go out in two days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they tell you that you were-- 

SUBJECT: The gestapo came and said, you have to go out tomorrow or in two days. And that's it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you just let. 

SUBJECT: And we had to leave, yes. And then I went to Hachshara once more, to the preparation in another place. Father was already not at home. My brother stayed at home with my mother. 

And I went in '41 and stayed there till winter, worked there till winter '41. And then I came home. And there I met my future husband. And we wanted to marry. 

But my husband was from Bohemia not far from Prague. And I didn't want to leave my mother. So we had to wait till he got permission from the gestapo to come to our town. 

Because we couldn't even travel. Not only travel, you couldn't go from our town to the next village. That was not allowed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You couldn't go. Jews couldn't go, or no one could go? 

SUBJECT: Jews couldn't go. So in the end, my husband got the permission from the gestapo. And he came to our town. And we married in January '42. And then he had to go to work. 

But Jews were allowed to work only in groups, not someplace, only in groups. And that was in another town, Mahrisch Ostrau a big town. So my brother went, and my husband went. And they came home for the weekend, for one day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they do, what kind of work? 

SUBJECT: It was mining work. Hochundtiefgesellschaft it was called. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: I was in at home. I couldn't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your mother. 

SUBJECT: I was my mother, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then what happened? 

SUBJECT: And then in September '42 we went to Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did that happen? 

SUBJECT: Transport were going from '41 from Czechoslovakia. But they went always after regents. The gestapo had no, we were going with Mahrisch Ostrau And some other village belonged to another regent. So we had to wait. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: By regent. 

SUBJECT: Regent, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But how did it happen? What happened? 

SUBJECT: We got from the Jewish community the dead who went to come to Mahrisch Ostrau And there we were in a school for four days. And that was it. 

Before they already took many of our things from our flat. Because we had to go the silver. And we had to give the radio. And all the things we didn't have at home anymore, they took, the Germans, that they took already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did-- 

SUBJECT: And we were allowed to take, I think, 25 kilo each of clothes. 