SUBJECT 1: Well, the secret, I think, of having been able to survive is very simple and profound one. Always, I think what we have been trying to, and I think, succeeded to hold onto is to some image of the remaining human being. What does that mean? To really stick to the norms of human behavior, of human behavior. And this was made possible. And I think that's a very important, very important privilege we had in all these terrible circumstances. 

That's why I think it's not only black and white. It's not all black-- that you're in these terrible circumstances, you find people who really, they are your role models, who you identify with. And for instance, in the Ravensbruck, there was one or two people who were extraordinary in terms of being human beings. One was a Catholic nun, and the other one was a resistance worker from France. And you identify-- 

And then you, of course-- you have each other. I had my sister. I had my mother. And this was this enables-- enabled us to really not lose your identity as a human. And many people couldn't, didn't manage to pull through like that. And it's the same thing in Theresienstadt. We saw people who, even under better circumstances, who were not human anymore, turned into apes. Jungle. Survival of the fittest. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you find role models there as well? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, I think in every situation, you find one amongst 1,000, or two among thousands, or five among thousands. If you can identify with these people, and you try really to draw strength from that, then there's a chance. And I think if you are completely by yourself, and you don't have such models, then it's-- I can't see how you can survive as a human being. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you find yourself becoming a role model or attempting to be a role model either at that time or after the war? 

SUBJECT 1: I think so. I think you really develop a lot of leadership qualities. I mean after the war with getting reorganized, getting-- But I do think this is the secret of suc-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mrs. Kledenski, where are you from? And can you tell us a bit about your family from wherever you came from in your life? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, I am from Poland. From Meta-- 