SUBJECT: To accompany... 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wait, wait. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's rolling. OK. 

SUBJECT: When the Kommandos in the morning were going after the roll call, were going to the work, um, behind the camp, there was a huge area, you know, the great-- During the night, it was the, the old people were in the camps. And after the-- in the morning, there was a huge guarded area. 

And in this area were working many thousand women and men in the Kommandos. Very, uh, heavy, apt work. You know, you to build, to build roads, to build, uh, to build buildings, and to, to, went to work in swamps and very dirty, dirty work. 

And every Kommando, maybe, was about 200, 300, 500 men or women, not together. And they were guarded to the working place, which were, was about, oh, a half a mile, one mile, two mile, three miles, far from the camp. They were guarded by the SS men, and the SS men had a dog. And if somebody was going out from the, from the-- no, from the road. Yes. So the, the dogs were trainered, and he catched him. 

Also, SS men played also with the dogs. And they, they enjoyed themself when they excited the dogs should bite the prisoners. Or then, when the prisoners came to the work, it was a huge, huge area. And they were digging some coal, no, some hole. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hole? 

SUBJECT: Sand. Some-- they were digging sand and so. And they were, they came tracks. They were loading, and so. 

And the, all this was done with a very, you know, beating and crying, and the people were exhausted. And if somebody wouldn't work, so they sent the, the dog on him, the SS men. They were guarded by SS men and dogs. These are the same SS men which came with this, uh, group of people to the working place. 

Then they, uh, they guarded the place where they work, so that nobody could go out of this place. And they used these, uh, dogs, or to play themselves up to got a better output of the, from the people, that they should work much faster and much harder and so. 

So it was-- you can never thought what the SS men would do. And especially the SS women. They had these dogs. And they all, always sent the-- they were much crueler, much more cruel than the SS men, those SS women guards. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your-- what did you do every day? Was there something that you had to do every day? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Every day-- look. Every morning, we had some-- to go in some camp, and there were, there were, they asked what is necessary to repair. Yes? Some water pipes, some cauldrons, and some blocks. 

And there were-- it was a huge area. There were electricians. There were locksmiths. But we could manage it, that we had some-- maybe I was interested to go in the women's camp, or to the crematorium camp, yes? Or to the family camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think when you went to the crematorium, when you saw the crematorium? 

SUBJECT: Look, I thought-- I never could go there when it was in operation. When the crematorium was in operation, no prisoners except, except of the Sonderkommando prisoners was allowed going in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But when you went there when it wasn't in operation-- 

SUBJECT: I saw it. No, what I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? What did you feel? 

SUBJECT: It's what I-- look. It's-- you-- I was accustomed to this. It was-- this, this, this hell of Auschwitz, it was on a very small-- it was two square kilometers. And it looked like a whole world, yes? It was something that you can't, cannot imagine how it was like hell. 

And we, we took it like, like necessity. We, we didn't believe somebody could stop it. We, we thought that the world doesn't know what it happened. And therefore we tried with all means to, to smuggle out letters and photographs and all means to know that the world knew what had happened. And then we knew that the world knew it exactly, what had happened, and they did nothing. 

I have asked in, in '67 in United States to make a research. And I found the letters which the escapees from Auschwitz, my friends, brought out. And these letters came to the highest, to the Allies, to the, the State Department, to the White, uh, House. And they asked to be bombed Auschwitz. 

And all-- and I found a letter from the, um, secretary of the War Department. And he wrote, we have no possibility and we, we could-- our planes cannot reach Auschwitz and we are afraid that the Germans would, uh, would, uh, kill more, more prisoners, and so on. They did not-- and, and I have proof that they were there at the time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever witness medical experimentation? People talk a great deal-- 

SUBJECT: Look, yes. Medical experimentation. Yes, I witnessed it once. And I will let you now, it castra-- cast-- castration. It's-- we were working in the, in the women's camp, was at barrack number 30. And there was a medicine doctor Schumann. And he got an equipment. We didn't knew for what it is. A huge Roentgenapparatur. You know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: X-ray machine. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, X-ray machines. And we were ordered to go and to, to, to mount, to settle something on this. The basement, yes? To make the basement. And later we came there. And we saw that there were some prisoners, and we saw by the, schlüsselloch. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The keyhole. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The keyhole. 

SUBJECT: Keyhole. And we looked there, under the keyhole, and we saw with this, uh, this, uh, Schumann put this, uh, prisoner before this huge apparatus, and he, he scanned genitals. He, uh, no? Ozaroval. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He what? 

SUBJECT: He bestrahlt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He X-rayed it. 

SUBJECT: X-rayeded his genitals. Yes. And these people came to a special block. This, this, this was Greek people, Greek prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were not Jewish prisoners. 

SUBJECT: Jewish prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jewish-- 

SUBJECT: Jewish from Greece, from Greece. And they had special cards. Yes? They were not sent to the Kommando. And later, it became, mm, eiter. It became, uh, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cancerous? 

SUBJECT: Cancer? No. It became-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: eiter. Pus-y. 

SUBJECT: Pus-y. And they were-- they very were-- they were very pain. This is a great pain for them. And they always must go there, and the later, they were then sent to the gas chambers, these people, the, these Greek, Greek, uh, prisoners. 

And in-- this I saw on my eyes. And I also contacted these people. And they could not do nothing. They were-- they got also better food. And they were very-- they had a special card and they always they were for the disposal of this, of this Dr. Schumann. 

And then a woman came. There was a block 10 when the-- in this, uh, similar way was, was 100, uh, women. But this I didn't saw. But I have some, um, witnesses, doctors which gave the witness in this-- also in this book, The Death Factory. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever see Dr. Schumann again? 

SUBJECT: Yes. No. After the war, no. But in the camp I saw him very often. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he was doing these things. 

SUBJECT: Yes, he was doing these-- he came on-- he had some assistants, some prisoner doctor assistants for this job also. But he came, and I saw him so-- not very often. 

But maybe one thing would interest you. I was many times as a witness by the trials, uh, after the war. And when I recognized some, some of these, uh, prison-- not prison. SS men. But one thing what I will, will stress is this. What I never can understand is that the whole annihilation and killing program was directed by doctors. I could understand that the SS men, you know, that they were hating Jews and they were primitive, uh, creatures. But the doctors who knew exactly, uh, what it, uh, what it is going on, these doctors were from the, the, they were directing the whole annihilation program, from the first stage. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you mean? 

SUBJECT: So first, there was a so-called Standortzarzt, which was Wurtz at the last stage. And he was the main doctor. Yes. And he had a staff of about 20 doctors, SS doctors, medicine doctors. 

And this SS Wurtz, the Standortzarzt got from the, uh, Reichssicherheitshauptamt, the rest of the deported, of the deported Jews. The so-called RSHA transport, the Jews which were deported from all countries over the Europe. 

And he got this list, and, uh, also with the, a suggestion how many people should be, uh, selected for work and how many people should be sent directly in the gas chambers. There were about from 15% to 25%, this, this, uh, space. And he ordered-- this Wurtz ordered the, from his staff, the doctors, who will make the selection on the ramp. Mengele, Thilo, Wegener, Kaschub. I knew many of them. 

And these doctors were selecting the people, one after the other, yes, with-- there was a standard. And he only say, uh, right, left. And he asked what profession you are, if they were, they wanted some professions. And the key was generally so. All women with children to the gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know the first names of these doctors? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They are written in the books, in some books. I witnessed against them, for instance, against two or three in, uh, in 40-- '63, in Frankfurt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel-- 

SUBJECT: I wrote a special book about this witnessing. And there are the names of doctor-- or what they told-- but it's not, I didn't finished it. 

Then the second was that there was a car. Always there was a car by the selection. In ambulance car were Red Cross. In this ambulance car, car was, uh, was the, the things with the gas, Zyklon B. And when selection was, uh, finished, so the doctor came with this car, with this car with the Red Cross, the ambulance car, to the crematorium. And he decided how many tanks of gas should be putted in. And then he has, he had his, his aides. And these aides came with a gas mask on the surface of the, of the, the 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of the bath house? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of the, of the, of the bath. And there were some channels. And they put up in these channels the things of the gas, of this, of these crystals of this Zyklon B. 

Then later, the doctor observed by a hole when the people are-- how the people are dying. And then he gave the order that the poisoned air should be exhausted. And he came with the gas mask, the, as the first. Then he gave the order to open the gas chamber. And he came with the gas mask in the gas chamber, and he certified that the people are dead. 

And there were another doctor, a doctor of, in the teeth, a dentist doctor. And he observed-- he had also some people, and he observed that, from every corpse, the, the fillings, gold fillings and tooth should be, should be-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Extracted? 

SUBJECT: Extracted. And, uh, they were smelted to gold. This was the task of the other doctors. 

And also, the doctors make the selection in the camp, not only when the people came, under-- in one or two months, in every camp, so after the roll call, it was given an order, all should be ausgez, all should be-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Undressed. 

SUBJECT: Undressed, and then they were defilating, you know, before the doctor. And when he saw that this somebody is not fit for work, he's already exhausted, so he ordered to write his number, and they were in-- sent to the gas chambers, from the camps. And they knew it exactly. I have also, 11 time I had such a selection in camp, during my stay in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in 11 selections? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how did you manage to-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I was-- first, I was in a good, uh, condition. Um, every man, it was not-- no, no exception was, was ordered to stay here and to, to make this - But who came to the selection, if I was bare-bodied, yes, and secondly this, uh, boss, SS boss from Auschwitz needed the, this, this maintenance Quote, so he already take care for this that, that our numbers should be-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know his name? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I know. I, I, I found him after the war. Shteimetz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know his name during the time you were there? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Shteimetz. He was a plumber in, in his civil occupation, a plumber. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever talk to him about his own family? 

SUBJECT: About his own family, so he was no, not, not, not. I, I remember very, very thing. When the gas chambers were destroyed, it was in November '42, they were destroyed, dismantled. So this, we, as plumber and the locksmith, so we were asked to dismantle these ovens, ventilators, all this equipment, yes, to dismantle it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

SUBJECT: You know, And we dismantling in a very, very exact manner. Every piece was cleaned and was conserved so. It was sent to the railway to, to, to the tracks, and to sent, uh, should be sent to the Germany. 

And so I ask my authority, Herr Oberscharfuhrer in German, you know, in English. Mr. Oberscharfuhrer, the, the war is over. The Jews are annihilated. Where will use-- what will you do with these, with these things? So I told it to him. 

And he look-- he answered me, pass mal auf, mein Herr. Look, my lad. The Fuhrer had a secret weapon. Now it will came over Europe. And then they will begin to Polish out the, the Czechs and Polish, and Polish Poles. And we will make 50,000 a day. 

So they, at that time, in November '44, they were convinced that they will win the war, and they would-- they sent that this equipment of the gas, gas chambers and of these furnaces to the West Germany, and they would build up a new, a new annihilation camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '42 or '44? 

SUBJECT: '44. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '44. 

SUBJECT: I thought '42, '44. It was November '44. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what did you say? 

SUBJECT: I didn't say nothing. What could I say to, to him? 

INTERVIEWER 1: So now you are in Israel. What do you feel here? How have you adjusted? 

SUBJECT: Look, I have adjusted. I-- I am in Israel about 11 year. I was in Czechoslovakia till '68, when, when the-- it was-- there are also very hard times. But I was, uh, involved in this, uh, in this democratization process with Dubcek. And I was also very involved in the Jewish community in Prague, yes? In Prague. 

And when the Russian came, so I knew I am endangered, I would be arrested. So I, the second day, when the Russian came, I escaped to Vienna. And in Vienna, Wiesenther, who is my friend, helped me a little. I was working in his office about three months. And then in this time, I could, uh, help my family, that they came over all to Austria. And then when we were united, we came here to, to, uh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, where my son lived earlier, my brother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: As a survivor, what has been the adjustment for you in Israel? 

SUBJECT: For, for me, the adjustment were not so bad, as I was known as a writer and historian. And I got a job at Yad Vashem as a researcher, and later the Institute of Contemporary Jewry, where I am working and publishing books and making research about the Holocaust period. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For others who are survivors, what is the adjustment, do you think? 

SUBJECT: The-- I, from my circle, I think all these people were adjusted, I think, well. But, uh, you cannot expect that, uh, you never will be allowed to get the same position as the old, uh, old-- as the [NON-ENGLISH], yes? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The old-timers. 

SUBJECT: Old-timers. As first I the language in my age, it is very, very hard to manage the language in such a state that I could write in Ivrit. But nobody asked it for me. I am writing in the languages which in Czech or German and the-- it is translated yes? But this has handicapped, which I feel very badly, yes, that I cannot express myself and I cannot read, exactly. But it's also my fault, a little, as I speaking English, German, other languages. So all information I want, so I can get it much easier in other languages. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about your son? 

SUBJECT: My son came here with 16. He came here with 16 years in '49 already. So he was first about six year in kibbutz, then he finished his, uh, education, and, uh, he married also from Czechoslovakia right. So in 16 years, you can, uh, much better adapt yourself than in 60. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I wanted to ask one thing about it. When you saw your son that time in the camp, when he arrived with your wife, what did you feel? 

SUBJECT: I feel afraid. I feel afraid it was for me. I couldn't imagine that they would survive. They wouldn't believe after-- I also was, was convinced that maybe this is an exception in the Red Cross. 

But after half a year, they ordered the whole camp should be annihilated. And I wouldn't believe it. We-- we warned them. After we had the connection in one, uh, secretary at prison, secretary of a camp leader had a telephone, uh, call when this order was done. That's a whole story. 

And then, by occasion, the whole camp was annihilated. Only by the occasion by some of us was my wife were, were safe. My son what at that time, he was at the infection block. He was sick by, uh, typhus. And the, the infection block was on the end of the camp. 

And to-- the SS men told no, you are going on a very nice, good transport that only the people, these healthy people will go. And they, till the last moment, they had such a good prepared, uh, you know, they, they, clever despite, despite, the-- cheated them, yes? Very, so very clever. It was psychologically so very prepared that they believed either to the SS men as to us, the other prisoners. 

And, and later they came to the camp, and they would-- they took also these sick and brought them to the gas chambers. But my son was at the end of the camp on this typhus block, of this epidemic block, when there were about 40 peoples. And later, my wife was also there. 

And this I learned later, but the night when it was-- when it happened, the annihilation of the family camp, so I was convinced that they, that, uh, I lost my whole family. And then later, I learned from a kapo, they came also for these people in this block, in these, uh, epidemic blocks. 

And there was rain, you know? And the, the terrain was a little, uh, up here. And they were moved. And the, the wheels of the truck were, were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Getting stuck? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The wheels were getting stuck? 

SUBJECT: No, started-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sliding. 

SUBJECT: Sliding. Sliding. And so the SS man which was on the charge, he told to this, to this driver, ah, die krepieren sowieso, hau ab. They will die anyway. Go away. And this accident-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Saved the-- 

SUBJECT: Saved my son and my wife. 