[INTERPOSING VOICES] INTERVIEWER 1: That's no problem. If he doesn't-- 

SUBJECT: If he doesn't come-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then there is-- 

SUBJECT: --but I promised him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --there is a possibility to duplicate it. That's no problem. 

SUBJECT: All right. And to get it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And to get it. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You just want the boys here. 

SUBJECT: The boys, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you asked me also about [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]? ?] 

SUBJECT: About [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: I have a name for you, so you can write to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] to that person. I'll give it to you at the end. 

SUBJECT: Very good. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK? If you want just to sign? This is-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --will be available. 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dr. Nutkevich may have mentioned, you're beginning by introducing I am Sophia Nuroczkow. This is my war time name. Do you have enough light? Good. 

CREW: Yeah, there she is. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Shall we start? 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

INTERVIEWER 2: So why don't you start by telling us who you are, where were born, and about your town and your life before the war, your family name and so on. 

SUBJECT: My name is Sophia Maryevska. It's my assumed name, my war time name. I was born in a tiny community, shtetl, about 1,000 inhabitants, perhaps. The majority, almost all the population was Jewish. A few Polish Christian people. Several men, several people were well-to-do. Some great people come from there, Roskovski the in any case. 

I was born to a family of 10, a prosperous Jewish man who made it all by himself. Lived in Bielszowice until 1918, when the war ended. And we were robbed. There was a robbery before the Polish government took over, and had to stop organize the police. And we moved to Kielce, where I went to school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you then? How old? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was born in 1903, so I was about 15 years. In Kielce, we lived until about 1930, when I got married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sophia Maryevska what was that shtetl like? 

SUBJECT: That shtetl was just a peaceful, lovely place to live. Most people were friends with each other. There was a market where there were Jewish stores. And on the corners, of the market were leading to fields, and to beautiful walks, gardens, mostly estates owned by Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Shabbas holidays? 

SUBJECT: Were much observed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Beggars? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. The real shtetl from Sholem Aleichem or from The Fiddler on the Roof. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What scenes do to remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, mostly religious, traditional holidays. Going out and going to synagogues on Saturday, the young people against the little younger girls, who were wearing white dresses, and looking too aggressive, let's say. People were getting together at homes, and big, big social life it was. 

Most families were numerous. Like ours was 10 children. We were 10 children. My uncle, who lived in the same town, also had about eight children. My grandfathers lived there. 

And they led a very nice life. My grandfather, who had only-- had no houses, no nothing, no buildings, nothing really except perhaps some money that he had earned, he took care of the family of all the cousins, and the nieces and nephews who had no money to get married too. And children took care of their parents when it came the time that they could no more work also. 

This was during the World War I. My grandfather, who was a tall man and lived to about 80-some years, he looked very strong, with a very long white beard, and was caught by the Germans on a winter day to clean the streets from snow at that age. That was kind of a prelude to what we have learned about Germans later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Already in the first World War? 

SUBJECT: In the first World War. He liked to go out for walks. He liked to be in the fresh air, wind or snow or cold. With his coat then the big hat. Well, that's about-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So that's where you lived until 1930? 

SUBJECT: 1918. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But just stayed there-- 

SUBJECT: After 1918, we were greeted by the Polish people with robbery, where they chased us all into one-- into the bedroom of my parents, and they emptied the house from everything after they had taken all the valuables before. They took out also our clothing and all that. So my father decided to move over to a larger town where he had purchased already a building before that time, which was Kielce. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was your life there? 

SUBJECT: Kielce was very nice too. We had a beautiful house there after a general who our people who had to flee Poland and to go back to Russia after the war, with beautiful gardens There I went to school to gymnasium. 

Still, you know, in Polish, we were not-- we were, for hundreds of years in Poland citizens, but we were never accepted as really Polish inhabitants, citizens. We couldn't go to gymnasium. Only a few Jews were accepted, like two or three, normally. Otherwise we had to create a Jewish school. A Jewish fine lady has organized a gymnasium, and they hired very good teachers. 

And we had to pay a lot of money. My father had to pay a lot of money for the education of children. And so we had-- she brought it to that gymnasium would become-- have the rights of the gymnasiums of the government subsidized. And we always had to have a kind of visitor called an inspector who would come and check whether we are on the level to get the grades, the proper grades to pass and to get eventually our what was called a matura our-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was basically a Jewish life, orthodox? 

SUBJECT: Not so. We were 50% Jews in Kielce, and the other 50% was Polish Christian. Still, Jews maintained their way of life, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell about it, the Jewish way of life? 

SUBJECT: Oh, there was already a tendency to assimilation in some way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember, the scenes that you remember of the Jewish life in Kielce? 

SUBJECT: To tell you the truth, I didn't mingle much with the traditional. And my father continued the traditional life at home, with kosher kitchen and the holidays, like especially Passover and others. Was all was going to a shtiebel where at neighbor's, where he would sometimes pray for [INAUDIBLE] Do you know that? When there was potatoes. 

There was respect for people. There was respect for the elderly. And the only thing that wasn't too nice was that we had lots and lots of beggars. Beggars every-- Thursday, the doors were opened, and beggars were accepted, and money was prepared for you know. That was something deplored. Deplorable, really. But there were no cases of stealing, of trying to disrupt the peace of people. What everyone was giving was all right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You eventually married in Kielce? 

SUBJECT: I married a young man from Lodz. I married already when my parents moved to a village where they had a mill near Czestochowa. Married into a tiny community, Jewish community, where we had to bring 10 people together to make a minyan. [INAUDIBLE] had to bring the people from the cemetery, so few Jewish men lived there. That was 1930, and I moved to Lodz, where I stayed until the 1939. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us about Lodz and your life there. What do you remember about it? 

SUBJECT: Lodz, again, had many Jews, some 200,000 or 300,000. Jewish life was similar to what I lived before. Jews were mostly industrialists or businessmen. And also-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dr. Nutkevich was asking about your memories. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your life. 

SUBJECT: My life? Oh, were you? It was just raising your family. Helping my husband in business. Wasn't much of a cultural life except really listening to radio, not going out much. Ah, not of interests, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So how did it begin in '39? 

SUBJECT: the war. In 19-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Remember, the first sense of it, the first things you saw, that you personally saw? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we were-- my children were in the country. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had two children? 

SUBJECT: I had two children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What age? 

SUBJECT: One was three and one was seven. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Boys? 

SUBJECT: Girls. They were in the country with a teacher who had a kindergarten in Lodz, and with a maid. And we were called to come in, because she was to come back. Already, the war was imminent. And in the night that we were there, the peasants started to come, to leave their homes with their belongings, the cows, thank you. Thank you. 

And as we arrived, my husband with the younger child on his back, and we arrived to Lodz, there was an exodus from Lodz. All the men were leaving. There were rumors that all men would be killed. My husband didn't feel like leaving, but I insisted that he should. And I stayed-- stayed there. So he left, and he wasn't home for about a month. In the meantime, the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He left where? 

SUBJECT: The Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, your husband left-- 

SUBJECT: To go with the whole-- the streets were dark with people, Jewish people, men, leaving towards Warsaw. Because towards Warsaw, when the Polish army took to defend eventually against-- to stop the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you were alone with the children, then? 

SUBJECT: I remained for about a month. My husband came back after a month. In the meantime, were new laws. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened in that month? You talk about the Germans coming. Can you remember what your first impression was, how you found out that they are there? 

SUBJECT: They were there. They were there everywhere. They already put out announcements. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the einmarsch? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me. 

SUBJECT: It was very majestic, very beautiful. Very beautiful man came. We couldn't imagine that these men could do anything wrong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they look like? 

SUBJECT: Beautifully military, all military. I couldn't describe, but I know they had made a great impression, and there Lodz had a big German element that were Polish citizens that were living in Poland also since hundreds of years. And they were welcomed by these Germans. And in the beginning, we didn't think of anything wrong that might happen. Of course they didn't kill the people. There were announcements only that Jews mustn't have more than $2,000 in their homes. That was the first announcement. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 2,000? 

SUBJECT: 2,000 zlotys, 2,000 zlotys. Zlotys wasn't worth much at that time. We had some 200,000 zlotys, and this was about $250 value at that time. Because all of the sudden, the value became almost nothing, still-- 

So the first thing I-- few days later, I went out from the house, and I left a babysitter with the children. And I came home, and my carpets, radio, camera were gone. Some of them came in and said, this is the order. [INAUDIBLE] After two weeks or so-- oh no, when my husband was back already. He was went out in the morning. And when I also, when I was coming back, a girl from the house, a ne-- a neighbor told me, don't go upstairs. The Germans are there. But I had the children upstairs, and I went. 

So there was a persecution. They were looking-- they were throwing out books and everything from cabinets and so on, looking for money. They didn't find anything. And the persecution went on for hours. And my friend, the girl downstairs, had seen my husband come in, and she didn't let him go upstairs. 

They did find finally, on the door was hanging my husband's coat, where I had sewn in 2,000 zlotys in case we lose the-- or we need some more money, and they got hold of that. They took me to so-called Devisenschutzkommando commander. Why was that the reason? I don't know. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's foreign currency. 

SUBJECT: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Schutzkommando They took me, and kept me. And they said they'll keep me until my husband shows up. And so I was there for several hours. And finally, my husband couldn't take it longer, and he came to release me. 

And so they imprisoned him, imprisoned him. Kept him for three or four days in prison with murderers, drunks. On the floor, where they were laying one next to the other on straw [INAUDIBLE] He came back with two officers from the Divisenschutzkommando. And he said-- Am I going into too much? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: He said, they want to keep him in prison unless I pay 10 times as much as they found. And you know, you don't have the money. We did have the money, but schlagenampt in banks. That's what they called it. Closed up our accounts, the Jewish accounts. And we are not supposed to have more than 2,000. 

So he came to you to ask you mightn't you have a way of helping, that I can get out from prison? And here they sit, the two officers. And I [INAUDIBLE] And I say, we have so many-- so many notes from prominent German industrialists. And they might be due. Let him cash them. They accepted. They took him in the car, and they were going from place to place and cashing the notes. 

And my husband said, might you cash something for me too, and we will share it? But then they said, what a Jewish concept, and so they let him go. And I got my husband free for some time. This was about October or November, 1939. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It still frightens to think of that? 

SUBJECT: No, no. [INAUDIBLE] still thinks that we're not so terrible. I-- before the end of the year, 1939, again came late-- and after 5:00, Jews were not supposed to go out. In the evening came a couple of officers, beautifully dressed They came supposedly with an order to pick up our jewelry and valuables, and to prepare us for being deported the next day. It was 1939. We believed. 

So we gave them what we had handy. And they told us to prepare packages for the next day to leave, to be ready to be deported. And that again, was not a program not an instruction. It was on their own they did it. 

So the next day, we thought that we had to leave, but heard from others that it couldn't be that we were the only ones that had to leave. But we decided that we'd leave Lodz anyhow, because the Germans knew us there too well, and we were already persecuted before the program was even developed. We-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, you decided to leave? 

SUBJECT: To leave Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The family met, talked about the [INAUDIBLE]. Describe that event, how you-- 

SUBJECT: A few days before I had sent my children to my parents, to Comanesti near Częstochowa. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Comanesti? 

SUBJECT: Comanesti. We were alone and free, and went to my husband's parents and told them what has happened to us. And they said, you go away. It's not-- it is too dangerous for you to be here. It's gone too far. So in that same day, we left for Warsaw. 

Warsaw was bombed out. I was after-- because Polish people have-- or the Polish army had put a-- had fought the Germans. And it was a fierce fight. And we stayed for some time in Warsaw. From there, we were invited to our family to Kielce, to my sister-in-law, who gave us an apartment. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where did you stay in Warsaw? Where were you? 

SUBJECT: In Warsaw, I had a sister in Warsaw. And she stayed already, her house was bombed out, and she stayed already with relatives, and they give us a room there to also a bombed-out apartment. But it still was livable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could Jews travel at that point? 

SUBJECT: No, we were not supposed to travel. And my husband was going-- he went to my parents to bring something after we were deprived from anything. And on the train, a German military man asked how many Jews in the Lodz, and he said, 300,000. And then this one says to the other one, imagine 300,000 [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] doing nothing. Because to them, we were parasites. We were. So my husband was not respecting the new laws, and he was traveling when it was needed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you frightened? 

SUBJECT: I started to be frightened, then soon I got used to it. Because I myself had to be out later on. Now we went to Kielce where it was much freer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is it to get used to be frightened? 

SUBJECT: Do you mean-- I hadn't felt any special fright for a long time until we got into the ghetto again. Because we went from here to-- from Warsaw to Kielce, where in that town, except for-- things were-- one had to be very cautious about. We [INAUDIBLE] the so-called general government. The laws were not that strict as in German-- as in Lodz, where this became right away a German town, so-called [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] The program of persecution was not elaborated right away. It was in progression [INAUDIBLE] 

I don't remember at what time we were to wear the band, the ribbon. In Lodz, we had to wear right away a star, a yellow star. But in that general government, we had been wearing arm bands. And we could take them off and put them on, while the ribbon had-- the star had to be sewn on. 

I missed the one thing that might be of importance. In Lodz, I was rushing home before 5:00, to get home before 5:00. Because after 5:00, I wasn't supposed to be outside. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You would be shot? 

SUBJECT: Probably. And I was rushing to cross the street to get home, and there caught me, a German, and threw me to the wall. And he said, you wait, you don't rush. But this was the way of admonishing me. And here, the minutes counted. Nothing happened to me, I went home, and I arrived. But that was the way of dealing with us. Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you were saying-- 

SUBJECT: --interrupt me. It was done [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm sure he would be there [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: But you-- can he take [INAUDIBLE]? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you were saying you were going to Kielce by this time? You had been in Warsaw? 

SUBJECT: We went back from Warsaw to Kielce, where we stayed until through about two years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember the way from Warsaw to Kielce? 

SUBJECT: Don't remember. I don't remember. We went, both of us, and just got to live-- and lived there with my family. My child became sick there with scarlet fever. Underneath my apartment lived a German officer, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And he was the head of the town, kind of like mayor. 

And my nephew wanted to cheer up my child, was singing in something in jazz, and dancing. and imitating how do jazz singers do it here in America. That came-- it was at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. Don't remember the name of that officer. He came up, and he said, I was sleeping now, and he threw him [INAUDIBLE] on the wall too. He fell and it took time until he came to his conscious. That was ever a way of dealing with us. He also-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: He knew you were Jews? 

SUBJECT: Of course. Of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He lived in the same house as you. 

SUBJECT: We lived-- yes, he was [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] Like they didn't have their own houses, so it was a time still when Jews were not yet in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you passed him in the morning or on the street, was there any hello, or any-- you lived in the same house. You were-- 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: You could have met him on the stairway. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Wouldn't look [INAUDIBLE] there, wouldn't nobody would dare to go close to him. They say [INAUDIBLE] the same nephew, my nephew, was caught in the street. And I don't know who it was, one of the officers, another Nazi, who had two dogs with him. 

And in the square of the town, he started chasing him with the two dogs. And the dogs were catching the ends of his coat. And that's the way he was playing around with him until he let him go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So there was no social contact, no-- 

SUBJECT: Whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --with the-- 

SUBJECT: Whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there persecutions, hostages, anything else happening in the town? 

SUBJECT: Oh, hostages were taken in Lodz right away. But I don't remember in Kielce about hostages. I might have come into in a later period. We were we were to move to the ghetto. The ghetto was established [INAUDIBLE] in 1942, I believe. And so we were fortunate to exchange our apartment-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you-- how was it in Lodz? How did you find out about it? 

SUBJECT: I think there was that Jewish committee that took over all the instructions from the Germans, and let us know that we have-- what we have to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any rumors? 

SUBJECT: I don't think these were rumors. I don't remember whether these were announcements or so. Probably announcements. So in the one of my fathers' associates, ex-associates became the head of the Jewish community. Unfortunately, we've known him. And he was giving out all the orders. [INAUDIBLE] He was taking his role very seriously. 

But we knew [INAUDIBLE] before that can exchange apartments, so we got a room and a kitchen in the ghetto, prospective ghetto [INAUDIBLE] to live there. In 1943-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have your children with you still [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, yes. Jews got used, and the Jews are being-- getting adapted to everything. We lived in one little room with a kitchen. And many Jewish family in that same house. And we had a little yard, and everybody had perhaps two feet square to plant vegetables or parsley or [INAUDIBLE] 

And it's gotten to be-- we never believed that there's going to be end other than a military takeover by the Americans or so. We never believed that we were going to be exterminated. We went for about a year, I think in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You'd gotten used to it? 

SUBJECT: Established our relations in the house and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any memories of that ghetto life, evenings, holiday celebrations, deaths? Something that-- what was that life like in ghetto Kielce with the [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: We have been keeping together in the family. And the family support people who lived in the same house. We were getting together. There were-- some of them were working for the Germans physically or otherwise. 

And we tried to form some life that would not-- and we somehow-- like if it ever-- like if [INAUDIBLE] Warsaw, except for incidents that were-- we had from outside or something happened that somebody went out and got shot [INAUDIBLE]. There were little concerts by talented people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Concerts? 

SUBJECT: Like a singer, a friend, a singer, we would get together in a place where somebody had a larger room, and might be piano too. And there we had a little girl in the house who was a nursery teacher. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they play in the concerts? 

SUBJECT: Oh, there were many musical people who knew classical music. And we had a friend who had a very good, a beautiful voice [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what the tune or [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: There was singing in the Tosca and Verdi and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're singing Tosca and Verdi in the ghetto in Kielce? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I mean, I say we were singing in Tosca, Tosca, it's just an opera. But [INAUDIBLE] were getting together for tea. And young people had their [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you play or sing? 

SUBJECT: I used to play the piano, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- did you participate, play in these concerts? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, I hadn't played at that time. My sister went to the Warsaw ghetto because of her piano, because she couldn't separate from the piano. She was a concert pianist, and she had students who wanted to hide her. But she decided to take the piano with her and to go to her-- to go to the ghetto. And she was one of the first that was murdered and [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your home must have been-- played a lot of music in your home? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, yes. My brothers were violinists, and my sister was an excellent pianist. Other sisters also played piano. We're getting together cellist and pianist and violinist, three years in the house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was music important for you then throughout those years? 

SUBJECT: I should say I wasn't talented, and I gave it up. Because I thought that I had offered all the time to something else that I had spent on piano lessons, on piano studying [INAUDIBLE] But going back to the ghetto, in 1943, we were notified that the ghetto's going to be exterminated. Not notified officially, but from Warsaw were coming news to get ready to do something about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember when you heard about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. It was might be a few weeks before it happened. But you know, nobody believed that we-- [INAUDIBLE] not going-- we are not going to do-- [INAUDIBLE] reported to do work, to work for the Germans. But there were rumors that we will be deported to be-- to go in the ovens, but nobody believed it. Nobody believed it. And we stayed in the ghetto until the Germans came in one night and surrounded it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember hearing, seeing that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, from my window, I have seen the Germans outside, having their guns set up-- I don't know [INAUDIBLE] and waiting, and waiting there downstairs. They were not around there, around the ghetto. Normally, they was only Polish in those navy blue uniformed policeman normally. But not the Germans. Here there were the Germans, and they came in in the night, and I seen them. I felt what was coming. But there I was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel? What did you think? 

SUBJECT: I was just terrified, terrified, and I was looking around how and where can we get out from here? My husband had many relations with Polish people, and had prepared Polish [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Papers? 

SUBJECT: Papers. And I told people, the neighbors-- we had numerous people in the same house-- might you have a way how to get out? So one neighbor who has been working in a sawery, where they saw wood? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sawmill? 

SUBJECT: Sawmill. Told me, gave me an idea, that that sawmill where he goes in and oversees the workers has an entrance out from the ghetto. Get ready at the time when the women come with lunch for their husbands, and get inside, and get out with them together. This was at a time where two thirds of the town were already deported. The Germans stopped the deportation because they had not enough trains. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw the deportations, rounding up of people? 

SUBJECT: I saw what happened. Not the deportation itself. I was going out in the ghetto, and they told there you can't go any more, the people were gone. Some people have been rebelling, and so they were shut down on the spot, [INAUDIBLE] very close [INAUDIBLE] people that we knew. But in general, people went with them, and went off. How this was done, I didn't know, but we guessed. 

On that day when there was a still stand, no more action. I had my two children with me. And I wanted to get out, to get out from a place where the German, the Polish have been watching. So the Polish man said you cannot get out here. If I let you out here, other one will pick you up. So finally, I went out through that sawmill [INAUDIBLE] mentioning that. 

The German gendarme who stood there, said I haven't seen you go in. I said, I was, and I showed him the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] showed him the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] and said, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] Let me go. On that night-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel that moment? 

SUBJECT: I can't describe it. Out from the roofs [INAUDIBLE] We went to a shoe maker. A Polish shoe maker kept us through the night. And my husband was notified about, and he jumped out from a window, from a window, which was leading to the side that was not the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you managed to get out with the children? 

SUBJECT: With both children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Through the sawmill? 

SUBJECT: Through the sawmill. In the morning, a engineer, a friend of ours came to me to tell me that my husband is in his house, and that he-- I should go there, and we are to leave for Warsaw. And that's what we did, undetected. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At this moment, you were not Jews officially any longer? 

SUBJECT: No more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did it feel like? 

SUBJECT: What did it feel like? I believe I didn't sing, and I didn't feel. I just was out and to had to think how to manage from minute to minute, from hour to hour, to go on living and providing for my children. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened then? 

SUBJECT: We went to Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you get there? 

SUBJECT: By train. 

INTERVIEWER 2: By train. 

SUBJECT: My husband stood in the aisle in order not to be seen too much, because he has more of a Semitic appearance. And I was in a-- with my children. I had no Jewish-- did not look Jewish, the children. And when [INAUDIBLE] and stayed inside. We had no luggage, we had nothing, only what we had on ourselves, and my children barefoot. 

And there was a professor of architecture in that compartment, and a young woman from Warsaw. And they were leading the conversation. Many Polish people were sometimes be frightened [INAUDIBLE] from their homes and just let out, and that's what I made believe, that I had just had to leave because the Germans took over our possessions. 

And we had a long conversation. And when we were going out, my husband asked me, do you have enough [INAUDIBLE]? And I didn't think about it. And that professor told me that she was renting a room. And that young girl had told me about a little hut that they had in the suburbs of Warsaw. 

So he said, let's follow that way, and we did. And she took us in for a few days. But soon, my husband was recognized, and you know, she didn't want to keep us. And in the meantime, I found that hut, [INAUDIBLE] from the hut in the suburbs of Warsaw. And whatever I had in money. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How much? 

SUBJECT: I had something like 20,000 zlotys. And paid probably 18,000, and we took over that little house. And we went there for few weeks. My husband realized that he should not be there. 

He went off to Warsaw [INAUDIBLE] and posed as a Polish officer in hiding. And Polish people were very hospitable for their own people. So we had found an apart-- a room with a family. And I was there with the children. Soon, and they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get more money to live on? 

SUBJECT: I started business. My husband had been doing business in the ghetto, bringing in corks for bottles. You know what a cork is? He used to be-- and that was imported from Warsaw. And he gave me the name of the factory. 

And I went there, and I was carrying [INAUDIBLE] it was the time, it was fall, where people make preserves of fruit to make [INAUDIBLE] and juices and all that in Poland. And so I was [INAUDIBLE] cost pennies to buy the mer-- merchandise. And I was selling to stores [INAUDIBLE] from stores, to store like hardware stores, and pharmacies. First it was corks. And then it was [INAUDIBLE], which is the sealer of bottles, carrying loads. But nobody recognized me. Nobody knew who I was, and nobody was asking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, did you believe that you were a Jew or [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I knew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know-- 

SUBJECT: I know well that I have to be careful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But did you at times forget it, perhaps? As though-- no. 

SUBJECT: I couldn't. I couldn't, too much was at stake, my life, and my family's life. I was the one that was joining-- how you say-- connection between children and my husband, who was separately. Soon they discovered that we were Jewish there in the village. My little child has seen a woman, a neighbor woman, scraping, washing her-- her-- her pictures of Santa Maria outside from [INAUDIBLE] and things like that. And she says what it was. And nobody in Poland, no Christian child would be ignorant of who the Saint Mary is. 

And a few days later, we were-- in the night came several peasants with guns to me, and to give them my husband. And my husband wasn't there. And to give them money, all the money what I had. And so they let me go. And I gave them what I could. And they left me. But in the night, I took the children, I went out from there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The came to you with guns? Were they for the Germans? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no no. This was on their own. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they explain that? 

SUBJECT: They will put me through to bring me to Gestapo. If you're Jewish, that was enough. There were many calls [INAUDIBLE] In Warsaw, my husband was attacked many, many times. 

But I think I'm not to speak about Polish people at this point. Because we had Polish people who helped us, very much. And I would like to give them credit for it. But this was-- this was [INAUDIBLE] the bad elements. And they it was blackmail. So in the night, I left the village. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did it occur to you to ask them how can you do that to me? 

SUBJECT: No. No, it was so to them, natural to do. And I was sitting and helping my little girl with her-- she was going to the cloister through nearby with her [INAUDIBLE] And [INAUDIBLE] And she came to me in the other room and she said, mother, don't give them all the money. 

But of course, I had to give them money and the left, which was very fortunate. Because if they would have brought me to Gestapo, I would have been-- I wouldn't have been here. Around 4 o'clock in the morning, I had my children out from there. And we went to Warsaw, which was not far. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Sophia, ?] you must have-- you are a very tough woman. 

SUBJECT: You see how tough I am, how I look tough? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I'm-- I bear the burden. I carry the burden with me, and all the consequences. Got all [INAUDIBLE] with my earnings, I couldn't do much. [INAUDIBLE] for a long time. Later on, I did a little better. 

But it helped me-- maybe I should mention the Polish people that helped. As we were in Warsaw, my husband had learned about a woman who brought out from the ghetto his niece. And we got acquainted with that lady. And I couldn't make her help me with the children. But finally, she placed the children at some teacher's, where I paid. 

And it was just right where the ghetto was. The ghetto was burning, the fight was going on there. In 1943 was the uprising, the Jewish uprising. And we have seen all the atrocities, the womans jumping from windows with their children. And they have seen it was a terrible place to have them there. And finally, I convinced her to place the children in an orphanage. And she did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you hear, know, or see of the ghetto and it's end? 

SUBJECT: In Warsaw? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Oh. At first, the Poles were helping a lot of Jews, bringing-- giving them ammunition. And there were people were coming and going through the canals. Many people got sick and died of it because of swallowing all [INAUDIBLE] And we heard about heroism of the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see anything, you yourself, or were you in another part of the city? 

SUBJECT: I was out of town. And the children weren't there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they tell you? 

SUBJECT: They told me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your children tell you? 

SUBJECT: That they were afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of what they saw? 

SUBJECT: The were afraid of the fire, of the shooting, of the [INAUDIBLE] what they have seen through the windows. They didn't go out themselves. They were kind of hidden there. And 

INTERVIEWER 1: Poles make remarks on the ghetto uprising? 

SUBJECT: Very positive ones. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: They were praising very much the Jews for their heroic attitude, for their-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And any stories they told to you, not as a Jew? They didn't know that you were a Jew? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they tell about that event in the ghetto? 