[TEST SOUND] MINA NISENKIER: Yeah, I'm listening on. Yeah. Wash the dishes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Good focus. OK, everybody set? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you tell me your full name, where you were born, and the date of your birth? 

MINA NISENKIER: Do I have to? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

MINA NISENKIER: OK. 

[CHUCKLING] 

Well, I was born in Poland, Lodz. I was a teenager. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Give me give me your name first. 

MINA NISENKIER: My name is Mina Nisenkier. I was born Markovich. I lived in Poland, in Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you give me your full name? 

MIRIAM: OK. Miriam Markovich. The same way, I was born in Lodz in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And, one more time. 

MIRIAM: That's my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 2: One more time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One more time? OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: On the right. All right. 

Would you give me your full name-- 

MINA NISENKIER: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: --when you were born, and the date of your birth? 

MIRIAM: First name Miriam, Markovich. 

MINA NISENKIER: Weitzman. 

MIRIAM: Weitzman. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hold it. 

MIRIAM: [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ask her [INAUDIBLE]. 

MIRIAM: I was to say I was born in Lodz. Lodz, Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. And what's the date of your birth? 

MIRIAM: You have to have it? I give it to you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

MIRIAM: Doesn't matter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Now, just for me, if you would, one time, just give me your full name and where you were born. Just all the way through that. Is necessary the age? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. No. No. 

MIRIAM: You give them the age? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well, you ask him. You-- he's talking to you. 

MIRIAM: OK. 

MINA NISENKIER: Talk to him. Not to me. 

MIRIAM: My name is Miriam Weitzman. My name is Miriam Markiewicz. Weitzman, of course, is because I married. I was born in Lodz, in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. And what was your family address in Poland? 

MIRIAM: This I remember. Roki- Address where I was living? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

MIRIAM: Rokicinska 155. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How large a family did you come from? 

MINA NISENKIER: Asking me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mina. 

MINA NISENKIER: We were six brothers and sisters, five sisters and one brother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And were you comfortable as-- how comfortable were you as a Polish citizen in the 1930's? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well, it was a time that we were not too comfortable as Jews, and it was already because of the Germans. They started to talk about it. What's going on in Germany doing, and they are anti-Semitic, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anything specifically happen to you? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well, like we went to school, and they just-- we live in a Polish neighborhood, not in a Jewish section. The children, of course, in school they said that this is-- she is Jewish, or anything like this, or making fun of us, or it was communist, or they throw-- you know, they use water on us. It's not-- so you know, we had to kind of watch ourselves. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you then? 

MINA NISENKIER: I was going to school. I was about here-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] in high school? 

MINA NISENKIER: I-- yeah, it was about 13, 14. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about you, Miriam? 

MIRIAM: I was 12. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. What type of experiences did you have in the 1930's? 

MIRIAM: I remember in 1930's what they do. This that, taking bottles, and breaking windows. And they say, you know, you the Jew. 

You mean literally now in the '30s until the-? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before Hitler came in. 

MIRIAM: Yeah, they was putting always in the windows, like beat the Jews, kill the Jews, we are against the Jews, we don't like Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it any different living in a Polish neighbor? 

MINA NISENKIER: Not really. They were kind of-- the Polish people, they were nice to the Jewish people where they lived there. But if somebody Jewish from another section from town came in-- especially with beards like in Poland they used to have-- they were throwing rocks and things like this. But we were their Jews. We were kind of protected against them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened in 1939, when the Germans marched in to Poland? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well, that's-- they came all of a sudden, and they started to bombard the places. We lived close to a bridge where this was the outskirt of Lodz. That was a lot of factories there. 

And we had to leave our home and go to town where it's more populated and like this. So I have an older sister that she was married by then, and we went to them. We stay with them for a week or so. And then when it's quiet down we went back to our place where we lived. 

And then it started-- like they started to come in and take us to work. Like they would come in. There were Germans saying, everybody comes out. It was winter time, almost, and we had to shovel snow, or to go clean their-- whatever they want us to do. 

Or beating up people. They come in to somebody say-- like we have a neighbor that he get a store from-- grocery store. He came in and ask him, what are you? And she say, I'm Jewish. And he started to slap her both ways. 

He say, you are not-- you're not a Jude, you are Judin. This was a difference between-- a Jude's a man, a Judin. is a woman. But she didn't know that, and he was slapping her therefore he beat her up. 

And finally she say-- he say, you are a Judin. He say, I am a Judin. and he left. Things like that, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were you doing, Miriam? What type of work did they make you do? 

MIRIAM: Work, yeah, you mean? 

INTERVIEWER 1: When the Germans came in. 

MIRIAM: When the Germans came in, they start-- first they start-- when they came in, they start asking us to put in the Jude. We have to put on-- every person have to make a star, a Jude, a yellow star. And then pick us-- pick up a-- they pick up the girls, they made-- they take us a lot of places to work with them, like pick up on the street and work, you know, to go to some places, and like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what was happening to your brothers and sisters? 

MINA NISENKIER: Ah, well, after a short while, they decided to make this ghetto, and we had to leave the place where we lived. And whatever we had-- there was no transportation. We had to take like sleds, I think. What ever somebody could take with them. And it was the other part of the city that they make into a ghetto, with barbwire or something like this. And we went there with all our bundles which we could take with us. 

And they put together like-- we were then with the whole family, my father, my brother, and my sisters. I have one married sister that she left to Warsaw before the ghetto was close. And we all lived in one room. And then it starts really the trouble. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened then? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well, first of all we start to have, uh, rash-- rations-- ration. I cannot pronounce this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Rations. 

MINA NISENKIER: Rations, yeah. They give us an amount of bread that we have to have for a whole week. And you know, it was very hard. Even if people had a lot of money, they couldn't buy nothing with it, because nobody wants to sell any food. And then we all were supposed to work, because if you wouldn't work, they just took it out. Send us to work camps. That's what they said that time, but really the people never came back, the one what they were sent away. I was working-- in the ghetto I was working at, uh, three different places. Like it was always thought that I was doing knitting for the ladies, for the officers' ladies. And then they took me to a straw resort, and I have to make straw boots for the soldiers in the war. And then I went to work the zatler resort that I have to work with saddles. And in 1940-- five, it was 1945. 

MIRIAM: 1944. 

MINA NISENKIER: 1944. 

MIRIAM: September. 

MINA NISENKIER: Yeah. Uh huh. They close up the ghetto completely. They took us to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Miriam, what type of work were you doing in the ghetto? 

MIRIAM: In the ghetto, I was working a resort was I was working-- first I was working was not a resort, was they would take away people. They said-- they, how do you call this? They deported people and they took off the clothes, and then they bring back the clothes and they're ripping up their clothes and make different clothes. Then later on they sent me to another place, the resort was named Zbar now is working, how we called this for the shoulders, how you call the pad for the soldiers. I was working there. 

And we've been-- one time we'd been locked up in this place, because they try to send us away. The German come one time, and they tell everybody in the families to go out. They come out, and they start shooting in the air, saying, everybody have to come out. 

And then-- and then they take away, you know, younger people, like children through 10 years old. They take away the older people, and they ask everybody in the big trucks. They deported them. And they ask us back to go home, because even young people, they let us go back in the house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And at this point, your family was still all together. 

MINA NISENKIER: All together. 

MIRIAM: Yeah, this point we been together. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How were you treated in the ghetto by the guards? 

MINA NISENKIER: Well-- well, if we went our way, we were a certain-- we had to be-- it was like, they call it like, um-- we had to be in the house about either five or six o'clock, I didn't know. It was the summer, and everybody have to be-- never-- never could go out on the streets. 

Well, what we did, we just tear apart all the-- the-- the fences. We just went through the fences, and we play cards and things like that, but we had to watch ourselves and things like that. But in 1944, it was the time that they called us and they say, you have to go to work. They're taking us to work. We could take as much as we could carry, because they want everything today. 

They took us in on trucks and then to the station, and just piled us up like in a cattle train, like you see in The Holocaust. This was a train like this. I saw myself when I watched it. I didn't see actually myself, but I knew I was something like this in there. And they were just like-- like herrings, you know, you couldn't have a place where to sit. You were just standing all the time. 

It was a nightmare at about-- I don't even remember how long. I know it was a whole night and a whole day, and finally we came to Auschwitz. And then they start to take us out. The people what they were working there, of course, they were people they were very rude and say, you are going now to be hanged or to the chamber or something like that. 

They took us to this room, and we have to take off everything what we had on, just like we were born. And she, at that time, she was very skinny from the ghetto. She was-- she looked like a skeleton then already. She was sick, she didn't have enough food, because we didn't have any food in the ghetto. 

And they tried to take her away from me. And at that time, I don't know what got into me, but I just spoke out at this soldier-- all naked like it was, you know, with no clothes-- and I say, don't take away my sister. You take away already my-- because everybody else was taken away at that time from me, my mother, the rest of my family. Don't take away her too. 

And the soldiers say, you can have your sister. If I won't take her somebody else will. And this work then. 

And then we went to the barracks. It was about six people-- it was 60 people in one square that they put together, and everybody should fit in each order. Like one person-- we were in six like this, six here and six here. It was all together 6 here, about 10 row. 

And they start to talk with a podium like this. And this woman was talking and they say very bad word, dirty, and she say, you are not home anymore with your mother and your father, or something like that. You're doing like we are taught. And this was like in the morning. 

At night they started to give us food. They gave us one pot of food. This was a pot-- one get a small one, one get-- whatever they had, and no spoon or nothing. We had to share. Like the first one have to sip theirs, and give it to the second one, and the third one, and there. And back and forth this way we had our food was handed to us. 

And then came the night, and this was just unpossible. I remember I had-- before I was there through that, I had long hair. They cut my hair. Because like I told them, they were nice hair, and the girl what did this to me say because her sister was taken away to death and she had her like me, and she decided to take at least my hair away from me. When we went out from there. She didn't recognize me. 

MIRIAM: Yes. 

MINA NISENKIER: And I also had nice shoes. Then she, the same girl, say give me your shoes. I said, why should I give you my shoes? I don't have anything else, just leave me my shoes. Say, I give you my wooden shoes, because if I won't take them away, somebody else will. 

I get the shoes, and put my shoes under my head as like a pillow. And at the night somebody Stole my one shoe, and I didn't have any shoes at all. 

Well, this girl went out for a few days, and then came the time when this was another selection that they supposed to take us to work. They said that they will send us to work. Again, I get her with me, and they want to take her away again. And I did the same thing, I say, maybe this time they will do it again. 

And we were, again, you know, they came to look us over, who was healthy enough to go to work and who was not. And I did the same thing then, and I say, don't take her away from me. And that time I got a few slaps in my face. They say, OK, next time we'll take her away. 

That's why it was 15 days in this mad house. In this Auschwitz, this was-- this to say, this wasn't to work, this to go. 

And about the 15th day, they took us again and somehow, with some other girls, we took in the middle and we went through there. And they took us to Birkenau-- to Birkenau. And it was almost night then but they took us in a field. Was just wet grass. 

We did-- so what we had on us, and they put us together make a circle of-- I think it was about 500 us that time, and we had to survive there all night. And the soldiers, they went back and forth against the wire, the barbed wire thing, and they were shooting in the air-- pointing to us, but shooting in the air for fun and just they laughing. And we survived like this in this wet ground till the morning. 

After this we went in and this-- and this bad thing what they got. I think this was this death thing. And they put us together around this what was like chairs, we all sit together on it, and they give a piece of soap, each of us. 

At that time, we didn't know-- or this is the gas chamber. It must have been, but we didn't know we'll come out alive, or we'll go to take a shower. After we order-- we were told that everybody should stay against the wall and take a shower hat, you know? We're staying against it, we had to shower. 

And after that, they give us some clothes. Then we knew that we are not going to die, and each of us a piece of bread and the clothes to wear. And I, of course, get this long dress-- a long skirt. It was probably from a 80-year-old woman, I don't know. And a pajama top. It was blue with white polka dots. 

I will never forget this in my life. They put that, with the red paint, they put the-- the back of ours, from the bottom to the down, not-- not to get-- not to escape this way. And I tore up a piece from the leg and put like a turban over my head [INAUDIBLE]. 

And this the way we came in to Harburg. We were on this train about two days, probably, with no water. I remember it was raining. And we opened a little bit the window, and we get some tin cans and we took out this and to take some water, to have some water to drink from it. And that's-- that's we were. 

And when we came to Harburg, we felt that we are coming to a heaven. It was a barrack. Everybody was get a cup, a spoon, a plate, and a blanket. That's what you get. And of course, it was some bath-- some things that you could take wash ourself. Not a bath or anything like that, but was sinks we could wash ourself. 

And then they start to take us out like-- it was not far from Hamburg. This was at the outskirts of Harburg. And they took us to work. The work was that we had to walk about probably four hours in the snow to the train. It was the most gorgeous train we sit in. 

They took us to the port. They took us on a beautiful ship. Sometimes they give us even beer on an empty stomach, you know, just to make fun there. And then we came on the other side, and we start to clean some bricks what are from the old bricks what they were. We have to clean the bricks up. 

We could work just maybe for two hours, and then we had to go the same tour back and we have to walk with it too. And sometimes it was-- most of the time it was snow, and we were wearing the wooden shoes And the snow got-- you know, gets-- get glued to it, that some day we were so big, like we were, you know, it was just piling up. We had to-- against the trees, of course. 

But the soldiers, they were tired too, and they started to-- they wanted to go faster home, faster to the barrack. They make us sing. They were lonely, they want us to sing songs what they want us to do. And when we came back to the barrack, it was already dark, and we get our soup. 

And after this, 5 o'clock in the morning, they call us for the- to get out, or they call it the coffee holen. We have to go and buy, or we want it or not, to bring a lot of coffee. This was so heavy and every second time somebody else had to go and bring the coffee. Or we want it or not, we had to go up to there. And this was going on for a while, and then-- and we stay there in this camp, I think, of quite a few months until they send us to Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were with her all this time. 

MIRIAM: Yes, all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever have any more trouble keeping her by your side? Keeping her with you. 

MINA NISENKIER: Uh, well, she-- no, I was watching her. We were watching her. She was the scavenger. She was more than I was. 

Like they say that-- says for a second portion for soup, I was the one that if I had my soup it's enough, but she was hungry. She went twice. Sometimes she would bring another soup, and we would share. 

Or sometimes-- I will never forget this in my life, she found two chicken feet, and she wanted to cook a soup (LAUGHING) out of it. 

MIRIAM: I don't remember it. 

MINA NISENKIER: Two little chicken feet. I say, where did you find this? She said, I found it in the-- things like this, you know, I remember all my life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember doing things like this? 

MIRIAM: Yes, I remember about Auschwitz I can tell you also. I remember they let us out go out 3 o'clock and 2:30 in the morning. They call appell and everybody have to walk straight, five girls, like a-- like soldiers. When somebody turned their head, not straight, the Germans slap us in the face. And everybody was have to go on the knees and sit on the knees until 10 o'clock in the morning, because one girl was not having the head straight, you know, like moving around like that. So because of that, we've been punished, and the whole children-- the whole girls was have to sit underneath. 

We've been barefooted. We didn't got no shoes, no clothes, nothing till 10 o'clock in the morning. And then 10 o'clock in the morning, they give us a pot like a tea-- I forgot what was the name-- like a big pot, and everybody was taking a sip from that pot. Then later on we went to the blocks. 

And 3 o'clock, afternoon, they take us again to go out and stay there. Also, we have to go straight. And then-- and then we stay up until 7 o'clock in the morning. And then we go back in the block, and stay even come a lot of, people come from Poland also they don't let us go out, because they no want we see they've got a lot of more transport to come. 

One time, I remember I went out and this was this girl in-- they-- they-- they call us like animals. They call us in German say-- how do you say? Schweine! You know, an animal. 

And one time, when I was not straight. They want push us straight. So one girl, she took a big piece of wood-- I don't know, like a two by four-- and she get me over my head. And I was having a headache maybe for months. I never forget it. 

And also I was working outside in Hamburg, but they got these bombs falling down. So we pick up this broken bricks, you know this, and I got all my ten fingers was just frozen. I was almost lost my finger. Frozen like I was-- I never will thinked that I would have back my fingers. They got frozen, and they put me in this hospital and they put some medicine. And after I was liberated, I got still trouble with my fingers, because every time when was change in the weather, rain or snow, I had always infection in it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened when you got to Bergen-Belsen? 

MINA NISENKIER: Uh, well, in Bergen-Belsen, when we get there, it was already the [INAUDIBLE]. We were-- they took us in one place. We were about thousands of people all together in our. 

It was no man, just woman. It was woman camp. And they said that the men, they didn't survive, just the woman. We didn't know that men is still alive, or anything like that. And they took us all in one place, and they didn't let us out. And we didn't have any place for to sit, but we were standing. 

And the same night, I remember a woman had a baby. This was something that a girl was with us in camp all for the few months, and we didn't even know that she was pregnant. She was hiding beside-- behind blankets. She cover herself with blanket. Everybody thought that she's crazy, and that she was-- she had so much beating, because the way she was doing. But she was warned to hide her pregnancy, and that she would be dead. 

When-- because we were all together with about seven months in camp, because we left the ghetto it was in September, and we get liberated in May. And-- was it in May, or it was in May-- 

MIRIAM: April. 

MINA NISENKIER: In April. In April, from Auschwitz. From Bergen-Belsen. 

Well, and this woman was screaming, I'm having a baby, help me. Help me, I'm having a baby. And everybody was thinking she's crazy. She-- you know, from this. 

Well, anyway, in the morning we got liberated. This was the day before they took us. I think the Germans knew that it's the end of it. They cut off the water. We didn't have no food at all for two days, and no water. 

And they make us take to the train their belongings what they have. It was like-- like uniforms that they had-- that they were worn-- that they had some like tree painted on it, something like this too. And they put us to take them to the train. What we did-- most of us we could hardly walk-- we throw away half of this bundles on there. 

What I think is that it was-- we saw that it's getting to be an end, because it was about a few soldiers with so many people, you could see that-- what do you call it? All kind. You could see Hungarian people, and Polish people, and gypsies. And everybody was working, and when we went to the woods, that was some soldiers that they told us it's the end, just hold on. 

Then some of them even say, you can run away now. Look at this, it's just a few soldiers there watching after you. You can run away now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were these German soldiers? 

MINA NISENKIER: No, they were-- but the thing was they-- no, they were from Ukraine or things like this, or Russian or they-- we could understand them. 

But what it was it-- they let-- they-- the American-- no, the Germans they went away, but instead, they have the Ukraine-- the White Russian, what they call them-- they're took their place, and they were shooting at us. They were the ones what took over. And this was going on like this the whole day, but at night what I'm telling you about. That was the last night that we were there. 

And a lot of people they were dying during this, because it was no way that too many people could survive there in this. Well, apparently, in the morning, this woman had the baby. It was a lot of woman there that were older people, and they helped her have baby. And in the morning the-- the English came and we were liberated that time, but we were so worn out that we even didn't why-- didn't even went out, because I didn't believe it that the end is there. And all of a sudden she got very sick, and she was taken away from me that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was wrong with you, Miriam? 

MIRIAM: [INAUDIBLE], they say. This you want me to say? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, yeah, let's talk about you're being sick, and then-- 

MIRIAM: OK. I was-- I got sick because when the English-- when the British come in, they started getting us, you know, bread. The steam was coming out in the bread. And chocolate candy, everything, I don't know. We eats so much. And then I got-- was a epidemic, how you call, typhus? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Typhoid. 

MIRIAM: Typhoid or typhus, and I got so weak and sick. And I remember the same day was bad rain, and the blocks were even staying over the roof. And I was so sick, so I remember my sister and another girl, she went out of this, and they come in with the ambulances pickup, you know, people. 

So they-- they took me in this-- they got this room, how you call this, this hospital, you know? They took me away in the other room, and my sister was thinking, God, [? they kill. ?] When I'm in block, I was not feeling too good, so they will take me away also to the hospital. 

I was sitting in that hospital there where they got sick people. I got so sick. I got more sick. They no want to pay-- take care of me, because they just taking away people, but there's almost been maybe 90% death. So my sister took me in her hand, she went to this doctor, this British, and she say, look, she's dying, take her. 

So they took me away to a-- they took me-- what I remember, they take me out. I was not even able to walk like a baby. They took me away to a room, they put me in new clothes. They took me down with the ambulance to a hospital, in another place. Then I was this in the hospital, I were in another camp. 

So I was there, I don't remember how many days, maybe two weeks or so. So the doctors and nurses come in, they were speaking Polish, all kind of a languages. And they say, I hear about the Polish girls from Birkenau, they're going to send away in another camp. And then I say, I bet, I said, my sister thinks that I'm not alive. When she will think that I'm alive, she will go look for me, because she don't look for me. 

So I hear about it. So I went to the doctor and I said to her, listen, I have a sister, was with her together in Bergen-Belsen, and I would like to see her. And she tell me also that the children-- the sick girls, everybody, they go send away to this camp and my sister, because they sent her away in a different camp out from Birkenau were they healthy girls also. So I said to this doctor, and she said, OK, we will send you where you want to go. And meantime, my sister was in the same hospital when I was [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which sister? Excuse me. Your sister. 

MIRIAM: Mina, you know. In the meantime, she was looking for me, but I didn't know, and she was in the same hospital when I was sick in hospital. She went and she asked for my name, and they found me in the list that I'm not anymore alive, that list that I died. So she went all over for these blocks, all over was signs typhus, typhus, typhus, you don't-- can't go through. So she says, she's dead, OK. She don't look for me anymore. 

So I didn't know that she was looking for me. Finally, I begged this nurse and the doctor, I said, I want to go to my sister. She said, OK, we have transport. We got girls from Polish, from-- from-- all kind cities. So tomorrow morning, you come here, you take in a big truck, you will get some clothes. You'll be taken to your sister. 

When I left there, I don't even got temperature. I was so weak. I weight according maybe 36 kilogram. And I was so skinny, my face was looking like, I would say, nine or five years old, I tell you. Not a face at all. So they get me, I remember, um, scarf was green, and dark green polka dots. 

MINA NISENKIER: Would you mind that I will tell about it? 

MIRIAM: Well, I can tell too. And they get me a-- a raincoat was green, skinny shoes. And that time was all-- there a lot of blocks there. They taken Hungarian girls separate, Polish girls separate, all kind of thing. Usually they put me in this-- in a big blanket like a soldier blanket, you know the-- and they gave me my hand, I hardly can walk. 

So they put me in this truck, in this soldier truck, and they tell me, block one, you go down, you will see girls outside barbecuing outside. That's your sister is there, because all Polish girls stay there. You go down, you find your sister. She must be in the block 13. Just go. 

I went down. They let me go down. Hardly I can walk. I look terrible. 

I went-- I find a girl in block one-- was two girls-- well then I remembered the name too, was Maskovicz, and they saw me. We'd been together also in camp. They look at me, and they think I was not alive. And I went to her, close, and I say to them, you know where my sister Mina is? They run away from me like-- like-- like how you call? Like a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A ghost. 

MIRIAM: Like a ghost, that's right. And they say, pointed with finger like that, you-- there's another block. This is black one of Polish girls, but you go to black 13, and you will see your sister's in block 13. I was walking 13 blocks. 

Then I went through the window-- I don't know, coincidence-- and I was walking and I see my sister was there and three or five more girls. And they start screaming, oh, your sister's here! And everybody what they was in that-- in that little house, in the room, they fainted. I tell you, oh they start crying, and they don't think that I was alive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your reaction when you found that your sister was gone? 

MINA NISENKIER: Oh, well, what it was, when they took her, when I give it-- give her away, practically, to this-- this man and to the English soldiers, they say they take her to the hospital. Uh, then the next few day, I-- days, I was kind of sick. I didn't go to the hospital or anything, but I felt, you know, like just didn't feel like-- like I live or die or anything. 

All of a sudden a friend of mine, with her sister was taken away too, say, would you like to go and look for your sister? I said, how can we go? They won't let us out, because they were all in the quarantine. You know, shouldn't go in there. 

We start to go in there, and we, through the wires, we opened the wires and we sneak in there. And I went in, from one block to another, we started block number one. I think this was the barracks where the soldiers they lived in it, and they converted to hospital. And they had about 50 of them. This many people were sick. 

And wherever I went, I look at the list for the sick people, she wasn't on it, and the dead people, she wasn't on it. She say that they told me that she was dead, but I didn't find her on the dead list. But what it was, she wasn't one of the barracks. They took her in a little cottage there that we didn't go and see, because we though that's all there is. 

And I went back, and we were in this camp and we were recuperating. You know, we were already like-- between, we were about 13 or 14 girls in one room. We didn't want to separate. Like we need this closeness thing. 

We had enough food. It was no problem at all, because-- and they started to give us some clothes, and then we started to look a little bit like people. We had-- we were washing 3, 4 times a day. We wanted to clean up everything to-- you know, ourselves. 

And at that time, it was-- I think it was about really a month since she came back. All of a sudden, like she said, the girls came in screaming that they think that she saw my sister, which she-- it's unpossible. She looks like a ghost. If this is your sister, it's not her. 

Well, I went out-- she said she came in, I went out to meet her-- here she was sitting. Like she say, she couldn't see herself, but I did. And each time I talking about it I have to laugh. It's just something that you could never see in real life. 

What she was, she was very skinny, and like she said, she had a pointed nose with no face at all. And she was wearing this scarf tied under the chin, and she was wearing a loose, long coat, a trench coat, a flower dress, some pink hose, and some black shoes very pointed, we think. This was some clothes which the Red Cross sent, I think, from the United States, from all over. And they just give her, you know, whatever they could. 

And of course, I recognize her, and I took her to all my girls what they were there. They were afraid of her, just to look at her. But she was so hungry. She was eating constantly, whatever she could see, and she was eating, eating, eating. 

And that's when she had a relapse and she gets sick again, and then I have to call, a few days later, have to call again the ambulance. They took her to the hospital. That time, I went with her. And after that, she was staying this hospital for two months, and she got so fat that it's unbelievable. She was fat, big. 

At that time, I went-- oh, we met some people that we were looking for everybody or somebody else's-- some survivors. That I knew I had another sister. I knew I had a brother, but I didn't know he's alive or not. I know about the parents that they gone. But the brother and sister I was kind of hoping that they still. And we went like some different towns, like a group of boys and girls. She was in hospital. I visit her every day. I cook for her, bringing some food. 

And then I decided-- it was another friend of mine that was very sick, and I decided to go some-- someplace in another town, and maybe somebody told me that they will give me some apples for her. And I went there, and this place was-- I just don't remember the town. This was not far from Hamburg-- from Bergen-Belsen. 

And a girl was there. It was a canteen that everybody meets. And everybody will say, hey, did you knew somebody, did you saw somebody maybe, did you know or see my sister? 

A girl came by and say, listen, I know you. I know you from the ghetto. You know, I just left you sister-- your older sister, the one [? I went to school with-- ?] and she is in Landsberg. 

Landsberg is not far from Munich. It's completely a different direction from Bergen-Belsen. I say, are you sure? She said, I cannot give you 100% guarantee, but I know you and I know your sisters. 

What I did, I was wearing a white dress what I made myself from a sheet, by hand. I didn't know how to sew, but I don't know, I made it. And with this dress like it was, no coat, no nothing. 

I said, I'm going with this girl, because she's going back to Landsberg. I wrote a note to her to give it to somebody to give to my sister that I'm going. I was on this train on call-- on cattle trains for a whole week. And I came to Landsberg. 

Now, we didn't eat. We-- you know, it was terrible. A whole week to be-- it was raining. Because it was no transportation, at the time. And I found my sister. And before, my-- this girl went to see her, my sister was already there. 

And that's how I-- we went. I was in Landsberg a week later. I and my sister went to pick her up from-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, during this period that you were looking for this last sister, you were liberated already. 

MINA NISENKIER: Oh, yes, we were all-- yeah, she was in hospital. She was free there. It's why we were free. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. What-- what-- from each of you, what were your feelings when you were liberated? How did you feel? 

MINA NISENKIER: I didn't feel no-- it was no feeling at all. I didn't-- I just don't know. Like I say, it was a day before the liberation, like it was, I was walking through the deaths. If I wanted to go to the toilet, I have to walk through the all piles of dead people, and I don't believe that I have any feelings. You know, it didn't bother me at all. I didn't-- either way. Like it would be, uh, some dirt or something, I walked over it. 

I think either it was something wrong with me, with us, with everybody. Or maybe they give us something like a medication or something that you were just numb. And in fact, when I was liberated, I didn't even want to go out. I was there, I still didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

MINA NISENKIER: I just-- because the same time it was a dear friend of mine went, because she said was that we are liberated, and she want to go and find something for a sick sister, like some food, because we didn't eat for a few days. And she'd been shot through this-- this White Russian. And I saw like she is falling down, and the minute she did, another girl went and took off her shoes, because she didn't have any shoes. From the dead person, she took her pair of shoes, and she put them on. 

It was a feeling that it's just unbelievable. You know, you asking yourself something they are blocked in my mind. It's little by little that comes through with it. I cannot remember, you know, just the way it was really. 

But then the-- the English start to bring in food. And this was the trouble, they start to bring some cans with pork or beans and thing, and everybody was starving and they start to eat. That's why they get so sick. 

But what we-- my group of girls, what we ask is for water. We didn't have any water for maybe a few days. And they start to bring the trucks, you know, like you see in gasoline tanks, like this, with water. And with whatever buckets we had, we just run for the water. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Miriam what about you? 

MINA NISENKIER: She-- I don't think she'll remember this at all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember anything about liberation? 

MIRIAM: Yes, I remember about the same girl, can I say, when she died, yeah? I thinks when she got shot was 2 o'clock, and 3 o'clock they been liberated, an hour later. 

MINA NISENKIER: [INAUDIBLE] 

MIRIAM: An hour later. And also I remember she went to get-- she-- she took for her sister potatoes, and she peel them. She get her sister to eat sliced with a knife. She picked up some dirty knife and she give sliced potatoes, and she give to her sister eat raw potatoes. That's what she eats. And she keep her up, alive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now I'd like to get some shots of you. Would you just look at each other, please? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Get me out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Stay seated for just [INAUDIBLE]. 

Now, would you look at the camera, please, both of you? Right here. 

And look back here. To the right of you, over here. And back at each other. Back at the interviewer, please. And back at each other. 

All right. Just a minute. Would you both look at the interviewer, please? Right into the camera. Just right into the camera. 

OK. And look at each other. 

I'd like to get a two-shot. Would you both look at the interviewer, please? And into the camera. And at each other. 

That's it, thank you. 

