[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: Tape is rolling. OK. Mrs. Filer, can you reach back and try to tell us your earliest memories of your family, the town you lived in, the friends you had, any special things that you remember before the Nazis took over? 

SUBJECT: Do I have to go back so far? 

INTERVIEWER: As far back as you choose. 

SUBJECT: As far as I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Describe your family. Describe your home. 

SUBJECT: Happy home, three brothers, two sisters, Mother and Father, relatives. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you live? 

SUBJECT: Um, in a small town in-- in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name? 

SUBJECT: Czemierniki. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you when the war began or when the Germans came? 

SUBJECT: 15, going on 16. 

INTERVIEWER: And can you describe your life, your friends? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we were a happy life. 

INTERVIEWER: Your school, especially. 

SUBJECT: School. 

[SIGH] 

That's hard, to go back so far. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends that were not Jewish? Or were all the children in your school Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Predominately Polish, Christians, Jewish, all kind of friends. We were brought up among Polish people, predominately. 

INTERVIEWER: So your neighborhood was mostly Polish people? 

SUBJECT: Mm, a mixed neighborhood, a mixed neighborhood. But my father was in business. And-- and we dealt with all different kinds of nationalities. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of business? 

SUBJECT: Lumber business. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever help him in-- 

SUBJECT: No, I was too young. But my two brothers were in the business with my father. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you the youngest in the family of your siblings? 

SUBJECT: No, I had a younger brother. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: And there was a big difference between my older brother and myself, till the war came and-- and the destruction that set in. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember for us any changes in attitude, any changes in behavior from your non-Jewish friends when the war began? 

SUBJECT: Not till 19-- till, um, actually, November 1939, till the Germans marched in, we were still free people. In November, the Germans marched in, and there were-- the problems started. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't notice anything, any attitude, any way of behaving, just before the Germans came in? 

SUBJECT: No, because we were raised and brought up among Polish people, you know, Christian people, whatever you were. No, till the war, till the-- in November, when the Germans walked in, they were-- everything started to go just downhill. 

INTERVIEWER: In your own words, can you just tell us without-- just tell us the best you can exactly what happened from the time the Germans walked in, to you, from your own memories. 

SUBJECT: For instance, the business was taken away immediately. They walked in, and they needed lumber. And they needed, um-- and they took everything, whatever it was, in the yard. And we were left without, uh, without anything. That was in November 1939. 

And from then on, of course, we were restricted. We couldn't go anyplace. We couldn't do anything. And, that was the first bad winter. 

And, actually, myself and my youngest brother, only the two of us that were able to go out and bring in some supplies. So, support the family and got to work until the spring 1940. In 1940, they took away one of my brothers. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that, how they took him away? 

SUBJECT: The Gestapo came, and they took him away. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that day? 

SUBJECT: No, it is very hard to describe it. And, um, that was the way of life already. And you couldn't do anything, couldn't go anyplace. 

And actually it was-- it is very hard to go into every detail. 

INTERVIEWER: Had it happened to, uh, friends of yours already? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, some friends dispersed. Some remained. There was no one-- no place to go. We couldn't go anyplace. And, um, we were just hoping that the end will soon come, but there was no end to it. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you able to visit other friends, I mean, other Jewish friends, go to their homes? Could you? 

SUBJECT: Uh, yes, but within a closed circle, you know, next to homes or-- couldn't go too far, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what happened in their families? Can you describe what happened in their families? 

SUBJECT: Actually, just in our town, the destruction came in 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: For two years, you lived like this? 

SUBJECT: For two years, yes, we were going to work. We had to go to work. And we were working for the Wehrmacht. And-- and we worked at the airport, airfield. And we, uh, we were the only supporters in the house. 

And uh, the time that we-- after the-- the Wehrmacht left, we went to work in the fields, till 1942, yes. We still remained till 1942 as a community. In 1942, the destruction started. 

We were evacuated from Czemierniki and resettled in Parczew. It was a gathering point. And we knew that we are going for destruction, but we just didn't know when and how. Until one afternoon, we did receive a message that the trains are on the, um, that a lot of trains were at the train depot. 

And we knew that something was going to happen. And everybody, whoever was able to, went into hiding. And that was in the afternoon. And, of course, in the evening and the following day, I really don't remember how long it lasted because days didn't mean anything to you. And when we came out from under-- from the hiding, from the bunker, there were hardly any people left. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you hiding? 

SUBJECT: There was a-- a-- a bunker was built in the backyard. And you went through, like, in a tunnel, from the house, through the cellar, into the tunnel, and into the hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: This was in your town? 

SUBJECT: No, that was in Parczew. No, our town was clean-- clean already from the Jewish population. 

INTERVIEWER: Who built the bunker? 

SUBJECT: An uncle. And the family was helping. One of my brothers was still helping. And my mother remained alive yet. My father was taken away. And we were still-- I still had two sisters, and the youngest brother was still with us. 

And from there, somehow we managed to go to a-- a small gathering point, where they promised to keep some of the people working there. And so my brother, the youngest brother, my sister, and myself went to that gathering point. And from there, of course, I parted with my-- we parted with our mother and our sister. We didn't know what the end is going to be, but we knew. 

Uh, my mother gave us permission. She said, it's time for us to separate because maybe somebody will remain alive. We went to that camp, and the name of the camp was Suchowola. 

And my brother and sister and myself, and the following day, I had a message from my oldest brother, to come to visit him. It is very important. And I went from one-- from the camp, I went to Parczew. It's-- Parczew is about 18 miles-- correction, kilometers. 

And I walked. I walked to my hometown. And, of course, it was judenrein already. And I got to my brother's house. And my brother said, listen. 

You're the only one have a chance to survive. And I know somebody who will get you a birth certificate as a-- as, um, a Polish woman. And he said, you're going to go to Germany. Maybe you'll survive there. 

Well, I couldn't leave immediately because I left my brother and my sister in that camp. I went back to the camp and parted. The same night, I parted with my brother and sister. 

And far away, I could hear his-- their screaming and crying. Don't go because they're going to kill you. They didn't know what it was in store for them. 

Somehow, I managed to go back again, 18 miles to Kock And I got to the house. My brother wasn't there. A day before, they killed two Germans. 

And the Germans came in, and they burned down that little village and the people, around where my brother was living. My brother was in hiding. His wife was in hiding, and the son was in hiding. 

And just the same, I went to that man. And he gave me that birth certificate. And I went to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get to Germany? 

SUBJECT: How I got to Germany, a transport of Polish workers were leaving that particular day. And with a heavy heart, I climbed on that truck. And I know this is the end. 

And I-- I had nothing to lose. If they'll catch me, they'll kill me, regardless if I'm here or I'm-- wherever I'm going to be. Standing on the bus, on the truck, going towards the gathering point to Lublin, they called my name. But I did not memorize my name. I couldn't remember my name. 

And they hollered, Ursula Yukurska, Ursula Yukurska. And I was facing the other way. And I didn't hear because I had a heavy scarf on my head. 

And somebody pulled. Are you Ursula Yukurska? And that crying saved me, because they forget. I at the time really was very sorry leaving, you know, going to Germany to work. They didn't know my feelings, my heart. 

I knew I'm leaving everything and everybody behind to die. And from there, I went into Germany-- no problems, no complications. Then I was in Germany from 1942, from around October, days and, you know, didn't mean anything. 

You just more or less the months or the time of the season or whatever, anyway, I was able to escape to Germany. I was in Germany from 1942 till May 1949. And a woman that she suspected me be-- working at the airport, she was from my, uh, uh, from not exactly from the immediate neighborhood. But she was away from about 7 kilometers but worked at the same airport as I did. 

She worked there, too. And she denounced us, and the Gestapo came. And they took us away. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: 1943, in May. 

INTERVIEWER: Took you away, where? 

SUBJECT: They took us to a polizeipräsidium. And, uh, we didn't figure that they were going to hold us there. We figured that they were going to pick us up, and they were going to kill us. 

INTERVIEWER: She denounced you as being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Denounced me of being Jewish, and she denounced three other women. I came back from work, and the Gestapo was waiting. And they gathered the four of us up, and they took us in the police presidium to Dessau in Germany. And we were there. In Dessau, we were there for, uh-- we made a tent till July, till the verdict came from-- from the higher echelon to send us to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did she denounce you? Do you know? 

SUBJECT: That's hard to say. 

INTERVIEWER: She knew you from Poland? 

SUBJECT: She suspected. She only suspected. And, of course, we didn't get any parcels. We didn't get any mail. 

And I never admitted that I'm a full-blooded Jew. The three others, the following day, we were-- they-- they took us, uh, for interview. Would you say interview? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, interrogation. 

SUBJECT: Interrogation, yes, correction. And I never admitted that I'm a full-blooded Jew. But the two others, the three others did. I lost two teeth in the process. And I even managed to take a little bit more aspirin than I should have, but nothing worked. 

INTERVIEWER: You lost-- pardon me. You lost two teeth? Was that-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: They-- they tortured you? 

SUBJECT: I got a terrible beating, yes. And, actually, I was the only one that got the beating because I never wanted to admit it at the time. The others admitted right away. 

And it came July. They sent us out from Germany. They were sending us to, um, Auschwitz. And we did not go directly to Auschwitz because they stopped in every town. They stopped in different prisons and picking up prisoners to take them along to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say prisoners, do you mean criminal prisoners or-- 

SUBJECT: No, there was no such thing as criminal prisoners. Some of the Polish people escaped. Some didn't want to work. 

Some, um, not exactly, you know, people that committed crimes as, like, fighting or killing or stealing or things like this, just minor offenses. And they were just thrown into prison. And afterward, some, uh, so it took us till August, from July till August, around the middle of August, to get to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You were on a train. How long? 

SUBJECT: Well, not exactly on the train because they stopped in different prisons. And we slept over in different prisons. They took us off of the trains, and stayed overnight in the prisons, and gathered the other prisoners. And the following day, they-- or two days, because the connections-- trains' connections got very bad, you know. 

So-- till we got to Auschwitz, and we got to Auschwitz. I knew that I wouldn't be able to survive. I saw what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Hundreds and thousands of people. It's hard to me to begin because it's-- they stripped us of our belongings. They cut my hair. They shaved my head. And they took away whatever I had, which I had very little. 

And they put us in a-- in a-- would you call it a block, cell block? You know, like the rest of the prisoners. And it looked very bad, very grim. 

The follow-- the following day, you used to get up in the morning. How would you say it? Appell, a roll call in the morning, and I realized that people do go to work. And I figured, if I got to work it will help because somehow the others, you know, not sitting around and waiting for destruction. So that following day, I went to work. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: They were taking us to work. They'd count us, and they were taking us out to fieldwork, digging ditches. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any sounds? Do you remember any special sounds associated, orders, shouting, music, anything -- when they took you to work? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we marched to music every morning. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind? 

SUBJECT: There was an orchestra, sitting in there. We were walking out from, uh, B Lager, B camp. We passed the A camp, and we were going outside, behind the gates. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was the orchestra? 

SUBJECT: And they were sitting on the left side going out, not far from the Entlausung building. 

INTERVIEWER: The what building? 

SUBJECT: Entlausung. That means this was the, um, the shower room where you came. You know, you undressed, and you left your clothes there. And so supposedly they gave you a shower. 

I cannot go into all the details that you want to do. Some of them are very gruesome, and I don't-- I really cannot go back so far. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the music? 

SUBJECT: It hurts. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the music? 

SUBJECT: Well, you had to-- you had to walk to the, you know, right, left, right, left. And if you didn't, you were hit. You were clobbered. 

Till we left, we went behind, till the doors, the gates closed behind us. And we walked for miles, till you got back. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you going when you walked? Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: Uh, around the surroundings, around Auschwitz, from Birkenau-- between Birkenau and Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: What was there? 

SUBJECT: There were-- there were fields. When I got there, that was the time of harvesting. There was cutting the corn, and there were the beans. And-- And what else did I work in? Raking hay in one particular place, And in the evening, we were coming back. 

INTERVIEWER: When you cut the corn, didn't they give you a knife? What did they give you to cut the corn? What did you use, tools? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry. Corn, I-- I-- I misinterpreted the whole thing. Corn is wheat. We have rye. We have wheat, and we have barley. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you harvest it? 

SUBJECT: Uh, there were machines for cutting. You had to make your contingent. You got a piece assigned to gather that piece of land. You were outside, like, 50 feet, 30 feet. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you actually do? Did you-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, we were picking up, um-- oh, it's hard to describe it. Uh, we had to tie bundles, you know. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Like sheaves? 

SUBJECT: Yes, you had to, you know, perform. You had to make your-- uh, and whoever wasn't able to got a beating, got a thrashing. And-- and it wasn't good, but I did my best. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they give you any tools to work with? 

SUBJECT: You that need it. This particular job, you didn't need any tools. But, like, uh, raking the hay, you had a rake. 

INTERVIEWER: A wooden rake? 

SUBJECT: A wooden rake, yes. And, uh, weeding the beans, we had a hoe. 

INTERVIEWER: A metal hoe? 

SUBJECT: A metal hoe, yes, or digging the ditches, they had shovels. But not everybody got shovels. You know, some of them had to carry the stones. Make a pile of stones over here. When you got finished with the pile of stones over here, you had to take it from here and put it over there. And that took up a whole day. 

Sometimes, we did get the soup, and sometimes we didn't. It all depends, you know, how lucky we were. But it didn't last long. I took sick. 

And I-- working in the swamps, I took sick. I contracted malaria. And within a few days, sick in the barrack, uh, they took me to the hospital, so cold. And I was very sick with malaria. And I thought the end is coming because every day, they were coming in. 

And they made selections, you know. And the first selection I went through, I didn't even realize that it was a selection because they put us outside. So I figured they put us out for some fresh air. 

But we were sitting outside. Some of them were not able to sit. Dr. Mengele came over with two other guys, two other SS people. 

And he was pointing, this one, that one, the other one, the third one, the fourth one. And they gathered their numbers. They were put in another block, and they went to destruction the following day. But I didn't know what was going on. I was new. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your number? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your number? 

SUBJECT: On my arm? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Of course, I do. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your number? 

SUBJECT: 50069, I still have it. I'm not ashamed of it. They should be ashamed of it. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you walked back from work. Did something special happen, something particular happen on the walk back before you got ill? 

SUBJECT: You mean about-- about beating and torturing the people? That was going on daily. That was on the daily menu. 

INTERVIEWER: When you walked back from work, they were beating you? 

SUBJECT: At work, or walking back from work, or-- they just had to look at you. And they didn't like you, you got a beating. 

INTERVIEWER: With what? 

SUBJECT: Whatever it was in their hand. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't they afraid that some people would use the hoe or the rake to hit back? 

SUBJECT: No. No, every-- every soldier, every guard had-- had a gun with him. They were armed, taking us to, uh, to work. 

INTERVIEWER: How many soldiers? 

SUBJECT: It depends how large a group we were. And you had an SS woman, too, with us. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there dogs? 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. 

INTERVIEWER: How many? 

SUBJECT: One or two, it depends. 

INTERVIEWER: Were people afraid of the dogs? 

SUBJECT: Very much so. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: You tried to keep out of trouble, but sometimes the trouble did find you regardless. 

INTERVIEWER: Anything you-- go ahead. 

SUBJECT: You go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER: Anything you remember about the dogs? 

SUBJECT: Yes, if they let them loose, they-- they ripped people to pieces. Ripped your clothes, it depends how you were able to-- must I go back to those things? I would rather not. 

We used to come back after a day's work. Sometimes, there was something to eat, and sometimes there wasn't. One night, I was so hungry, I couldn't sleep. 

It was a very bad night. They were bringing in people for destruction from two particular parts of the country, from Bendzin and Sosnowiec. And the screaming and the hollering was going on. And all three chimneys were lit up. It was, like, broad daylight. 

I couldn't sleep. My, uh, what do you call it? Uh, she was sleeping next to me, my, uh, roommate? We were five in-- in a, um, how do you call, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: A bunk? 

SUBJECT: A bunk, five in a bunk, next to her, I got very friendly with her. And she saved a tiny, tiny slice of bread and a piece of margarine for breakfast. See, I was still new, because she was already there for some times. And that was only two weeks. 

When I got there, I didn't-- you know, I was still-- and that particular night, I stole that piece of bread from her. I never admit it. And she got up in the morning, and she was swearing like a truck driver. 

And I just closed my ears, not to listen to the swearing that she did. And still and all, together we went to work in the morning. And she didn't-- the whole day, she didn't forget that she lost her piece of bread. I never admitted that I took it. 

I was very hurt. I was very sore. And I was very sorry, because I was hungry, and she was hungry. But somehow, once we were outside, there was some-- sometimes you picked up a leaf from a beans, or you picked up something. There was something always to put in your mouth. 

But that was no solution. You got diarrhea, and you were dying, anyway. Once you got diarrhea, that was the end. This wasn't good, and that wasn't good. So what choice did we have? 

Again, till I took sick and I went to the hospital, being in the hospital-- I befriended a woman on the train coming from Germany to Auschwitz. She was a doctor. There were a few professional people on that particular train. 

One was an opera singer. One was a doctor. One was a dentist. That was three. And there were four other women. I really cannot recall the other women. 

But I got very friendly with that woman doctor. And we were separated, of course. We went to a different barracks, and they went to the different barracks. 

But the day we arrived in Auschwitz, the SS people came in, the soldiers. And we were stark naked. We were waiting to have our heads shaved. 

And he recognized that opera singer. She was a Jewish woman. And he got very hysterical, a smirk on his face. And he made that woman, a middle-aged woman, get up, stark naked, and sing. 

Anyway, being in the hospital, sick with malaria, I ran into that particular woman, doctor. And she recognized me. And she said-- she went over to the Blockalteste, that means the woman that she was in charge of the whole barracks. And she said, I have a very good friend over here. 

She said to her, would you please keep an eye on her, and when she feels better, to give her a job? And meanwhile, there was a selection. Dr. Mengele came in. 

No, corrections, there was a-- uh, rumors that we were going to have another selection. And there were very sick people. And that block, that was already from there, you were-- you went to the crematorium, or you went on the pile of bodies at night just. 

And she came over to me. And she said to me, hey, you. She says, you have a clean body. You better-- she said, I'll give you an extra portion of bread. You go through twice, because we have to have so many and so many people. 

We'll try to save some people. But they can't have too-- too much. You know, they had, uh, 500 people on the block. They had to have 500 bodies had to go through. 

Anyway, I wasn't smart enough to be afraid. Maybe he will recognize me, or maybe he won't like me, or whatever. I went through twice. 

I never got the slice of bread. I was very hurt. It didn't matter, because about half an hour later, the malaria-- malaria set in. And, you know, I started to shake and getting cold. 

And in my bunk bed, there was a woman. She was from Greece. I couldn't communicate with her, but I know that she was from Malta, Malta, Malta. 

I couldn't communicate with her. The only thing was when she took sick, when she got extremely cold, she took the blanket. 

I covered her till, you know, the shakes were gone away, subsided. And when I took sick, she used to take the blanket and cover me. We had a blanket. 

That particular Sunday night, she was already sick up there. And she was covered. I was still below. I was waiting for that slice of bread. 

And I got into bed. And she was out of her wits because the heat, the extreme heat. You know, after the cold, the shakes subside and the-- the heat gets to your head, you-- it's just unbelievable, 104 and 105. You're completely out of your mind. 

And she was covered. And I got underneath the blanket. And I started up. And afterwards, the suffering, it lasted for about a Half an hour, 3/4 of an hour. It depends how strong you got it in the beginning. 

I woke up at night, and I was very cold. That means the temperature already left me. And-- and I touched her. And I was trying to talk to her. When I touched her, she was dead. 

Anyway, I felt very sorry for a minute. But I took the whole blanket, and I covered myself. I had the whole blanket for myself till about 6 o'clock in the morning. Do you want a few more gruesome stories, or shall I-- I-- do I have to? 

INTERVIEWER: What you can, what you want. 

SUBJECT: Finally, I got better. I was able to get out of bed and move around a little bit. And she said, you know, I could have put you on-- that was a number 6. I can put you on 22. 

And she said, but would you like to do a little bit of errands over here, you know, stay inside, because from there, maybe they'll take you out again to-- out into the fields or whatever? It was already December, the beginning of December. And I said, all right. I'll rather stay here and do some chores. And this one, you know, she was a little bit already friendlier to me on account the other barracks had told her to. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she a kapo? Is that what she - 

SUBJECT: No, she was no kapo, no. 

INTERVIEWER: What is a kapo? 

SUBJECT: The kapo, I heard right in the beginning on that barracks where I went to work. I figured, it's better to get out of the barracks than to stay with her. Well, anyway, I got a job carrying people's waste out of-- from the barracks at night, days and nights. But my first job started at night. 

I was very sick. I got diarrhea. That was already recuperating a little bit from the malaria. And I walked out with two pails of human waste. And I was going towards the-- the dump. 

I walked out. And between the barracks was a mountain of people, as high as myself. Of course, I was in those, you know, the wooden shoes, the Hollander shoes. And whatever-- if the people died at night, they were just taken and on the dump, you know, a big pile of people. 

And I said to myself, oh, God. Must I walk by? But meanwhile, I couldn't hold back. And I just put down the two pails. And I sat down because I had a sick stomach. And the rats were standing and eating the people's faces, eating, you know, they were having a-- 

Anyway, I had to do my job. I was just looking. What's happening to a human being? That could have been my mother. That could have been my father. That could have been my sister or my brother. 

I pulled up my underpants, picked up the two buckets. I emptied them and came back to the-- to the barrack. There was nothing to throw up with, but I threw up. 

Anyway, my job lasted very short. You know, the Germans were working in a mysterious way. A doctor came in. And he said, all malaria sick to get together and-- actually, how that building was called, I can-- administration building. Yeah, it was that, the-- the-- the administration buildings, because that-- that was the place where they-- they tattooed you and took away all your belongings. 

And they gave you-- yeah, the administration building. We get up there. But the only thing that-- I was a little bit, you know, at ease because they did-- they didn't take only Jewish people. There was a mixture of nationalities. 

I got to that gathering point. And they said that they are sending us all to Majdanek, Lublin, where I came from. And, well, they kept us overnight in that office. on the-- on the concrete floors. 

The following day, they loaded us on trucks. And from there, we got to Auschwitz through the train. And they were taking us to Lublin. Bitter cold, it was December. We arrived the week before Christmas to Majdanek. 

Oh, I missed so many other things, important things, because-- I'm going back to Auschwitz. Because I never admitted that I am a full-blooded Jew, they called me to the politische Abteilung. That means, politische Abteilung means, um-- well, they kept all the records of the prisoners. And they took me there. 

I walked twice from Birkenau to Auschwitz to the politische Abteilung. And they decided because my father was Polish and mother Jewish that I cannot receive-- they made a decision on my verdict that, uh, I cannot write. I cannot receive any letters from home, not that I cared, because I didn't have anybody anymore, anyway. 

But I always remained-- retained my Polish identity. I never gave up my name, Ursula Yukurska. So they had on what to fall back, you know, because everybody was screened. And there was the number. And there was-- especially us, coming from-- from Germany, you know, going through the-- the whole process and everything else. I went that way twice. 

Anyway, arriving in Majdanek, they took my number. And, again, I never gave my real name. I still retained Ursula Yukurska's ? name and the old number. 

And meanwhile, they gave me a number in-- a different number in Majdanek. This one was disregarded, not as a person, in the papers. The papers were following me coming and going constantly. Maybe that was-- would you call it luck? 

And I got to Majdanek. We were all put in the same, uh, uh, barracks. And we know that there are very few Jewish people. And still and all, I never admitted to my full name again. 

I remained-- but I was very-- some of the women were very suspicious of me. They couldn't figure out. They-- they-- I was a mystery to them. Sometimes, they were even afraid of me. 

And meanwhile, the malaria came back, being in Majdanek. And I went back to the hospital. I was in the hospital. I don't even know how long I was in the hospital, a week or two. Again, days, days didn't mean a damn thing. 

They were missing my name. And they were missing-- they-- they had the real-- they had the-- the account. The people-- the account was there. But I was missing. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they have your real name, Hannah? 

SUBJECT: Never did, no, never did. Anyway, when I came back, there was one administrator. He was a Jewish man, but he was there on an assumed name, too. His name was Jan. 

And he came back after me being back from the hospital. He used to come and, you know, take the count. He used to come in with a doctor, checking up on us. 

And he said to me, uh, came over to me. And he said to me, what is your name? And I said to him, Ursula Yukurska. 

And are you from Auschwitz? You came with the transport. I said, yes. And he was trying to get my, well, you know, the background. 

I said, I am a mixture. I'm half and half. He says to me, you know, he says, der Lagerfuehrer -- Thumann was his name-- does not believe in mixtures. Are you one or the other? 

I said to him, by what do you mean? He says, are you Jewish, or are you Polish? Well, because I had the number, and I had the triangle on my arm, and I realized it's no use fighting anymore. 

I said, this is it. And I went. They put me on-- I-- I-- uh, in a barrack where other Jewish people were there. 

So I realized that there were more Jewish people. After the destruction of Lublin, around Lublin, Lublin airport, they left 200 women and 200 men in Majdanek. And a few Jewish people that they arrived from Auschwitz were put with the Jewish people, with the 200 people that they remained to clear-- clean-- clear up Majdanek, to sort the clothes, to, you know, to sort the clothes. 

I was a very short while on the block. Afterwards, they took me to work, to, um, the barracks. And that was, like, a-- a-- a-- a Naehstube. How do you say, a 

A, um-- you did sewing, repairs, sewing, sewing on buttons. I got a very easy job. I was sitting and untwining-- unwinding the twine, to looking for gold, for jewelry, for what precious things that was hidden in the wool or in the cotton balls, whatever. 

INTERVIEWER: How did it get hidden there? 

SUBJECT: The people were hiding. See, the-- the things that were left over from the people after the destruction, it was the clothes, the belongings of the people that they were-- after Majdanek was clear of Jews, cleaned. That was-- that-- that lasted till April, the beginning of April. The beginning of April, as the Russians were advancing, there came an order to evacuate us. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: That was 1944, in the beginning, in April. And the people that they came from Auschwitz with the numbers, the people from Auschwitz, they put in a separate cell. And the women that they remained from the destruction, the witnesses, the 200 women, the witnesses to the destruction-- let's put it this way-- they were sent to Auschwitz. 

But I knew that they were going for destruction. They didn't. If not, they wouldn't have separated us. 

And they left. And early spring was coming. And the Russians were advancing. And one day, they had an order to send us to Plaszow, Krakow. 

We came to Plaszow. We were traveling, again, by trains, open trains, closed trains, night and day. I really don't remember, again, how many days we were on the train or-- we got to Plaszow. And I figured, this is the end of me, because here there is no difference, you know. 

There were about 80% were Jewish people. But I still not-- I still kept my assumed name. I never went back to my own name, Ursula Yukurska. 

I was in Plaszow and worked there. And one day, they came to my job. An SS man came to my job, and he said to me, are you Ursula  Yukurska?  And I says, yes. 

And he says, you're wanted at the politische Abteilung, again, back to the-- I got very ill at ease. And I figured that this is the end because Plaszow, they were bringing in a lot of people. And they were just killing them. 

INTERVIEWER: It was a camp? 

SUBJECT: It was a camp. Sure, it was a big camp. And I went to the politische Abteilung. And the SS man took out all my papers, again. 

And he said, you will be put on a Polish block with Polish women. And you're going to go from here to Germany to work, from Plaszow. That means I'm back where I started. 

And I said to myself, whatever. It didn't matter anymore because we knew that it is the end, you know, another week, another few days. I came back. Everybody was very anxious to see me back. 

You know, what did they needed you at-- at, uh-- and that particular division, what have-- what have you done? What's-- what's-- what's going on? And I told them. 

And I told that supervisor, the SS man. And he said, oh, good. You know, that means you're going to leave us pretty soon from here. He was, uh, let's put it this way, another dog. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No, names didn't mean a thing. You know, the faces, I still see the faces. 

Anyway, one Sunday, we felt that something is in the air. But we didn't-- oh, God, I would like to backtrack. But it's-- it's-- 

INTERVIEWER: It's all right. Go ahead. Backtrack. 

SUBJECT: We got to Ausch-- we got to, uh, Plaszow. So we-- 

