INTERVIEWER 1: The cover of the album. 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: We are seeing photographs. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And there's the photographs of this little-- what-- where were you born? 

SUBJECT: In, um, in [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. It's a small-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Oh, my name is [INAUDIBLE]. I-- I was born in a Romanian, in a small city, [INAUDIBLE]. And, uh, when I-- after the-- after the grammar school, most of the time that I spend in Oradea, the city Oradea Mare in-- in Romanian. I grew up there and being in-- in school, in high school, we played together with all the nationality. And we are-- we are in very good relation, you know. And-- and until when I get 20, 21, I went to the-- in army, in Romanian army. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What family did you come from? 

SUBJECT: Oh, my family? Oh, my-- my mother had-- I talk about my mother. My moth-- we had-- we were four brothers. My father was killed in 1921, accidentally. There were some robbers in this place where I was born and they killed my-- my father. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you when your father-- 

SUBJECT: I was six years old. And my brother was 18 years older than I am, and he replacing my-- my father. And we grew, we stick together, the whole family. And then my sister get married. She was the oldest. She get married and she had three children. Then my brother get married. He had-- he had two-- two children. And I had a brother, the-- older than me, my senior. He went to Uruguay, emigrated in 1926. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what was your home like? Your mother-- 

SUBJECT: My-- my mother was a very poorly educated in this time. You know, it-- and she grew up the family you very nicely. She put in school my moth-- my brother, my oldest brother. He was-- he didn't finish the university, but he went to the university and everything that was at this time belong to Romanian-- to, I mean, Hungary. But the border was open. He went to school there. And my sister get married, too, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did your brother go to Uruguay? 

SUBJECT: Because he-- in this time, the army was very difficult, to stay in the army in Romanian in the studies. Because he was a Jew. But for everybody it was difficult. They were pretty brutal in this-- this time, you know. And he decided he didn't want to go to the army. And he went to Uruguay. And-- and stayed there until he died last year. 

Then I grow up, and I went in high school. And then from high school my brother, who were a Zionist in this time, and he decided I have to go to learn something. Because he's a businessman and I don't know anything. And we wanted to go to Israel. And he send me, I learn woodwork this time. And I grew up being a craftsman of woodwork. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A carpenter? 

SUBJECT: It's not carpentry. It's a different-- it's a-- it's a furniture maker. It's a higher qualification. I was four years apprentice on this. Anyway, I grew up. And then I went in the army, in the Cluj in-- in Romania. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Romanian army. 

SUBJECT: In Romanian army, 1934. And I was there two years, part of them, you know, part they let me home. Anyway, and I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like to be a soldier in the Romanian army in 1930? 

SUBJECT: I wasn't there too much because the off-- I get a good relation with the officer. And I don't want to stay there to much. I was mostly the time at home, and I go back and [? [SPEAKING ROMANIAN] ?] means-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Horses. 

SUBJECT: With the horses. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it worse being Jewish or different because you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes, where is Jews, always were anti-Semitism there. But it wasn't really bad, you know. You always, somehow you can get away from these people. 

And I grew up. Then in 1940, I think, or '41 came in the Romanian and it give half of Transylvania back. Then we become Hungarians. And then it was start the terrible time the Jews because when the Hungarians get back, they get back the anti-Semitism too. 

It's much worse than in the Romanian. They start after they get in Hungary. After two weeks, they start already the law, creating law against the Jews. 

And everything is going bad and bad every day for the Jews. And they already, they start to take the people to the army, helping the army. Because the Jews in this time, they don't get any like making, like a soldier, just helping the soldiers, digging holes and the war or such things but no arm. And I was taken too in 1942. And for doing such things. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's the munca soldat. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, munca soldat, this means concentration for work. And depends who you get, who was your commander, you know, the situation. I was the lucky man who, I always get such a good commanders like, I can't say like my father, you know. But the other ones, they were [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] in Ukraine, mostly 80%. 

And from this 80%, the people, they come back, they 5%. The rest die in Ukraine fighting against the Russians. They don't fight. Just they digging the holes and bringing the munitions, such things. 

And they, I was never out from the country, from Hungary. This means the lucky one. Because who get in Ukraine and who gets caught, they killed them. And but-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean, Jewish men were helping the-- 

SUBJECT: The Hungarian soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --army fight against the Russians. 

SUBJECT: Not fighting, just digging the hole. Because they don't have arms, you know, or bringing the munitions from the back and supplying the fighting army. But the commanders, they did a very bad time for them. 

Like the way I heard, and I think it's true, if you know the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] the fencer, they did fencing? Fencing, yeah, they call it. He was the world champion. 

They put him to climb the tree. And he was up in the tree. They shoot him down, and such a things. 

They put the Jews, when they have to back up from the Russians, they cannot, they don't want to bother with the Jews. They put in a big bank or such a things. And they burned fire. They put fire to the buildings. And all the boys were burned. 

They don't get clothing. They have to use their own clothes and during the Ukrainian fighting lines, you know. And they are, they were unclothed. They have no possibility because they get frozen there. And they die, mostly them. 

And I was the lucky one who never get out from the country. And I was taken to Esztergom Tabor. It's a location in Hungary where we build some kind of corridors, how to shot the tanks, you know. But the other was this whole things that, just for to keep us from our family and to be inside, you know. We did mostly nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was there any thought of resisting the idea of going, of not going? 

SUBJECT: Where? In Ukraine? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just not going and reporting to this detail. Was there any thought of yours that you were going to stay home and not go with them? 

SUBJECT: It's no possibility for this. No, you cannot. This means the law was against you like in the army. You know what, I mean, they can execute you if you don't follow them. 

You have to be there, you know. You take a chance if you run away. And no place to go because nobody's helping you. You are a Jew and you nobody give you a chance. 

INTERVIEWER 2: If you didn't go, you would be a deserter? 

SUBJECT: Well, sure, sure, sure. They execute you right away. And I was in Esztergom Tabor. And we had a commander, H excellent, Dr. Gaya Warhadi was his name. 

He was excellent man. We get there. And he made us a very, very good life there. And we were in a group with 204 and 210 men in a group. And we had four groups in this Esztergom Tabor. 

And the top of the four commander was on top somebody who top all the officers, you know, on top. That was Dr. Kish, the other, it was a police pension from the policemen. And he put together when he get there to start this work, he put together in a square two, one group here, one group here. 

And he stood in the middle. And he told to the soldiers, who stood with us, you know. Each group had maybe 50 soldiers, you know. 

And he told not to anybody to say to those guys to us, you are Jewish. All those guys, all those people are same like you are. The soldiers were Christians, you know. And he made such a speech that, and nobody ever touch us, you know. 

We had such a, in the circumstances we have such a good time there, you know. We can escape. Now, the time is going. And the war is getting closer to Hungary. 

And they still, they need the helpers on the front. They took us away from there. And three groups they sent to the fighting line. 

And just, our group because our commander had such a good connection with the higher officers, you know, they let us stay. They took us in Budapest to work there when the bomb fall down and destroying officers and army places, you know. And we work at chap-- factory chapel, you know. This is a big munition factory. They put us to work there. 

And with this, our commander, we had a very, very good situation comparing to the other ones. And that's the way it goes, the life. Until 1944 when Horthy made in declaration the war. He will go against Germany. And he will stay with the Russian. 

And in this time, I was home. I had a little apartment. I had the room where I stay. And I decided-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were how old then? 

SUBJECT: I was 20. I was born in 1940. And this was '44. It was 30 years old. 

And I decided not to go back because the Russians were already in Monor city. This is like 20 miles away from Budapest. I said, if they go so fast, in one hour they can be there. You know, maybe I stay one day or two days hiding. And the Russians will be there. 

But it's not happen. The Russians stop because they have different order. And they cross the Donau. 

And they come from the West to Budapest. But they come from east first. And they go around, link up, you know, the city. And they come from west. 

And what's happened? They stay there around the city because they wants to make the city hungry. And everything they bombing, no water, no electricity, you know. They want us to give up the city, not to die. I don't know, many thousand Russian soldiers. 

Anyway, it was in '44. And the Russians, they didn't come in. You know, they stayed. And then I was, I lost my group. 

This was my best protection, to stay in the army. If you are in the army, nobody can touch you. We have a yellow band and private clothing. We cannot wear army uniform. 

They don't give us, just my own clothing. And a yellow band, we work on the street with a yellow band, you know. That's the way it was. 

And I stay home. And I said, the Russians, they don't come. Now, I know a very high office man in Budapest because we had [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] in this time. 

And we rented the place from him. He was Dr. Baluch Alexander in Budapest. And I know where he lives. 

And I went to him. And I said, sir. Such a name because he had some titles from the-- would you hide me? 

Because I know him. He is a nice man. He's not a fascist. He's not with-- and to hide me here in Europe. He had a really closed little house, you know, like a castle, I can say, and some more very nice place, very good section. 

And to hide me for a week here, a week, for a few days until the Russian. Because you can heard the cannon. And at night, you can see the lighting what when they are shooting the cities of. 

And OK, he said. He put me in the basement. And I stayed there for four days or five days. And he come to me. Look, the Russian, they don't come. 

And I can't keep you because the superintendent what takes care on the house, he's a fascist. He's listening to the radio that is each minute with the propaganda against the Jews. You know, the people getting so much against the Jews, they don't know why. Just the propaganda, they drive them crazy. 

No matter where you are, they shoot you down if they find out you are a Jew. And he said, I can't keep you. The superintendent maybe find out you are here. Right away, they call the police or some right organization. And they kill you. 

And I said, OK, no way to go because I am not from Budapest. I don't know too many people here. I have to kill myself. I don't want to get in their hand. 

And I smashed up all my papers, you know, for identification. And I go to the Donau, to the river to kill myself, no escaping. And I said, OK. I take a last chance. 

We used to go to work on the offices but what get smashed from bombing, small bombing, you know, to put in place to can work for the army of [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And I go in this direction. And I said, OK. 

Maybe the guys aren't here. And they take me back with a punishment. And I was scared because you're not supposed to run away from a army. This means they execute you, wartime. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you take off the yellow arm band? 

SUBJECT: On the walking, oh yeah, I took this off. And I didn't look Jewish in my face. It wasn't, this was something important too. 

My face, it doesn't look, you know, Jewish. It's not a Semitic face, you know. I don't know. 

Anyway, and I go in this direction where we used to work. And I find out the boys are there. After the proclamation a few days, everything was upside down. 

But we get in order. They put back the boys. They come, they had to work. And I wonder. 

And it was their army man or Coprar, or I don't know what, Coperar, his name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Copero. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he's, and he saw me. He said, oh, Steve Reich. Come back. We do something not to punish you. 

Come back to the army. And you have no problem. We don't report you. 

His wife was Jewish. He was a very nice man, this man. He help us very much. 

And I went back. And call me, the higher grade where I dropped in. I told them, the Germans, they caught me. And they, during the proclamation, and I was home. 

And when I want to go back, they caught me. And they took me. And they want to know about me, where I am, who I am. And they let me free. 

And then I really accepted, they know. But some, they were against the Germans. You know, and they accepted what I said and no problem. 

But time is going on. And they had this one road to get out from Budapest. And they pushing out all the Jews, all who was with the army or without army [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] They want to push out to Austrian, to go in Austria, you know. 

And by the time, they kill most of them on the road because they walking for 30 miles a day or 20 miles a day. And what's happened, we get the order, our group, to take us in Austria. And one morning when we wake up, our location where we were, they was all get with the soldiers together, you know, around them, with the soldiers with the arms. 

And we cannot go no place. This means, tomorrow they put us in wagon and they take us to Austria. What's happened, that was a school. And these two other guys, they climb the door, the entrance door. 

On the upper part was some windows. Because the door was locked. They was thinking, well, nobody can run away. But still we open the window, and we escape from this school. 

And two more boys and myself, we escape. But we have no place to go. We are on the street. 

It was very dangerous in our age to be in the city. Because nobody in our age was walking in Budapest unless you are sick or you are hurt in war or such a thing. It was totally war, you know, you cannot. We were lucky we escape. 

And then one my friend was from Budapest. They had a plumbing place, you know. I don't know. 10 or 20 people used to work there. And the other one wasn't from Budapest, I think. 

But anyway, he was very rich. His parents was taken from, the Germans, they took them in Switzerland one night. And they can't get him out from the group. 

And they fly to Switzerland and left him a lot of money and jewelry and things like this. And he had plenty of money. We had no problem because he had them to support us. 

But we had no place to go. Then where I used to have this, my apartment on this night, this day when we get through the window out, I told them, let's go to where I have my apartment. I know the superintendent. He was a pretty nice man, no problem. 

And I went to them. I told them, look. Keep us three here. The Russians aren't close. You can't be here tomorrow. 

And he said, OK. I take you. And we give him three bracelets for one night. I don't know how heavy they were. Doesn't matter because we had the money. 

And he keep us there for a night. 9:00, 10:00 o'clock he come to me. He said, Mr. Reich, I can't keep you anymore. Because you are in danger. I am in danger. 

You have to get out. Here is what you give it to me back. And please walk out. It was 10:00 o'clock at night, no place to go really. And we were trapped there. 

The plumbing place was taken away with one, they had the workers there. And one worker, who sympathized with the right, was taken away from the Jewish owner. And he was inside. He was like a new boss there. And he worked for them. 

Anyway, and I said, OK. I know a guy. He's a nice man. He was a wrestler. 

And I told them, let's try this guy. And he walked something like a mile and a half on feet at night, 10:00 o'clock. Just we were walking, nobody catch you. Because they used to patrol the street, you know, the army and the police. 

They caught you. Where are you from? Why don't you go and fight? What's happened to you? 

And we went to this guy. And he used to work. This time he was in his small shop, you know, in Oberstein. And I said to him, Mr. Lukach, please, you know who I am. And there are my friends. 

Give me a chance to sleep here for tonight. We don't know tomorrow what's going on. Just let me sleep here. 

He said, OK. Without taking a penny, he don't want. He let us stay there. 

But I know he has a worker there, a very nice fellow, a Christian man. And he had a girlfriend. And this girlfriend belonged to the hunter. I know about her. 

She was sympathizing with the communists, you know. And they help us. And this girl belonged to the illegally sympathizing with the communists. 

And she, this man called her. And she come over next morning. And she took us in her apartment in a very slum, working neighborhood, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] It's a really, really bad apartment, you know, very, very low class. 

And all of three us, we went in her mother apartment. And we stayed there for a while. But no food, we have no food. She doesn't have food. Even with the money, you cannot buy food. 

It was so terrible time, no food. The horses dying on the street, the way they cannon is shooting. And they shook out. And they cut a piece off, out from the horse. 

You know, and they cook it. And we eat it. They eat it, I am not, but anyway. 

And one night what's happened was, we have no room to sleep, no bed there. Because they had, the whole family had a one-room apartment, you know. And they would sleep on the floor. 

And they hiding us because the neighbors come in over there. It's different. They don't have the privacy like here. They come in, they go, they come in. And they don't want to find out these things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you hide? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you hide in one room? 

SUBJECT: In one room, there are extra places, you know. They, with the neighbors, you know, they coordinated keeping the kitchen somehow. Anyway, we don't meet anybody. 

But one night come a young lady there. And we were tired already, sleeping there all over and hiding. And she said to the young lady, don't, your husband is home? 

Said, no, she's in the war. You want to take one guy from here to sleep in your apartment? I said, yes. And I go with her. 

She wasn't too far, maybe 400 feet or, I don't know. Anyway, and I get to her apartment. But before I get in, when I get there, she doesn't know I'm a Jewish. 

And we get to her apartment, I saw a man walking with a gun on his shoulder and with a [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] on his head. And I realized, he did something wrong. And what's happened, they had some kind of headquarters there. 

And she lives upstairs. And upstairs was their headquarters. And I said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was the fascist leader then. I said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

And he let me in because I was with her. Realizing, I don't sleep all night. In the morning, I woke up. I walk back to the lady. 

And I go out again, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] Because they don't realize I am, I don't belong to her or husband. They don't know. And I walk away. I escape this one. 

Now it's coming the time they have no food. And I can't stay there. And we decided what to do. 

And this with the plumbing-- he had this place where they had the plumbing business. And we went to this guy, who took from them the business. And then he told him, look. 

There are-- in a few days. You want to escape? He said, yes. I want to escape. Would you hide me? 

And we stay one night there. And after one night, he said, OK. They called George, him. You stay here forever. I will save you. 

This guy, he had a good reputation. Because he was, they known he's a fascist, you know. They don't look for him. 

And OK, he had a place already. And the other young guy, he had a really Jewish face, you know. And he can't get very easy understood, because either way, they recognize him. 

And then I had my problem. Then from here, I was out. I can go back to the lady. 

I went, they call it-- the Jewish organization, they had their office in-- they call it, [? Wodda ?] Street. Probably in the books, you will find this name. Many books, they talk about it. 

They had a underground organization. They provide you all kinds of military papers, false, you know. Like I get one. I am hurt in the war. No specification, but I hurt. 

And I am invalid 80%, you know. But still, I take a stick. And I walk on the street with this one. The stupid patrol, you know, maybe stop me. He don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you know about that organization and the papers? 

SUBJECT: We know from other ones. They inform us. Everybody want to escape somehow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was what month now? 

SUBJECT: This month, that was in '44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What month? 

SUBJECT: '44, it's probably in November. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So this was after most of the Jews had been already-- 

SUBJECT: In ghettos, the other Jews, they were in ghettos. And we were there. But don't belong to ghetto. 

We were under the army protection. That was good for us. You know, otherwise they took us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And this organization was inside the ghetto or out? 

SUBJECT: Out, this wasn't in ghetto, no. The ghetto was closed. And nobody can walk out from the ghetto. 

Anyway, and I said, I got such a paper. But in this [? Wodda ?] Street get together maybe 500 Jews. But I don't know, was the whole thing was a 10-room apartment. They sleep on the floor, men, women, children. 

You know, they, because if they were home, the houses, they put on the entrance. It's a yellow star. This means that you're a Jewish house. And they know. 

And one guy come there. And they took all the Jews from the house. They took to the gunner. And they line them up. And they shot them, they kill them. 

And I got this kind of paper. And from here, I went in another place where the bombing hit the houses. And they moved out. And they give to us with the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

You heard about the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] This was a paper made from Sweden or from Switzerland. And the people gathered together there, but no water, no supplies. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because it was a house under foreign protection? 

SUBJECT: Foreign protection, they put out paper from the street, the embassy or from the Switzerland embassy. It doesn't belong to us. But it doesn't watch it too much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right, how did you have the contacts to get the first paper that you were an invalid to get into the protected house? 

SUBJECT: We went, when I went on the [? Wodda ?] Street, well, then they have the underground. You know, they bring us the paper. And they fill out your name. They have stamp, everything. 

Not just Jews, a lot of Christian who sympathized with the Jews or the anti-fascists, you know, and they give us paper. But this paper just satisfy a little bit. It doesn't mean too much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They also give you the place in the schutzhaus? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The underground. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Also gave you the place in the schutzhaus? 

SUBJECT: Well, yeah, they give everything from there. You can get 500. They give false, it was all false. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, but also did they give you a place, did they give you the place in the foreign house, in this schutzhaus? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, that we select ourself. We went. And then we saw the paper on the wall. And we get in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just walked in? 

SUBJECT: Walked in like this. And for a while, it was good. They don't bother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did it cost a lot of money? 

SUBJECT: No, this doesn't cost money, no, no money. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So a Jew who was outside the ghetto could get illegal papers. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could get into the schutzhaus? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, you could get if you are a little bit lucky or you get somebody to inform you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who informed you? 

SUBJECT: [? Wodda ?] Street, they have underground organization. They inform you. And you get pretty good information. This wasn't a problem. 

And we get here. They gather together people, you know, who doesn't want to go in the ghetto. They escaped somehow. And they had their friends. 

After a few days, they can't stay there. And they get there. And for the girls, wasn't too bad, you know. 

What's happened, I met there a lot of people. And I met there a girl. And the girl was from Hungary. But she went under main office in Budapest. 

And she told, she was pushed out from the Russian. She was running away from the Russians. They were by the thousand, 10 thousand people were running from the Russian. You know? 

She said, I'm from [? Klosh, ?] you know. And I would like to have a apartment. It was a lot of apartments empty because the Jews, they were taken away in ghettos. And the apartment was empty, what's happened. 

Such a big apartment, they split in two, three with a common kitchen. But they give you. And this lady went in the office. But to find out if she is a Jewish, because I said, she said, I have no paper. Not just she, many of them, you know, they said, I have no paper, nothing. I said, they put to pray to show if she knows the Christian prayers, you know, such a things. But she knows. She was that smart. She knows. Anyway, she get apartment. When she get the apartment, I move in her apartment. And I leave this place because this place become every day more dangerous to stay there. They took you to the gunner. And they shoot you, kill you right away, no questions. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was the Germans would also-- 

SUBJECT: No, no Germans he was here. Just this was done by Hungarian rightist organization. They call it [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] you know, like God of the fear, in Romanian. Not, no, the Germans, they wasn't involved. 

And then I move in in her apartment by hiding, not moving. She was free to go on the street I'm sure. She can go in the street and provide some kind of food somehow, what she can get. That was in November in 1944. 

Still the Russians, they were there. Circling Budapest, but they don't get into Budapest. But I forgot to say, I went through the front. Because the Russian, they were in mountain Buda. 

But you, if you look at it, if you're a good eye, you can see them with the cannon on the top of the mountain. And they don't come in. I went through the Hungarian front line in Budapest, in the city. And I went close to the Russian, like 1,000 feet, that close. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you saying, the Russian troops were stationed in Buda on the hillside? 

SUBJECT: In the hillside, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So looking down over-- 

SUBJECT: Over Budapest, yeah, that's the way they stay. And I went through. How I went, I don't know. But I went through. 

And I was like 1,000 feet away from the Russians. And I hide in a school, waiting from them. Because they don't come from the east. 

We was thinking they come from the west. And we were hiding there. And I got friends, a lot of friends. Anyway, they don't-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were so close. Why couldn't you go and get behind the Russian lines? 

SUBJECT: No, that was difficult to pass. I was thinking, they come in. And they are liberate us, you know. Then I went back again. I went back again. 

How I went through, I don't know. But I went through again on the line. I was just lucky. 

And I went through. And I stay in this apartment with this young girl. And by the time, not just she was, but maybe other then Jewish girls get together with the same idea. They get a room there from the city. And they stay there. 

And somehow, we find out about each other, the way they talk, you know. She is a Jewish, she is a Jewish, she is a Jewish. And when we get together, one of the girls said, look. We should tell us, all of us, we are Jewish. 

And we stayed there somehow until, that was, they call it [? Domionich ?] Street. That was close to a part, the Russian come in then from Monor. They were from us 100 feet. And we wait for them maybe 10 days to get in to liberate us. 

When they get in, it's unbelievable for us, you know. Like it's happen now in the ice hockey team, you know, a big jump and just that neck, you know, and just unbelievable. You know, then we were find, now we are free. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now you're free, what did the Hungarian population treat you like if you, if they knew you were Jewish? Now that you're free-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they are anti-Semitic because they grow like this, especially the Hungarian. I cannot say this about, in Romania. In Romania, it wasn't always, it wasn't that. But like the Hungarians, because they come from their leaders, from Horthy, you know, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you still feel unsafe? 

SUBJECT: No, if I was back, no. I can say that, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, then, when the Russians first came in. And you were free. But you were Jewish. Did you still feel unsafe among the Hungarians? Or did you feel safe? 

SUBJECT: Yeah I think I, we were safe because they backing up. Oh, I was such a good man with you. We cry so much for you. 

And by the time they take everything from our apartment, all the business, everything was empty. No people get back any of those things. But I can talk-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So while you were hiding in the various places, the ghetto was slowly-- 

SUBJECT: The ghetto was on until the Russians get back-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, the ghettos transported to Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: The ghetto, no, not from Budapest. All the ghettos from the provincial cities, because this was the planning. First the provincial cities go. 

Then after they go, Budapest. But they cannot finish it. Because the road and the railroad for to get out from Budapest was already closed from the Russian army. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were are you frightened? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you frightened? 

SUBJECT: What means this? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Afraid. 

SUBJECT: Afraid, when? In this time? 

INTERVIEWER 2: From hiding to hiding. 

SUBJECT: When you are 28 years, you know, and you're getting used to it too. You're getting used to it. Sure, the danger was always on. Because I was a man for the army. In this age, nobody, it's hard to say, you know. 

When I get with this girl in this apartment, when I go in the basement, I had a terrible time there. Because they were ladies, and I was a young man. It was a terrible thing to save myself. 

Because you had no men, no men there. If you have, you had 60-year-old men there. That's terrible place to be like this. I don't know if you understand what I meant. It was a terrible life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And all the ladies wanted you? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I didn't count them, not just me, special. But most of them because you have no, my, you don't have people there. Everybody who was in good health, you know, they were on the front. It was a totally war. 

It's a very, very-- but this three months from October 15 through January 12, that was not three months. That was 30 years, 30 years. And still I don't know what's happened to my two friends. 

Because I forgot the one name. And when I was home in Budapest home, I went back. I went to see this, my friends on Szondi Street. Because I know where they had the plumber business. 

And they had no more film. Because it was everything nationalized in Hungary. And I can't fricking find anyone. And I had, I lost all-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever find them? 

SUBJECT: No, I lost all connection with them, two very bright, very smart young men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you very much, Mr. Reich. That was most interesting, very different. 

SUBJECT: It is difficult. I am not a story teller, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you're a very good story teller. 

SUBJECT: And my English-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, you're a very good story teller. You told it very well. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, but-- 

