LAUREL VLOCK: Patients that are constantly made. 

ANNIE C: Begin? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes. 

ANNIE C: I was born-- 

CREW: Oh, not yet. 

CREW: I'm sorry. 

LAUREL VLOCK: OK, not yet. 

CREW: We got to wait for the tape to get to speed, thanks. 

ANNIE C: Pas encore? 

LAUREL VLOCK: No. 

CREW: Tell us when, John. 

LAUREL VLOCK: OK. Right now. 

ANNIE C: My name is-- single was Annie Abrahams. I married in London a Frenchman during the First World War in 1915, June 1915. We lived there until the end of the war. And at the end of the war in April, we came to France. I, with my husband, came to France, and the child, which was two years old. 

In France, we lived very nicely. My husband was in business. And we-- he had a fairly good situation. 

And then we bought a home in Le Vesinet, from an ambassador. And then we were English ambassador. A beautiful home, it was a double home. 

And we thought that the child-- when she'll grow up, she'll get married, and we would give her the nicest part of the house. And we live-- would live in the other part of the house. But it didn't turn out that way. 

The war came along with the Germans, the Second World War, and we sent our daughter that was 20-- 21 with the last boat from Italy. There were no more boats going from France. And unhappily, we could not accompany her to the station even because there were blackouts, and we didn't have the right to go out. 

So she left alone by taxi to the station, and she went to Italy to take the last boat. I had a sister living in the United States. And we sent her to my sister. 

Well, it was-- at the beginning, she was not very happy here. And she wrote in one of the letters that she'd like to come back. But I said, God forbid. She shouldn't come back because the Germans were on the way to come into France. 

When the Germans came in, first of all, we had the American mess that came. They wanted to take our kitchen to have-- make their mess for the-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: No, the Germans then? 

ANNIE C: No, first-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: The Americans? 

ANNIE C: --the Americans. They make their mess. But being that we had the one single kitchen, they did not want to put us-- deprive us of our meals. Therefore, they did not accept. 

A few days later, I looked out of the house, and there was a mist. And the Germans were on the way to come in. They put up this mist so they would not be seen. 

While-- in the meantime, they were bombarding dreadfully. I was in the house one day with my maid that was Polish, and we had heard bombs falling. And each time a bomb fell, the doors opened and closed from the noise of the bomb. She was praying in Polish, and I was praying in English. God says protect us. 

When it was the bombardment was over, we looked outside. The cars that were stationed outside were flattened like pancakes. They were after the American mess, which they must have known that were-- were suppose to accept our house, but they didn't. And all along the street, there were half houses knocked out. From then on, we thought it was becoming very dangerous to stay home when they came-- when the Germans came in, we had to wear "Jew" on every coat and dress. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you remember what you felt about the Germans before they came in? Were-- 

ANNIE C: Before they came in? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Is that why you sent Arlette to the United States? Were you worried? 

ANNIE C: That's the reason we sent her because we knew that the-- the war started with the Germans when we sent her. There were no more boats leaving from France on account of that. And that's-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Before the war-- before the war started-- Jackie, I'm trying to get to this-- before the war started, did you know, living in France, that Jews were in jeopardy in Germany and other places? And what did you feel about that, living where you lived? 

ANNIE C: We felt very bad because there were Germans passing by selling materials and wanting some money. But we were in danger ourselves, and we couldn't help-- help them. And we even felt very, very bad that we couldn't help them. They were Jewish people from Germany that escaped. 

JACKIE B: But before-- before you sent mom to America, before you waited so long so that the only possible escape was by the last ship, did you think of leaving before when it-- when the danger did not seem to be so-- 

ANNIE C: Yes. 

JACKIE B: --close? 

ANNIE C: That's when Arlette had her passport made by an American, [? Weisenberger, ?] in the American embassy. And I started making mine. But mine-- her's was ready, and she left with her passport. But mine was not ready. 

And when the Germans came in, I kept continuing to go to-- to the-- 

JACKIE B: Town house? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Town hall. 

ANNIE C: --town hall where the Germans occupied-- occupied the town hall. And they never said no. They always told me to come back. I had-- the bridge where I lived was knocked down, and I had to take a boat to cross the bridge to go. And it was a lot of discomfort for me to go. 

But they never said no. They always said, come back another time. And I was very lucky that they did not arrest me because they were all Germans. I was lucky. 

JACKIE B: But before the war started, nanny, did you think that anything like that could happen? Did you think that there was a real danger? 

ANNIE C: No, I didn't see the danger that much. But being-- we heard what was going in Germany, that's why we sent Arlette to my sister's in the United States, on account of that danger. But we didn't imagine that it would be that terrible for us. 

But little by little, we learned that it was terrible, terrible, the goings on. The goings on were dreadful. When they arrested mothers, the mothers threw their babies through the windows to save their babies while they were arrested. 

One day-- one day my niece came from a little town further and said, auntie, the Germans will be here this afternoon because they're in this so-and-so town, very close to our town, Roanne. And so my husband left right away with his brother to hide out at my brother-in-law's mother-in-law that was Catholic in Saint-Germain-en-Laye. 

And I was left alone, so I put my coat on, had the bag in my hand. I locked the door, had the keys in my hand, and I started making parcels because when-- when the Germans came in, they were telling us on the radio to buy up as many things as we could. We bought the best in the Maison Blanche, the best of lange- table-- 

JACKIE B: Cloths. 

ANNIE C: Oui. 

JACKIE B: Tablecloths. 

ANNIE C: --all the best of everything. And my wardrobes were filled with the best. I started making passes, throwing things into sheets and tying them. And with my maid, I start-- my house was on two streets. The principal street was locked. And the other side, the neighbors-- one of the neighbors said I could put my goods in her place. She was Catholic. 

So I tied, without knowing what I threw in there, all-- I emptied all the envelopes. The wardrobes were the best of everything. And I-- we willed it to my neighbor in the other street. And she took them in. But she was afraid to keep them, so she took everything out-- and I never knew what was there-- and placed them in different places. 

In the meantime-- we were lucky. Our money-- I made three packages of our money. And we hid our money. One package I rolled in a sack and buried it in a-- a patch, a carrot patch in the-- on the lawn, in one of lawns. The second part, I stuck it into the-- what, the umbrella-- 

JACKIE B: The umbrella stand. 

ANNIE C: --the umbrella stand. We had four umbrellas in the garden. And I-- one roll I threw in that stand. And-- and the third, we unscrewed the inside of the oven, the metal door of the oven, and we-- I hid the third part in there. And thence my husband screwed back the door. Goes without saying, I never use that oven again. 

But we had-- we had another oven that we burned wood and coal. We had central heating. And we couldn't get wood or coal, so my husband had 200-- 200-year trees cut down and cut up. And we had enough wood for burning. And he gave the poor families some wood so as they could use it for their use. 

My next door neighbor on the other street said, Mrs. Frau Colbert you're not going to sleep alone in that house tonight. You can-- I have a spare bedroom. And my son is away. And you can sleep in that spare bedroom. So I slept-- I went. 

And my maid was picking snails. And she come across this tube with the money. She said, what's this doing-- doing here? I said, that's to defend myself. And I took it with me, and I went to my neighbor to sleep over the night. 

At night, people-- they were Swiss. She said, you have nothing to worry. They cannot raid here because I'm Swiss. And you sleep well. 

At night, I heard an-- heard footsteps. No, I heard the bell. I heard the bell. So I got out to the bed, I covered with my clothes as if no one slept there, covered the bed, and ran into the kitchen. And under the sink, I hid under the sink with there was a little curtain. 

So my neighbor said, Mrs. Colbert, what are you doing? I said, didn't you hear the bell? He said, Mrs. Colbert, go back to bed. That was the alarm clock going off. Because people were giving away-- they were selling the Jews. And I thought he was give-- giving me away. 

The next day, I took my-- I learned to ride the bicycle on account of the shortage of food. I took my bicycle and went to see my husband a few miles away and told him the story. He said, don't go back to sleep there. They'll give you away. 

Coming back, I saw a little girl of about seven with Jew written on sitting on a seat. I went over to her and asked her what she was doing. Well, that was about 17 miles from Paris. She said, she lived in Paris. Her parents were taken away with the Germans, and she came to fetch her father's wages. 

I kissed her, gave her a few-- a little money. And that's all I could do for her. And wished her luck. But I was in danger myself. I went back, and I still slept at the Swiss people, my neighbor. 

And then the-- after-- the next night, I hear footsteps at about 6:00 in the morning. I-- I do the same thing. I get out the bed, put the-- my clothes in the bed, covered the bed as though no one slept there, and ran into the kitchen and hid under the sink, and put the curtain down. 

The neighbor heard me. He said, Mrs. Colbert, what are you doing? I said, didn't you hear footsteps outside? 

He said, Mrs. Colbert, go back. You're in safety. That was me walking the dog to make his wee wee. So I went back to bed. The next day, I took the bicycle and told my-- he said, tell your husband that he can come and sleep here too. He'll be safe here because my husband wasn't very happy where he was hiding. 

I told my husband that. And he said, he's not coming to sleep there. And he told me to not to go back. He said, they're going to give you away. We gave them lots of food that we had bought in the black market. We gave it to them. 

After a few days, the Germans didn't come. Because where I was living-- where my niece was, was comme New York, like New York. And where I was was the outskirts-- 

JACKIE B: Mm-hmm. 

ANNIE C: --the outskirts. They didn't come to the outskirts. They only made the newer district. So I came back to my home. And after a while, we had to give up our radios when the Germans came in. We kept a very tiny one that we could get America and l'étranger. 

JACKIE B: And the other countries. 

ANNIE C: --foreign countries. And we-- my husband came back, and we stayed on. And we used to put this radio under the covers to hear the news how-- what's going on in America, in England. And we learned how dangerous it was becoming, overly dangerous. We-- can I go on? I have a lot to say. 

One day, my husband was in the street, and he saw a crowd. And there was a man, a young man, with a black suit that was much too big for him. And he made-- he said he-- he made out as if he's deaf and dumb. 

But my husband recognized there was something wrong there. And he tide-- tried speaking to him in English. And so the boy thought he could confide. 

He was an English soldier, escaped English soldier. And he slept in woods, or he had the bicycle, and he slept in the woods all over. And the peasants would give him-- gave him this suit and would give him a little food, money. 

So my husband took him-- brought him home. I gave him a good meal. I gave him a clean bed and-- and bath, and told him to come down very early in the morning because the neighbor opposite-- although he was a good friend, we were afraid of him because he was always at the window. And if he had seen a stranger, we were very much in-- afraid. So I told him to come down 7 o'clock. 

7 o'clock he's not down. 7:30 he's not down. A quarter to 8, he is not down. My husband said to go up and see what he's doing. We were afraid in the end. 

So he said he overslept, and he was shaving. And then he came down, I gave him breakfast. And I-- we gave him a pajama suit put-- to put under his suit, a clean pajama suit, and gave him some money. And he took care of his bicycle. He had some coller- 

JACKIE B: Some glue. 

ANNIE C: --tape that he took care of his bicycle, and off he went. A few months later, he came back. And we'd-- a few weeks later he came back, and we done the same thing over again-- a good meal, bed, bath, clean underwear, and money, and sent him off. We never saw him again. In the meantime, it was getting-- getting very bad. Many Germans pass by asking for help, which we had to refuse. 

And we had a brother-- a brother-- a brother of my husband came to hideout in our place. We were 17 miles from Paris. He came from Paris to hide out. And happily, we gave him just for one night to sleep. 

And the next night, we said, it's very dangerous for us, also for him. So he went off the next morning. And he went to-- to get-- take the train in Montparnasse to get out of town, out of Paris. And there and then in the station he was taken and done away with, never to be seen again. 

JACKIE B: Papa had many brothers. It was a big family. 

ANNIE C: There was another brother taken in Paris. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why was it dangerous for your-- why was it dangerous for your husband's brothers to hide in the house with you? 

ANNIE C: They all had-- we had to fit in five-- five forms of three-- three backgrounds-- 

JACKIE B: Three duplicates. 

ANNIE C: --three backgrounds-- parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, what religion they were, where they lived, the ages. And everyone had those. And they were sent in to the Germans, all the five in the town house. They had them all over. 

And we had Jew in French, Juif, they made us wear. So the brothers, every Jew was in danger, everyone. So this one wanted to hide out in our place, that he was taken after he slept over one night. 

Another brother hid in the-- when they came home, they told him to go down the cellar and hide out because it-- the Germans were around. He said, no, I'm not-- I have nothing against me. I'm not going to hide out. He was taken there and then. 

Another brother-in-law, the police-- the French police, came to fetch the-- to ask for his papers. He had left his papers at his mother-- parent's place. So the police said, go and fetch them. They meant for him to hide out. 

But he, being that he had nothing against himself, he had made two years of military service, he had nothing, absolutely nothing against him, so he went to his parents and came back with his papers. He was taken there and then. In- dans la rue his wife, was left with three small children. And he was never-- he was done away with in Auschwitz. 

His mother, my husband's mother, was living with them. They came to fetch her. She was over 80. And she died from fright. 

We-- we heard things going on dreadfully. For the first year, I had letters-- letters from my daughter through-- there was an American hospital in my town. And through of the nurses, I received letters through the nurses in this hospital that I went to pick up now and again. I went there every other day to see if there were letters. 

And in the street on one of the doors, there was a notice saying that they're catching illness-- cholér-- choléra. 

JACKIE B: Mm-hmm. 

ANNIE C: We have people suffering-- is sick with choléra to keep the Germans away. Anyway, that's just one of the I-- things that I want to tell you. 

And then later, the American hospital moved. In the American hospital, there were about 30 Jewish women hiding out. And I thought that dreadful to see them, that women of all ages hiding out in that hospital. 

When the Germans-- when the Americans moved their hospital out of our town, I got letters through the American Embassy. The wife of the Mr. [? Weisenberger ?] that made my daughter's passport, she was in the Red Cross. And she brought me the letters. That was the last letters that I received from my daughter through the American Embassy. 

Then we said, we cannot stay here any longer. We must prepare to leave. But every person that we asked for false identity cards, we had no confidence. 

There was a doctor, a well-renowned doctor, in Paris, a very expensive doctor, that people knew that he made false papers for Jews, rich Jewish people, to get them out of the country. He'd help them out of the country. But he said they should bring all their money, all their jewels, all their riches to him, and he'll get them out of the country. They came to him in all confidence. 

And he had to examine them first. And on the-- where he examined them, on the table, there was a sliding door into the cellar. And he just slid them into the cellar. And-- in lye. In lye. 

JACKIE B: In lye. 

ANNIE C: And they disappeared. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did he kill them? 

ANNIE C: Many. 

JACKIE B: They disappeared, and he would have the money. 

ANNIE C: Désintegre 

JACKIE B: They disintegrated, and then he would have their fortune. 

ANNIE C: And he kept all the money and that jewels. He'd done away with them. When we heard all of these goings on, we said, it's dangerous to stay. We must prepare to leave. So each person we interrogated for false papers, we had no confidence. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How did you know about this doctor and the lye. How did you know about that? 

JACKIE B: How did you know? 

ANNIE C: Through the newspapers. 

JACKIE B: They published it in the newspaper. But he still, nevertheless, could-- 

ANNIE C: He was arrested-- 

JACKIE B: He was arrested in the end. 

ANNIE C: --in the end. But he had done away with many, many rich Jews. We didn't go to him. We were not amongst that rich Jews-- happily. And so in the end, we were told to-- to gain Spain or Switzerland. And from Spain, we could get to America. 

But we had no confidence. People were done away with in the trains all over. There were terrible things going on, terrible. I can't explain everything. I'm-- I'm writing a book, which I take time to remember all the things that happened. 

Now, one of the men from the town house in our town came to our house in which we had the confidence. And he made us a false-- false identity cards. And our name became Monseiur Madame [? Frauge ?] no more Colbert. 

And we asked-- he knew of-- of a man that worked in the railways-- on the railways in New Orléans. He said, he'll take us to that-- we should go to that man in New Orléans. And he'll get us across the-- the-- the-- the Germans were not on the other side yet. 

JACKIE B: It would get you across the border. 

ANNIE C: The border. So we asked him to take-- come along with us. We were afraid to travel. So he said, I cannot come with you. But my wife will come with-- will accompany you. And everything was a lot of money. The false cards, everything we had to pay for very much. 

The lady came with us to Orléans. And we came to this man. There was a guard on the railway station. 

We left all our money with a Mr. [? Berro ?] in Paris. We were recommended to him by my daughter's best friend, his parents. We gave all our money to him, and we left. 

We arrived in New Orléans, and-- for my husband, the man dressed him up as a guard. And at night, he managed to get him across to Mont Laussane. 

For me, it was more difficult. We tried it about five or six times at night, at 12 o'clock at night, me holding him as his-- with a handkerchief around my head, a basket of food, and like a peasant. So I was his wife. And-- but we came back with heart beat every time because it was too dangerous. It was not in the station, but where the trains are stationed 

And the fifth or sixth time when we went, he had men that helped him in the compartment where there were crates, full of crates, where-- full of crates. The men frayed a little space to the end. There was a door on this side, and a door on that side. 

And he knew where the train-- so they made a place for one chair. And we sat on the chair. I sat on his knees. 

And we were supposed to stop in Vierzon, a station called Vierzon for 20 minutes. As the trains stopped, the Germans-- as the train stopped, we held our breath back. And the least movement would-- the crates would make a noise. 

And there were Germans. They opened the doors where he knew they would-- the Germans. And they'd pass by and inspect. And very often, they'd have dogs. But happily at that time, they were not dogs because we just felt that we were there. 

Any way, the train, instead of stopping 20 minutes, it stopped two hours with our breath held back. Thank God when the train began to go, we caught our breath. The guard knew which side we'd arrived, which side was safe to go down. 

There was a door on the other side. So he-- while the train was going, he frayed a passage because the men filled up. When they frayed that passage for us, they filled it up with the crates. Then he had to fray a place for us to get off. Before the train arrived, we jumped from the train as it was slowing down because it was dangerous to get-- to get off in the station. 

When my husband-- when I met my husband in the station, he said, it's too dangerous for you to come to the hotel where I'm staying. There's raids every night. And with the old English accent, you'll be recognized right away. So he wouldn't let me go to his hotel. But he said, I'm going to see Mr. [? Berro's ?] wife and ask her if she can put you up. 

He took me to Mrs. Berro. And she said-- refused because she lived in an apartment where you had to go to the bathroom through the garden. And there were neighbors around. And if they saw a stranger, it would be very dangerous for her and for me. She refused. But my husband insisted so much, that in the end, she let me sleep over. 

At 12 o'clock at night, her husband arrived with the money. Half he gave it to me, and a half he kept to give to my husband in case one of us was arrested-- arrested. Oh, then we went into a hotel. 

And we had this boy-- the son of-- of the guard that was working on the station. His wife took a liking to me because I stayed two weeks before I left. And she gave him-- her son was 21 of age. And he would've taken by the-- being taken by the Germans for labor, forced labor. 

So she'd confided her son to me. And we took him along as a nephew. We were supposed to be his aunt and uncle. We paid his room, hotel, food, and everything. 

When we arrived there, [? Berro ?] and his wife, they had a daughter that was consumptive and divorced. And she had a daughter of 12. This boy of 21 falls in love with this girl. That's sick, has a daughter of 12. And I gave his mother my word that I'd take care of him. 

I felt very bad about it. And I didn't mention anything to my husband because he's out-- was outspoken. And I knew he would speak right out. I've kept it to myself for a long time. I suffered with migraines, but that's a different story. 

In the end, I told my husband. I told him what's going on. And I felt very bad about it. 

So he took the boy and said, well, that's not for you, that girl. She's so much older, and she's not strong. And we gave your mother our word that we would take care of you and you're doing wrong. So he promised us that it's not serious. But the father kept on telling-- when we spoke to the father, he kept on saying that it's really serious. 

So the boy took us-- boy-- the boy went against us. He became a-- what do call? 

JACKIE B: A blackmailer. He blackmailed you. 

ANNIE C: Blackmailed us in the end. And this Mr. [? Berro ?] each time-- we were owner-recommended. He was an honest man. He could have kept our money, and we couldn't say a word against-- a word against him. He was an honest man. 

But he told his wife that he's going to the woods to inspect the trees. He knew how old they were and the value of them. And instead of going to the woods, he came to Paris, and he had girlfriends in Paris. One day, the wife finds a letter in his-- in his pocket and finds out what he's up to. And she thought, being that we're from France-- from Paris, that we knew all about it. So she was against us, too. 

The daughter was very sad about the whole story. And she said, if it had happened to me, I wouldn't care. But my mother, she was very upset. Anyway, the mother and the boy became, instead of friends, they were against us. 

Mr. Bell-- we were staying in a hotel. Mr. Bell said, I'll find a place for you where you'll be happy. The Germans are not there. There's plenty of food. You'll be wonderful there. 

This boy, we had left in his home our ration cards-- the sugar, bread, tobacco cards. And with that, it was worse then without an identity card. And each time we gave him money, and he said he's going to Orléans, and he'll bring our papers. Each time, he made some other excuse. He was going to see this girl. 

We was in-- we were in that small place. The name is [? [FRENCH] ?] 60 miles from Montlucon And we-- the first Sunday I arrived there-- it's a long story. You will permit me? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yeah. 

ANNIE C: When-- when we arrived in the hotel, we had to fill a form and our name. I was Mrs. [? [FRENCH]. ?] And I-- the boy marked where here, Correze where I was born, supposed to be born In case I'm arrested to know to be able to see where I was born, to be able to answer. 

When I arrived in this hotel, and I write Correze the town where I [INAUDIBLE]. The lady said, [? [FRENCH]. ?] You're from the same town as I. I thought I'd take a fit, a small town where everyone knows one another. I said, you'll excuse me, I have an awful-- I said, it's a small world. 

I said, excuse me, but I had a dreadful headache, and I must lay down. Will you excuse me? I'd like to go up to my room. And I cut it short. 

In Montlucon this boy was traveling. We were paying his hotel, his food. And every footstep at night, we thought-- we didn't have a wink of sleep. We thought every footstep was to arrest us because he was making the black market. 

And he didn't tell us what he was doing. He took money, and he said, he's going to Orléans. He went to see this girl, And so it went on. 

So one day my husband says, you go and see Mr. [? Berrot ?] and tell him the whole story how he's treating us. So I said no, I'm not taking chances. It's very dangerous. There was a buggy next to the door with the two police always there. And it was very dangerous. 

My husband kept on insisting. I was the strong one. Although my husband was very, very clever, very clever. But I was a strong one. 

His-- in the end, he decided-- I decided to go. So I asked the hotel, the patron of the hotel to get me a big chunk of veal to take to my friends. They had meat there. And I put it in the valet, and asked him to wake me very early. 

He woke me early. He gave me the piece of meat. I paid for it. And I went with a heartache, I got onto the buggy. 

There was-- you had to steps up. It was 17 miles. The station was 17 miles from this hotel to take the train to Montlucon. We had to go through the woods. 

Arrived in the middle of the woods, two police stopped the buggy. Papers. The first three gave their papers and took it back. When it came my turn, I couldn't add, otherwise, I was brave. I gave mine, and I put my hand out to take it back. It's not coming. 

Every second felt like an hour to me. I never sweated more in all my life, being that I had that piece of meat and my false identity card. The-- the guard in Orléans, the woman that took a liking to me, put-- gave me Joan of Arc and put it-- the back of my false identity card to bring me luck. She didn't know exactly what I was hiding out for. My card didn't come back. I never, never sweated more in my life before and not since. 

Anyway, when he turned the card on the other side and the saw Joan of Arc, he gave it back to me. Were not Joan of Arc there, the man that made our false cards, that came to the house to make our false cards in the name of [?Frauge ?] he did not put my finger mark-- my finger marks on. And had Joan of Arc not been there, mine-- they would have arrested me. So Joan of Arc saved my life that day. 

When I got to the station, I said, I'm not taking the train. If I come-- oh, they asked me questions, and I answered them-- more then they asked me so as they shouldn't be too long asking me more. When I got to the station, I said if there's police that are smarter than those two, they'll recognize my accent. 

To take the train is very dangerous. To go back, there's a police in the woods. It's very dangerous, too. I sat on a-- on a seat, and I waited for the train to come in. 

And I was thinking, [INAUDIBLE], what is the best to do? I said, I'm not taking the train. I'm taking the chance and took the buggy back. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How old were you at this time? 

ANNIE C: Pardon? 

LAUREL VLOCK: How old were you at this time? 

ANNIE C: I was over 50. About 55? 

JACKIE B: Mm-hmm. 

ANNIE C: I have my false cards here. When I got back-- 

JACKIE B: Excuse me, nanny, you were about 40. 

ANNIE C: I gave the piece of meat to the hotel-- to the patron. He said, I'll return you the money. I said, no, give it to the poor. I'd give everything I possess that day to have gone through that ordeal. 

He said, how was it you came back? I said, I forgot a package. I had to think all the time for answers. I said, I forgot a package, and I'll take-- I'll go back another day. That was in that town. A few days-- the first days that I arrived in that town, 

[KNOCKING SOUND] 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yeah, we-- we're changing tape. John, is Mrs. Reznick-- 