CREW: Name. 

MICHAEL VASEY: OK, we're shooting. But we first need-- 

INTERVIEWER: We'll getting the machine through a-- If it's a coffee table and-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Well, my name's Michael Vasey and I-- at the moment, I'm a teacher at a Church of England theological college, which I suppose is the same as a seminary here, in the Church of England, which is the equivalent to the Episcopal Church. Prior to that, I did-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were born--? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Right, OK, I'll start at that end. I was born in Nairobi, in Kenya, on the 23rd of January, 1946, the only son of my father's second wife. My father went to Kenya in the 1930-- in the early '30s, himself a self-made man of little formal education who ended up being the most-- probably the most prominent, most pro-black politician, white politician in Kenya, in colonial Kenya. And that's one-- be one very important influence, I suppose, on my life. My mother came from Bingen am Rhein. That was one of five-- 

INTERVIEWER: In Bingen? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Right-- was one of five sisters of whom both her parents, and two of the five sisters, were killed at Auschwitz. They decided that if I was a boy, I'd be a Christian, and therefore I was baptized in March of the same year at the age of three months. Was sent to school in England-- 

INTERVIEWER: If you were a girl? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I think I'd have been a Jew, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they decide that? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I've never really pursued it with them. I think they-- well, they're neither of them what'd you call religious people, but I think they wanted me to have a faith, so they gave me a bargain one, sort of sound. And they-- in the end, they sent me to straightforward thing like Sunday schools. They were, I think-- found it-- they were not that-- didn't find it that easy to accept when it actually became a serious thing as going to the ordained ministry of the Church of England. Though, they've both come to terms with it in their different ways since then. 

I was sent to school England, to an ordinary English public school. I went school at the age of nine. I think their motivation in that was partly that they didn't want me to end up the typical non-thinking, right-wing, colonial boy. And for that reason, as well as a desire to get me in some section to the English educational system, they sent me to school away from home quite early. With the result that from the age of nine, I never went home for longer than just a vacation. 

With the exception of one great aunt, those of my mother's family that survived Hitler went-- came to this country. One great aunt went to Israel-- Tante Johanna, [COUGHS], and the rest came here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tante Johanna? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, and the rest came here. And I suppose I first met them in 1955, something like that-- not in this country, but in Europe. But my memory may be quite wrong. I've a very-- I don't have a total accurate chronological memory of my past. 

My mother was obviously not a very-- a very strict Jew, in the sense that she married a Gentile against the wishes of her parents and so on. And though I think she's a very-- in her way, a very passionate one. She's involved in he synagogue at Nairobi. She goes along, as far as I can see, twice a year. 

But she is an active member of the congregation in the sense that she goes to-- I don't the right terms, but she goes to the meetings of the-- of the annual general meeting, or whatever the equivalent is. And mentioned as a troublemaker and as a thorn in everybody's flesh. Am I talking too quietly? Is that all right? 

And I think over-- as I understand it, her feelings about my Christianity-- this is a caricatured way of putting it-- but she sees-- she sees that there's the Christian world which murdered Jews in the Second World War, and Hitler was a Christian. And I'm not quite so bad a Christian because I have the good fortune to have a Jewish mother. And I don't think emotionally, she actually sees things in many other ways other than that. And that's been a very big influence in my life. And I suppose it means that we've-- that we've-- we've always talked a lot about Jewishness and Jews and Hitler and the Holocaust, and so on. We've talked fairly little about my Christianity. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have specific memories of what she said, these incidents? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, I don't think I do, really. I can't think of a time when I didn't know-- when I didn't know the story, as it were, of what my grandfather was like, because he was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's that story? 

MICHAEL VASEY: That he was a lawyer in Bingen-- yeah, that he was a good man, that he was not a Zionist because he thought that Judaism was a religion and not a nationalism. And so I don't-- I don't know the incident that caused it, but he and his wife actually had to leave Bingen much earlier than most of the Jews in Bingen because of some legal case in which he was involved which was used as a pretext to act against them. 

That the house was surrounded by a crowd, that my mother, who's probably the least Jewish looking of the family, got out because the crowd mistook her as the maid, and went and got the police. And then they left for Holland. And because they left, went to Holland so early, they then stayed in Holland too long over court. 

There were the two sisters that actually came to America. One was married to a cigarette manufacturer from Alsace-Lorraine, and therefore they went-- they went out to France, and there he was interned. In the end, they got out. The other sister came to this country-- I don't know-- the middle of the 1930s, but in any case, early enough. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's this story from back then, the house surrounded? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I don't know more than that, except that the police came, that they-- that the house wasn't attacked that night, and that immediately after that, they left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was in the mid-1930s, or? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Listen, I've-- again, I'm bad on dates. I imagine it to be 1933, but that might be wrong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did mother talk about their-- the child and about that life, paint pictures about it? What did you absorb? How did you imagine Bingen? Do you remember? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I went there in 1957, so I actually have a visual picture in my mind, which is probably stronger than any sort of verbal memory. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you came to Bingen, was it different from what you imagined it? What did you look up in Bingen? 

MICHAEL VASEY: We went and saw the house in which they lived. We went to a bank, I remember, because one of the bank clerks there was a man, a middle-aged, old man now, with ginger hair, who my mother remembered, though he didn't recognize her. And she remembered that he'd actually been involved in-- some in the crowd that had been around the house. 

I don't-- yes, I don't-- I don't have precise memories, I think, which is partly the way my mind works. Though often, I have my own version, which is probably in some ways wrong, of each members of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Please describe it. 

MICHAEL VASEY: --each person's story. I suppose I think that you'd actually get the story-- I mean, you could get the story firsthand from all of them, because most of them are in the states, so why-- why get it from me, to that extent? You're asking me to tell you about my family here? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm-- no why get the story from you, because you're-- at this moment, you are the minister. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Right, all right. Well, you'd have to forgive me the factual inaccuracies, that there must be enough. Well, I think of my uncle Paul, who came here. He was in the wine business and not very-- he's a very-- he's a very nice and good man, but he wasn't very good in the wine business. And I think came here to New York on his own, and found it very hard to cope. 

His wife came with the kids and they worked-- I don't have the words. She worked as a waitress, or some such, and he worked here, they found-- they left Holland. You know, they were short of money and lived on the east side. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why don't you choose what is most vivid, even though it can be imaginary. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What versions of whom? 

MICHAEL VASEY: But the main stories I have in my mind is how people got here, of which that's one example-- that they got here. But they only got out because my grandfather, then in Holland, put some money that already belonged to one second cousin's name in Paul's name, so that he actually had uncle Paul's name, so that he actually had a financial base here, and could therefore, in a sense, slip through the otherwise stricter immigration laws. 

In the case of my mother's other sister, I don't know. I remember little things, really. He was a very successful cigarette manufacturer in Germany. He-- they had a chauffeur, who I met later in life, Emil. Very nice man, gentile, worked with ironwork, wrought-iron work. They escaped with nothing except the amount of money that Emil managed to smuggle in his very large shoes. 

Then they lived-- Uncle Ernest was interned in France. Aunt Mary and her two daughters lived. She was-- she had trained as a dressmaker, so she had a source of revenue like that. They got to this country because her uncle, already here, tramped around the streets of New York till he actually got the papers to get them out and get them into this country. 

The story that I have in my mind, which may not to right about them, is that the gentile general manager of the firm of the cigarette business did, if anything, his best to get them caught by the Germans. But the day after the war, my uncle forgave it all and said that it wasn't going to go-- you know, nothing was to be gained by going over past wrongs and left it. That's the story that's, whether true or not, has lived very powerfully in my mind, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why, why is that so powerful? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Well, I suppose because it would be pretty understandable if he wanted to get his own back, or yeah, have some form of vengeance on somebody for participating. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You can experience that vengeance that--? 

MICHAEL VASEY: You're asking me how I feel about it? Yes, that's-- that's quite different, in away, from trying to get my memory, isn't it? I think-- and I think the way I feel is it should not quite related to it. 

I have these stories, half-baked stories in my mind, which I think I've always had. And though, in a sense, I've only come to this country sort of once every five years, I have a very strong sense of belonging to this family. I have no-- my father was married before. I have a half-brother, but I have no family other than the Jewish family, really, that I have in the states, that I know. And I have a very close rapport with them, really. 

I think the facts are fairly clearly in my mind that my mother lost her three sisters-- her two sisters and her parents in the war. And I have a sort of picture in my mind of what the character of each of those people would like-- Leah, Eliza, who was the intellectual. Leah, who was the young baby of the family. 

Grandfather, a proud lawyer, my grandmother, I have less of a picture of. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're grandfather what? 

MICHAEL VASEY: A proud lawyer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

MICHAEL VASEY: My grandmother, I have less of a picture of, though I imagine her as a woman who fussed. I don't know where I've picked that up. And how I feel about it-- I suppose I find, for example, that I'm very anti-German, and that that's actually something that I actually have to deal with and cope with. It's the ending strong racial prejudice in my mind, now. I actually would-- don't buy things that come from Germany and so on, and associate. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Michael, do you have your version of their end? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, I don't, really. I mean, I have-- No, I have strong pictures in my mind of what gas chambers were like, but I've not-- I've just picked them up, I suppose, from television and films. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe them? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, I suppose it's sort of lonely railway stations and trucks arriving at the station. A lot of guards, a lot of shouting, police dogs, people being separated, old people and young children being stripped and taken straight to gas chambers. And other people being used for labor, so that's the sort of image I have in my mind of it. I don't think that's an image that I've ever got from the family, of course. I think that's an image of I've just got from public reading. 

It was interesting that when the film The Holocaust came and was shown in England, I actually found that I couldn't watch it. I was very pleased it was shown, and got my friends to see it. But I couldn't, actually. 

The thing was actually two important, and I was to bound up with it. And it just seemed, to me, indecent to actually watch it myself. Not because I didn't want to know, but just because it seemed to me that I didn't-- didn't want to desecrate-- that I did know and didn't want to desecrate the dead just by going through a film showing it. 

Yeah, I was quite surprised how intensely I felt that. I mean, it was actually, at the time, very inconvenient not to watch it because I was with a family who I knew well who were going to watch it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You felt it was a desecration to the people-- to the memories or the people you knew, or your memories, or--? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, not to my memories. To-- to the members of my family killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That you knew? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I mean, you know? What's pleased us-- I mean, I think it's right that the culture and the society shouldn't be allowed to forget what it had done. That said that it had murdered my grandparents, but I didn't actually want to see my grandparents murdered. But that's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were surprised to find something that you responded to? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I was surprised to find that I responded as intensely as that, yes. That's to say, I thought I'd be able to sit down and watch it dispassionately, and comment and contribute. And I was with an English working-class mining family, to whom the whole thing would have been very alien, and in a sense, would have been very pleased to stay and comment and-- and in the sense, to try to make the points of the film personally. But I was actually-- I knew that if I stayed, I'd have been more worked up than that, and I just didn't to do it, and excused myself and left. I mean, they know me well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now I have to address you by your title, which is-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Oh, right. Yes, I don't know-- Michael Vasey. I mean, I'm the Reverend Michael-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: It's Reverend Michael-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Vasey. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --Vasey. And you could not-- when you-- that film was on, it struck a familiar chord and you couldn't quite watch it. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, that's right, truly. I mean, I suppose I might have done in a different circumstance. But I mean, I've-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I addressed you purposefully by your-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Go on. Why? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That-- that you touched on a forgotten-- maybe a little bit alien. How do you-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: 'Cause I don't-- it's very odd. I think from the point of view of a Jew, to be a Christian is not to be a Jew. That's not actually how Christians who come from Jewish family feel about it at all, which I think is a difficult thing for Jews to actually understand and feel. 

Jesus was a Jew. The first disciples were Jews. Saint Paul was a Jew. The subject in which I lecture is Christian worship. You can't actually understand Christian worship without understanding the Jewish origins of Christian worship. So from my perspective, the thing that is always obvious is the continuity between what I see as the Old Testament and Jesus, and the present time. And that's not just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm? 

MICHAEL VASEY: That's not just sort of-- there may be Christians, though I don't think I've-- I've known too many-- by Christians, I mean people who are actually not cultural Christians, but people who believe in Christ and the Bible, in the message of the truth of biblical religion-- who don't come to terms with the fact that there are Jews-- that the Jewish nation continues to have a religious and real life after the time of Jesus. That's obviously never been an option to me. And thought again, I suppose I'm not, in a formal sense, very learned about it. I've always taken care to try to read myself into that sort of area. 

There's a German theologian-- I don't know if you know his name-- by the name of Moltmann, Jürgen Moltmann, who was-- whose-- I mean, I quote him because, in a sense, he says things that I think have always been in my bones. But his comment is that-- I suppose that both-- that Israel is a son to the Church, that the Kingdom of God has not yet come, and Israel, meaning the Jewish community in post-Christian times. 

And also that the Church is a sign to Israel of what God has actually done. So I think the present reality of Israel has always been a thing I've actually had to come to terms with religiously. I'm not sure-- [COUGHS] 

I suppose I could have a go at articulating what I think, but it's not what you've got me-- got me here to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's your family name again? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Vasey. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Vasey-- the Reverend Michael Vasey, I want to understand the continuity in you. 

MICHAEL VASEY: In me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: In you when you-- the cord was struck and that film was presented, you found something. And you had to make some link between these poles-- not opposite poles, but obviously they're two different-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, it's obviously-- I don't actually feel about them as different. But to me, the whole of history is the unfolding of God's promise to Abraham, to which the Christian church is an heir, and to which I, personally, am an heir, and to which the Jewish nation is an heir. And I think of myself as a member of a Jewish family who is a Christian, as well as, in a way, I'm part of a Gentile family who is a Christian. 

But actually I have no gentile-- I mean, I have no family except for my father on my Gentile side. So from the point of view of that short embodiment in that of flesh and blood people, it's only Jews. That's all the family I really have. 

So I don't actually feel a discontinuity. I just feel this is my family. This is people with whom I'm a part. And I suppose I-- it's led-- I think I have followed a fairly strict policy ever since the time that I became a committed Christian, of making it known that I come from Jewish family, and doing so early. 

If I ever preach in a place in which I'm not known, I make quite sure that it comes-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Well, the preacher has to use great variety of ways, but I mean, either I talk about a Jewish wedding I went to the other day or I remark that I come from a Jewish family, or something like that. In any case, I believe in introducing myself as a human being to the people to whom I talk, and not just being a disembodied voice of authority. So that's been-- in a way, that's been quite a strong part of how I've functioned and conceived of myself anyway. 

I think I'm very aware of the fact that Saint Paul, who is the person who took the Christian faith from its Jewish base to the Gentile world, was Jewish. And in a sense, in his theological education, the most profoundly educated of the first Christians. And that's a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, push me again because I'm-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --pushing. I'm still struck by this moment of the film shown, and the British family, and you had to leave. What-- what came alive? What-- why couldn't you stay there? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I don't think that anything came along. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What knocked on the door, in particular to the Holocaust film? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I suppose I think that there's a lot of violence on the television when one watches it. And one watches it in a detached-- where, you know, you see a film of some Central American republic where they've shot another 15 people in the street. And you actually watch it in the same frame of mind as you watch any gangster movie, really. 

And I just, in my bones, felt that it was wrong, inescapable, that one would watch the film about the death of one's own relatives and people in the same way. And that it would be wrong to do so, and that I wasn't going to do so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because it was a drama? If it was-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, I don't-- I don't actually think I'd have watched straight documentary film, and on the whole, haven't done often. I suppose one has done sometimes. I'd be more likely to do it in the case in which it was actually part of a serious moment of reflection, rather than sitting with a family who wouldn't immediately understand what was going on in my mind, watching what's just a television program, amongst a lot of other television programs. For all the fact that it would probably lead to a serious conversation afterwards. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What reflection-- can you tell us more? 

MICHAEL VASEY: [CLEARS THROAT] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is something crying in you? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, but that's partly because, you know, detached Englishman, as well as other things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Pardon? 

MICHAEL VASEY: That's partly because I'm a detached Englishman, as well as other things. And you won't easily get beneath the skin of that. Partly because I'm tired and that's the end of the long day, and if you actually got me, it probably wouldn't be now. 

I think you'd-- I mean, I think as a person, my emotions and my thoughts about my emotions, are actually detached from one another, and they do meet. But I don't know that I actually easily show to people the points at which they meet, so what you would get is the articulations about what I feel. You're not likely going to get what I actually feel because that's the sort of person that I am, I think, which is a part of having been alone a lot. Because I was away from school, from home since the age of nine. And I'd only been on my own, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: From the age of nine? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Right. Usually rootless, usually living, to some extent, as an alien in another community. And I developed a way of coping with it which doesn't quite lightly be laid aside, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Living as an alien in another community? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, that's been true in a lot of ways-- my father, a political liberal. I'm related to that, therefore not part of the colonial world. I was very conscious at school of coming from Jewish family. I-- probably my first move to real, articulate Christian faith came, in part, because I was teased for being Jewish at public school, in the days when English public schools were sports-centered. 

And I had polio as a child and was left-wing in my views, and interested in science and literature, and certainly interested in sport, and had no intention of joining that. And in a sense, that I was known to come from Jewish family, that I have a nose is plausibly Jewish to English public school boy, was enough to be teased for being Jewish. Which had the result in me that I began to read the Bible seriously. Though, I suppose, because I was baptized and because of the experience I've met with some people who-- the experience that I had of some people I met as a youngster, who really believed the Bible, in a sense, I read, what is to me, the Old and the New Testament as a continuity and not a discontinuity. 

| was very politically minded as a youngster. And the book-- the book in the Bible which first gripped me was Deuteronomy, and it remains, I suppose, a book that I read again and again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know it in Hebrew? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, I don't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's [INAUDIBLE] that's [INAUDIBLE]? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]? 

MICHAEL VASEY: It's the fourth book of Moses. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] is that [INAUDIBLE]? It's-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: I have only smattering. I mean, I only know a few words of Hebrew, and that's not amongst. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think that's [INAUDIBLE] That's where all the rules are, the laws and the rules. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, there's also a collection in the middle of Exodus, Exodus 20 to 24. And there are quite a few in Leviticus. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm thinking of Leviticus, I'm sorry. 

MICHAEL VASEY: So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is the-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: It's the last text, so it's the exhortation of Moses on the banks of the Jordan, before he dies and the people enter the promised land. It is, therefore, a better summary of the covenant. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So it's last, so it's the fifth book. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Sorry, it's the fifth book. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's the fifth book, yeah. 

MICHAEL VASEY: It's the fifth book. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That would be-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Deuteronomy, in the fifth book, but it's interesting, recently, I had to talk to a women's meeting in Durham, the north of England, where I live. And I discovered that I'd actually written out large, so I was trying to think about how I'd got to where I'd got. 'Cause I had written out large sections of Deuteronomy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of what? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Of Deuteronomy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Deuteronomy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. Which sections? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Oh, well, it's random, really. I think, particularly, both the-- the bits around some of the hortatory bits in chapter 10, in the 10 commandments. And then some of what I suppose people would now think of as the enlightened social legislation around chapters 23 and 24, 25-- things like gleaning and so on. 

Which, in a sense-- I mean, as I thought about it, you actually there see God shaping the social institutions of a society, and doing so in a way that conflicts with laissez-faire capitalism, because he actually interferes. He says that society is not thought of the normal-- I mean, the logical thing. If a man owes you money, is that you take what he owns in payment of a debt. What the law actually lays down is that if [CLEARS THROAT] what he owes you is his last garment, that you can take it, but that you must give it him back at night. 

And I suppose the lawyer in me enjoys the sort of games that, in a way, later, rabbis have played, deciding when that applies and when it doesn't. But the principle behind it, and profound-- this-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you spell it out? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Well, I think it's two-- there are two principles that operate in it. The first is the dignity of the human individual, and particularly, the dignity of the individual within the community. Those are the-- that's the first. 

Then I found myself attracted to socialism, the idea of human interdependence, which, in a sense, is there in Genesis 2. I was attracted to the idea of the dignity of the individual, man made in the image of God, and wrestling with the idea with how these things can be reconciled within a human community in a way that either didn't destroy the community, or destroy the individual. 

And reading Deuteronomy and trying to imagine the society that lies behind us, it seemed to me that you actually had, in the principles that underlie that, worked out in one social situation, a social vision that preserves the dignity of the community and the dignity of the individual. Basically, because it has a high enough view of God behind it to preserve the dignity and place of birth. I suppose-- I mean, I think that's the answer I'd have given you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But there's something that's in this book, which is Moses arriving at the Jordan River. 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Go on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [CLEARS THROAT] 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, I don't-- I don't how much Moses-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he is not allowed, or-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, that's right, I see-- 

He's not allowed to enter the promised land because the people have driven him to impatience. I mean, it's difficult because I suppose I now know the book-- I mean, it's an important book to me now, as well as being and important book to me then. Yes, ask me your question. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Again, an alien in a-- can you repeat that? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, I don't think I can. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you thought an alien-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: In communities that are not my own? I think that's true. And I suppose I've felt that to be true about myself at a few levels, both politically, a half-Jew, and then a Christian. And to that extent, I mean, it was-- in as much as I see it, it's the whole human community, Jews and Gentiles, that crucified Christ. 

If you're part of Jesus Christ, you're actually, to that extent, an alien and an incomprehensible feature in the rest of the human scene. So, I mean, that's-- I mean, you might disagree with that way of looking at it. But in a sense, perhaps I need to tell a bit how I became a Christian beyond that. I started to read the Bible carefully after that, and was very influenced by the writings of a man called CS Lewis. 

I was at the same time a scientist and reading William Blake, and the sort of things that are pulled together. I then went to Balliol, which is a college in Oxford, a very-- this was in the 1960s, in the days of the student revolt, and it was probably the most left-wing college in Oxford. And found a college in which the principal was a Marxist and the senior student was a Marxist and the college porter was a Marxist. And I was never going to be a materialist, really, after what I discovered. So whatever I was, I wasn't-- I wasn't that. 

And there was a small Christian group which used to meet week by week to study the Bible and to pray extempore, which I found-- to an Englishman, that was excruciatingly embarrassing. But they were the only Christian group. There was a college chapel, which had a chaplain who was an old man, who I know very well. And in a sense, whose commentary about this Christian union was that they made be a bit narrow, but they were the only people who cut on the ice Christianly, and I should stick with them. 

And I found them to be a people-- a group of people who had a quality of life not found anywhere else in the college. They were not remarkable people in the main. There were some very-- some exceedingly able people amongst them. I mean, a man who's now an associate professor of philosophy at Princeton. And probably the most able of them will end up holding a high academic posting. In Britain, though he's not actually doing that at the moment. 

I actually-- I don't know where they would stand on the American religious scene. Probably somewhere between fundamentalists and Lutherans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You found your group, your roots with them? Was that it? 

MICHAEL VASEY: I joined-- I used to go to their meetings. I knew the Bible probably better than most of them, and was endlessly argumentative, and was not going to concede on any point without being satisfied in establishing my own mind. And so I stayed. And I didn't-- for about-- the chemistry degree in Oxford is four years. 

And about my third year, I was beginning to be persuaded that I couldn't-- that if Christianity was true, then what was true was historic Christianity, not my attempt to rewrite it as it seemed acceptable to me. The thing was either false-- in a sense as the scientist in me reading this way, partly. But also that I'd actually tried to rewrite it. Rewrite it morally, rewrite it philosophically and doctrinally, and found that-- that I couldn't escape my conviction that there was something here, and that the thing was not malleable. You couldn't actually change it. 

I shared at the time digs-- do you understand-- lodgings with a very patient, quiet fellow chemist. I was reading chemistry. And I'd already begin to discover the book of Jeremiah, which as I mentioned, my favorite part of scripture to this day. And a book that, I suppose-- I mean, this is obvious-- has a lot, in a sense to say, to the Holocaust and how. That whole era, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's the prediction of the prophecy of the Holocaust? 

MICHAEL VASEY: No, no, not-- but in a sense. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

MICHAEL VASEY: Can I come back to it? I see why you press me, but, in a sense, I don't want to get there immediately. In any case, William decided that the Christian union would study the book of Jeremiah for a term. 

And knowing that I was interested in it, got me to lead quite a few of the studies, which made me read and think. And instead of argue, I actually had to decide-- make my own estimate of the book, and of the man. I suppose I was initially fascinated by the man, Jeremiah. I suppose not least because you see the-- an intensely sensitive person who is asked by God to prophesy into a time when his people are destroyed and judged. 

I mean, I don't know how well do you know the book, but you get those marvelous-- but there's that passage in chapter eight, I think it is, where in two successive verses, he reacts with horror against the sins of the people, and with anguish against what the Babylonians will do with them. And it's fretted of course, in his own life. "Sing to the Lord. Cursed be the day on which I was born." And I suppose I'm an introvert, a slightly depressive person, and I identified with that. 

In studying Jeremiah, I suppose I'd-- when I started it, I was persuaded that Jeremiah was a very sensitive man. When I finished it, I was persuaded that he would have recoiled from that description of his own prophetic activity. In the book of Jeremiah, if you look at it, gives a real description of what it was like to receive words from God. 

And that was a very important intellectual breakthrough to me, because it actually meant that I changed my view of scripture, not seeing it just as divinely given, in the sense that God typed it. But that I actually believed that God had been active, revealing himself personally and verbally in scripture, as I see it, in the New Testament as well as the Old. I've stopped, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- here's Jeremiah and the prophecy of doom that he-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, do you mean how do I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to try sunsetting things. Moses was banned as-- in order to-- and turned into a total wanderer. It's one, I puzzle about your response to that film. What did that call out in you, who you really were? 

MICHAEL VASEY: You know, I think-- I think it'll highlight something. I don't think, in a way, it discovered something that wasn't always a part of me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. What-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: I don't-- yes, I don't quite see-- I mean, you could be asking me the question of what did I think God was doing in Hitler? That's a question you could ask me, isn't it? Yeah. 

Or you could be pushing this-- the picture of an alien. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

MICHAEL VASEY: It's the second, is it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who finds in that topic, in that, his homeland, from which he tries to flee-- 

MICHAEL VASEY: Yes, I didn't think I read Moses particularly as that, even if I read other parts of scripture as that. I suppose the difference, probably, between a Jew and a Christian on it-- no, I won't start there. First of all, I think a mistake that the Christian church has often made which is always disastrous and is often led, of course, in Eastern Europe to pogroms and things, is to baptize nationalism. 

And it gains a certain plausibility, because as I see it, God has actually made nations. And just as the family is part of God's plan for us, so through the wider community is part of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

MICHAEL VASEY: And you see that actually in Jeremiah, in Jeremiah 29, where the Jews in exile are told to pray for the welfare of Babylon, to seek its welfare, because in its welfare will be their welfare in time. But I think that's always wrong and a dreadful denial of biblical religion and of Christ and of God. 

Having said that, I think the difference between a Jew and a Christian lies-- it seems to me that Jews-- this world is not their home, and they can't actually escape that. They-- they try, but it's inescapable because they're God's people with a supernatural call in a world that actually denies God's authority, and will not acknowledge him or relate to him. And that's inescapable, as I see it, that they-- that, in a sense-- I mean, psychologically, that's led to lots of things in their lives and so on. But that ultimately, that's something that a Jew cannot escape. 

For a Christian, it seems to me the situation is similar but not the same. And the reason is that a Christian believes or knows that the messiah has come, and so he therefore finds himself a pilgrim with the messiah. There is a sharper tension between what God is now doing and what God will do in the final dawn of a completed messianic age. 

And I think that actually does change the precise tone of what it means to be an alien for a Jew and a Christian. And I'm conscious, myself, living halfway between them. If there was persecution of Jews in England tomorrow, I'd put out a dog-- I mean, who knows what you'd do. But what I imagine to myself I would do is put on a dog collar, which I don't often wear and go and join it, I mean, go join the Jews who are being persecuted. 

But I'm still conscious of two strands of alienness, and-- I don't know what I feel is different. I'll tell you what's just been normal part, of my Christian experience which I think is probably not a normal part of Jewish experience. I suppose the mystical Hasidic sects might be exceptions. It would be things like the certain knowledge of forgiveness, would be one, on the basis of something that God has already done. 