SUBJECT: I try to feel no hate to anybody, because I know hate wouldn't do me any good. It would just eat me up. And I won't accomplish anything with just going around hating people. But I try to live with it. When I came-- when I came out of it, out of this thing alive. And my wife and I, we got married, and we promised ourselves that we're going to start from the bottom. 

And it was very hard. I got, God bless, a nice family. And I still don't hate nobody, no matter what they did to me. Because see, I know, because hate will destroy me eventually if you go on hating, you'll eat yourself up with it. And you can't bring back the people. You can do nothing about it. 

If I could reverse this whole process, I would try to hate and try to reverse it, but there's no way. So you try to make the best of it, try to forget it, and try to live. Start from-- start from the bottom up. When we came to the United States, we didn't know-- I didn't-- couldn't speak, read, or write. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why were you afraid to come here today? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't bring it out. I was afraid I'm going to break down, I'm gonna-- I'm gonna relive this whole thing all over again. I lived for-- I lived with it for five years. And all these years, I forgot about it. I tried to put it on the bottom of my mind, way down there that should never come up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Except for nighttime. 

SUBJECT: Nighttime, that's beyond my control. I just somehow I start screaming. My wife has to wake me up. And sometimes I can hear myself scream. I don't know. Somebody is chasing me. All it's got to do with Germans chasing me. Somebody's after me. Somebody is trying to catch me. Somebody is always-- and then I start to howl and scream and my wife has to-- she wakes up and she wakes me up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know where you are when you wake up? 

SUBJECT: When I-- when I wake up, I didn't even know what happened. I said, how can you wake me up? She said, you were screaming. And then I forget what I was screaming all about. And that's how I try of bury these things. I wouldn't-- I'm getting older. I don't want to remember it no more. So. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Soon after the war, did you remember a lot more or? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, I kept living with it. That was the thing. I had to sit down and talk to myself and debate. Should I go on hating or should I start all over again? Should I live or should I do what? I couldn't go back to Poland. I couldn't stay in Germany. I couldn't get into Israel. I had to go someplace. 

The next best thing was United States. Far away from everything. Start stuff from scratch. And I think it helped, because you can-- you cannot survive, work, take care of a family, and have this thing-- thinking about this thing what happened to you. You cannot live like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there anyone you talk about these things? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your wife? 

SUBJECT: My wife very seldom, very seldom. Once in a while we had some different-- we talk about different incidents that happened while we were together. That was the happiest time of my whole camp. But we never talked about anything else, because I don't want to-- I don't want to start hating again. I hated long enough. It's time to-- It's time to stop and think about yourself and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Faymann, if you told me what you don't want to tell me, you would begin to hate? Is that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Somebody you would hate? Somebody? 

SUBJECT: I would-- I don't wanna hate nobody no more. That's the way I came out of camp. I was hating the whole world. Not just the Germans. 

Why did they let it happen? The whole world knew about it. They saw the ovens in Auschwitz. They saw the ovens in Dachau and Birkenau. And nobody did anything about it. They just figured, it's only Jews. Let them-- let them die out. 

So normal people would hate. And I don't-- I just want to get away from that. Because you can't-- you can't live all your life and hate people and hate everything, hate everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you-- if you told us to somebody what happened to you, do you think you'll be heard? People will understand what you're Saying 

SUBJECT: See, I-- I had ulcers. I came out of camp with ulcers. And that's because the hate was eating me up. I finally got them healed up. I don't want to start up all over again. So I don't want to go too deep into my-- with my memories. Because I might get hurt again, all over again. I hope you understand it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Absolutely. 