SUBJECT: OK. The type of people who were with me was kind of a mixed bag. There were people from small towns with very little education. There were people who were, previously, before the war, presumably, very religious. But somehow, they lost their belief during the war. 

There were people with PhDs and physicians who didn't act like civilized people. When it came to fight for a piece of bread, they could have killed you. There were some people who were stealing other prisoners' rations. And vise versa, there were some people-- you never expected-- who would show tremendous humanity. 

INTERVIEWER: What helped in your experiences? 

Strangely enough, as I said before, I came from a fairly assimilated home, not religious. In the camps, I became religious. And I believe that, were it not for my belief in God, that I wouldn't have survived the camps. I had the hope-- and I strongly believed in it, and I still do believe-- that in the afterlife I'm going to see my family again. 

One friend, in particular, who came to Skarzysko from a horrible concentration camp, Majdanek, where he was serving in the dead body disposal squad, fellow they called them [INAUDIBLE] became very attached to me. He was older than I was. And probably thanks to him I-- I survived the war. He helped me out to fend for myself, to defend me, helped defend me. He showed me how to organize things. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you mean by organize? 

SUBJECT: Organize, this is a-- a jargon of the camp, which meant to steal German property. For instance, steal a piece of wood to light a fire in the barracks while it was cold. If you were passing by some fruit trees by the road on the way to-- to the factory, when the guards weren't looking, you picked up an apple that was-- that fell off the tree. 

We organized, for instance-- and he was really clever in it. We, in essence, stole an entire tent that the Germans were using for storage of some equipment. We cut it up in pieces and made knapsack, which we sold to other inmates for a piece of bread. And these knapsack were used to carry the metal dish that each prisoner had to carry, or his rations. And this was very essential, is how we organize the tent, we cut it up into pieces, made small knapsacks, and we just traded them-- bartered them-- for pieces of bread. 

Now, this fellow-- he had horrible experiences at Majdanek. He never fully told me about them, but he was always crying out at night. He came-- 

INTERVIEWER: In the concentration camps? 

SUBJECT: In the concentration. He came to the United States before I came over here, and in the process of two three years became very prosperous. He had a-- two or three supermarkets. He started as a grocery clerk, and-- and he ended up owning two or three supermarkets. But then, one day, he committed suicide. He jumped off Manhattan Bridge. But I owe a-- a great deal to my friend, [? Benha ?] [? Rosenzweig. ?] 

INTERVIEWER: Was he like your father or brother? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: He was like your father or brother? 

SUBJECT: Brother. 

INTERVIEWER: A good person. 

SUBJECT: I can say that the camps stopped me a lot, and matured quite a bit. And I'm glad I didn't lose humanity in-- in the camps. I think I helped several people to survive. I know, in Germany ,in Schlieben, when several of my friends got ill, and were taken to the prisoners' hospital, where no food was given to the prisoners, I shared my meager rations with them. I know for one fellow who definitely survived because of-- survived because of me. 

INTERVIEWER: I wish to come back to your friend. You cried. 

SUBJECT: And I cried because-- 

INTERVIEWER: What you felt in your memory? He survived-- 

SUBJECT: I felt that he survived the war. Yet, because of the war, he committed suicide. He could never adjust himself, even though, on the surface, he was a very successful businessman, would you call. In two or three years, he achieved what many people would have considered a lifetime achievement. He became financially successful, but mentally, he could never get readjusted. 

INTERVIEWER: You have been in contact with him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I was in contact with him. As a matter of fact, how I found out about it, that he sent me, in a package, some money and a letter that he's jumping off Manhattan Bridge. But he still thought of me, when I was here in this country, on his way to commit suicide. 

INTERVIEWER: He wrote you why? 

SUBJECT: No. It just says I'm jumping. And I thought, initially, that he is skipping the country, for some reason. I think, maybe-- I don't know, maybe he was in financial trouble or something. But now, he literally meant that I'm jumping off Manhattan bridge. And they fished out his body. 

Back to my religion, I felt that there is God. Despite the terrible things that happened to us. I couldn't deny the existence of it never. 

I remember, after the war, when I was liberated in Theresienstadt, there was a big pile of religious articles, tefillin, prayer books. And I just thought, where are the people who own them? And I picked a pair, never use them ever since. And I don't know the persons who own them. And the prayer book is an old prayer book, printed in Prague, Czechoslovakia. Who knows who had them? But I didn't want the chain to be broken. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you sometimes imagine to yourself what happened? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I couldn't picture the person. I don't know. The book was-- it's falling apart, must have been used many times. But I'm glad I'm using them. It's a big pile, mountain, thousands. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you a feeling that you have kind of duty to the thousands, that you are presenting them when you are praying? 

SUBJECT: | don't know. I don't analyze it. 

INTERVIEWER: But now, when you cry, when you imagine this, when you thought about them, thousands of [INAUDIBLE], of prayer books. 

SUBJECT: I don't know if I have the duty. I just feel I'm continuing something that was started. It's symbolic to me. Do I have a duty to them? I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: You told me also about tefillin that you had. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. On this one, I meant I had a tefillin and a prayer book. It's a very small, tefillin, I'd never seen any that size. And many a time, I was just wondering if there are Kosher or not. They have to be handwritten. And conceivably, that could have meant photographed, which wouldn't make them kosher. But I don't want to open them up, find out. Because I am so attached to them. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you talk about your liberation? 

SUBJECT: The liberation came on the last day of the war. And again, I cannot speak about the fact, but, again, these were the rumors that circulated in Theresienstadt. I have to tell you that I was liberated in Theresienstadt. In the last month of the war, in April, we were evacuated from Schlieben. And on the 20th of April we came to Theresienstadt. 

But there were rumors that the entire camp was mined, and was to be exploded, except at the last minute the SS commander made a deal with the Swiss Red Cross, and they gave him a safe conduct to Switzerland, that he won't explode the camp. On that camp, there were, for instance, some allied POWs. There were some Canadian POWs, in Theresienstadt. Me I don't know if they came in the last days of the war or something, but-- 

And we were liberated on the 8th of May. We heard a battle going on, the sound of cannons. And finally, it stopped. And we saw-- first, we noticed the disappearance of the SS guards. Some of them change into civilian uniforms, civilian clothing. And we just ran out, not knowing where to go. 

And some people stopped the-- some of the retreating Germans. Some people behaved abominably. I could say I didn't raise my hand, I didn't hit a single German. And I don't regret it. I-- And this may come as a surprise to you, I don't hate them. But some people, they were terrible. 

There was one man-- a prisoner, he stopped a group of Germans, and singled out one young fellow, must have been 18 or 19. Of course, without weapons, etc. but just was in his-- still in his uniform, [INAUDIBLE], and he just started hitting the man, hit him in the face. And his eyeball popped out. 

But I don't feel any hatred for the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Were those in SS uniforms, or-- 

SUBJECT: No, No. These were on the Wehrmacht uniform. You very seldom saw anybody in a SS uniform. They knew it better. 

INTERVIEWER: To change? 

SUBJECT: Change. But these were the Wehrmacht people, regular army. 

INTERVIEWER: You are stressing that you are not hating now the Germans, but then. 

SUBJECT: I wasn't hating them then. If I were hating them-- 

INTERVIEWER: Feeling hatred. 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I'm sure if I-- if I felt strong emotion at that time, I would have hit them, killed somebody. Other people were acting in this way, but I didn't. I-- I didn't feel. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? What do you think? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: What is the reason that you [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Think about it. 

SUBJECT: Probably, I would say that there was a group of people who were responsible for it, but I couldn't just say that everybody was responsible for it. And I couldn't actually identify somebody. If I, for instance, if I saw this man who shot my grandmother, I probably would have hated him. But not knowing the individual, I just couldn't say, arbitrarily, I hate you. 

| know, for instance, some people say they couldn't go back to Germany now, visit because the recollections or I don't find myself in that position. I don't think you can blame in one generation after-- for something that happens in another one. And you cannot blame the whole people for something that was committed by a group of people. 

That's probably the way I analyze it now. But I am describing how I reacted at that time, and probably this was done, just without any benefit of analysis. 

INTERVIEWER: So is this something which is in consciously, how it is in some nights, You know, do you...? 

SUBJECT: Dreams. I don't know. I cannot-- I don't remember all my dreams. I know I-- I am screaming a lot. I know, during the day, many a times, I develop a very severe headaches, which are probably precipitated by some recollections. Some of these headaches last for three or four days. And no medication relieves them. 

I have nightmares. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind? 

SUBJECT: Being followed by somebody, being chased by somebody. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember a specific dream? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't right now recall any specific. 

INTERVIEWER: Which is repeating itself? 

SUBJECT: Do they repeat themselves? Some of them do. But as a chase, and I'm being followed, and-- Sometimes, I'm facing a firing squad. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you relating in your [INAUDIBLE] life to the Holocaust? How you are living with it. 

SUBJECT: I'm afraid it may happen again. I'm afraid for the safety of the state of Israel, which is probably related to the Holocaust. I identify myself very closely with the hostages in Iran. I have great empathy for-- for the feeling of helplessness that this may endure. Nothing is being done to save them, which is analogous to what happened to me. The world stood by, and we were dying out. 

I have a strange-- I don't know how to describe, a strange-- I would say, an obsession. In many a time, when I am in a business meeting, I'm looking at the people in the room, and somehow I am selecting, in my mind, people with German names. And in my mind, I see them in a uniform, not necessarily of an SS man, but the-- some German uniform. And I am just asking myself, how would a fellow like this had behaved in say, 40 years ago? 

INTERVIEWER: 40 years ago? 

SUBJECT: 40 years ago. In other words, if, by accident, his father or his grandfather did not come to this country, if he'd stayed over there, Mr. so and so, he would have been a-- could have been one of my guards. He could have been a-- could have been a-- this railroad policeman. So in my mind, I'm going around the room, I-- I'm just seeing the face, and say, well, that face on the uniform, how would he have acted? 

And don't misunderstand me, there were some Germans who were-- weren't inhumane. There were some, I work with some of them, in-- in Schlieben. Some of the carpenters, they brought me some food. They gave me some encouragement. They told me what they heard on the news. So not necessarily means that they were all bad, but I'm just, in that analysis, I'm just looking at these faces around the room, and I say, gee, same face, 40 years ago, in a different environment, how would he have acted? 

INTERVIEWER: OK, tell now about your life now. 

SUBJECT: Well, I am an engineer. Actually, I'm a manager of engineering For a large company in the United States. I am married also to a survivor of the Holocaust. We have two children. My wife is very active in the various Jewish and non-Jewish social organizations. And she is devoting most of her life to lecture about Holocaust at various universities, high schools, churches. 

We have a-- in our community, we have organized a Holocaust Memorial project, with library of books about the Holocaust, films. Local high schools are teaching courses on Holocaust. I would say that there's a great awareness in our community of what Holocaust did, not only to Jews, about the potential of it occurring again, and how to guard ourselves about not letting it happen again. 

I would say, on the surface, we lead a pretty normal life. And I'm sure anybody who looked at me in everyday behavior wouldn't say that I am a survivor on the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER: But how do you see yourself, [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: With what respect? 

INTERVIEWER: As a man, as a human being. 

SUBJECT: I think I'm a good human being. I-- I am compassionate, which, to me, is the first prerequisite for a good human being. We-- I hate to-- just to label myself as charitable, but I think we are very charitable. We-- I don't think this, I should talk about this thing. That's against our precept of our religion, should be given anonymity. I am still religious. 

I don't know what else you-- I can say. I have a variety of interests, and we don't live very ostentatiously. We're very well accepted in our community. We are considered to be the leaders of the community. And we have a whole slew of friends, primarily, thanks to my wife. She is more social animal than I am, more extroverted. And I'm I am more of an introvert. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much. 

INTERVIEWER: And thank you for the gift. 

SUBJECT: It was a gift for every one of us. 