INTERVIEWER: You don't have many adult experience? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I was first taken to camp in '39, so I was 29 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: Ah. Well, let's-- we will start with that. With that. You were from Germany. You have to say where you were from and all that. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: I-- 

INTERVIEWER: As soon as he's rolling, we'll-- we'll-- we'll-- we'll-- we'll do this. 

SUBJECT: My mother-- 

INTERVIEWER: Wait. Wait. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: All right, we're rolling. Start off with your name, and-- go ahead. 

SUBJECT: I am Joan Bauer. I live in Boynton Beach. I was born in Mainz, Germany, which is near the French border of Alsace-Lorraine. 

I was first taken to camp in 1939. One of the reasons that I keep on talking about it now in 1980 is this here. This was on all of my clothes. I framed it, and I wrote down, "They never come back? Never?" 

I've been doubtful all these years whether there will be an occurrence like that was. A catastrophe. I know it is impossible to prevent it all over the world, but if we survivors keep on talking about it, it might be possible to at least prevent it in this country. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in Germany at Kristallnacht. What happened? Start with that. You were 29 years old. Start with-- 

SUBJECT: At this time that happened, when a young, mentally deranged, foolish young man shot-- uh, the attache of the-- uh, the-- uh, the German embassy in Paris. He died two years later. And Hitler took this occurrence as a reason to get all the people together and start burning the synagogues down, breaking the windows, the displays in the stores, Jewish-owned stores, and also some homes. And the streets were lit up with glass. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Oh yeah. My parents had a hotel, restaurant. My father's partner was shot to death. His wife received some shots and was later on rescued and hidden and has survived. My parents were not shot but beaten and stamped with those heavy boots unmercifully. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I saw my parents. They were black, totally black. Their faces, their bodies. 

My father's liver was damaged. It took him nine very painful months to die. My mother died six weeks later. She couldn't live alone without my father. Uh, my mother was 57, my father 58 years old. 

Um-- by now it was '39. Hitler had started invading Poland, and the war started-- for Europe, not for the United States. And we were taken-- I was taken to the first camp, which was a forced labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing before that? Be-- 

SUBJECT: Before that, I was a designer. I was trained in France for millinery design. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were working in Mainz? 

SUBJECT: I wasn't working. I was married. I only had received training, but I got married very young. 

Uh-- Then, the first labor camp. We packed vegetables, fruits, which were sent for the troops in large bags. Uh, second labor camp was a camp where we could still sleep at home, but we had to be in the morning at 5 o'clock in this camp. There were very, very strict foremen and overseers, and we sewed uh, rain uniforms for the Rommel Army. 

After that-- that was the second camp. Third camp was Theresienstadt, or Terezín in Czechoslovakian. Uh, they have this camp in the film Holocaust. 

I want to inject this for anyone who has seen the film. When I saw it, it looked to me like a resort place in comparison to the way it really was. This was a very old, uh, Austrian garrison town with the dust in the houses, and particularly in the attics, was actually eight inches high. The houses were hundreds of years old. And it was, of course, overloaded. 

This was a very small garrison town. All the room we had was a third of one mattress. In Europe, the mattress are not one piece. They're three, actually four pieces. One, two, three, and a wedge as the headpiece. So each one of us had one third of one mattress in the middle of this dust. 

We stayed in Theresienstadt-- uh-- my first husband, myself, our immediate family, which was a total of 11 people. I am the only one who has survived this. The 10 others are killed, including my first husband. 

From Theresienstadt, we were sent to Auschwitz. Or Oswiecim in Polish. I was lucky, extremely lucky. I stayed there only 10 weeks. 

At the time when I was there, nobody survived more than six months of it. After six months, these people were sent to the gas chamber. I was there 10 weeks. 

Then Hitler actually ran out of people to work for him cleaning the streets, working in the factories, and so on. So he started to collect transports and sent them back to Germany for work. We were in this train four days and five nights. No water, just two slices of bread, I remember. 

And I was with-- only with Czechoslovakian girls. My first husband was Czechoslovakian. And they hoisted me on their shoulders, and I looked out, and to my great amazement, I had arrived back in the town from whence I came-- in Hamburg, Germany. 

We were sent to a camp called Anthaber, because it was actually already outside of the actual town, and marched every morning for our work miles and miles. Uh, we repaired oil pipes, pipelines. We unloaded barges with uh, bricks. And we built houses, emergency houses. Uh, we did all kinds of things. 

One day we were taken from that camp, 1,200 of us, and sent to a smaller camp, where we again did some kind of work, mainly cleaning out the center of the town, which was heavily bombed, and were taken there. And so from one small camp, I was sent to another one. 

The last one before Bergen-Belsen, our commanding officer had fired-- or had her killed. We never found out-- his cook. Since I come from a hotel and cook like a professional, he knew that, and he selected me, which is also the reason why I survived, because I ate the same food that he got, the commanding officer, whereas all the others ate the food of prisoners. 

But on the other hand, I suffered very much, because he broke my back twice beating me. Uh, once because I had written and smuggled out a letter, and, uh, instead of-- the man who found it, instead of mailing it off, gave it to the commanding officer. So he sentenced me to 16 lashes. But I didn't beg for mercy, so he kept on beating me and broke my upper back. 

And with that, I had to work. If I wouldn't have worked, he would have killed me. So to this day, I cannot walk straight. As a matter of fact, I was seven months in a wheelchair, unable to walk. And only uh, very good care of an interesting doctor-- an interested doctor-- brought me back to walking. 

The second time-- we had fish twice a week. And there were 55 guards. And if anybody ever cleaned 220 fish and then fried, knows that it's easily possible to leave something in which should have been taken out. 

Unfortunately, the commanding officer found a little piece in that fish that I should have taken out, and he sentenced me this time to 20 lashes. And I got more than that, close to 30, I would say. And he broke the lower part of my back. This particular part is still giving me trouble. 

And then we heard the guns. We know the British were coming. We saw the end coming. He never admitted. Nobody ever admitted it. But we saw and we heard. 

And we were loaded into cattle cars and shipped to Belsen-- Bergen-Belsen, which is close to Hanover, the center of Germany, and not very far from Hamburg. But it's only about maybe 120 miles. 

And that was, I would say, the hardest thing, because a few days before this transportation, the front of a department store had fallen on the streetcar where our girls were transported. With these street-- I wasn't in there. I was a cook. But about maybe 500, 600 of our girls were in these streetcars, and a wind came up, a sudden storm, and the house itself was only-- the front part was the only thing that was standing. 

It fell on the streetcar. Killed 84 of them, some guards too. The rest of them was injured severely. Our commanding officer was raging, and he had been in a bad mood anyway, because two of the girls that were there had been pregnant. One had already given birth. The other one was about to give birth. 

He made me boil water, and I thought to myself, this is just like you hear in films. Boiled water. But the water wasn't to have that-- the act of giving birth. He drowned the newborn in this boiling water. Then he came to me for a box, from margarine or something like that, and that was the coffin for the newborn baby. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw him kill the baby? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, I did. Oh yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say anything? 

SUBJECT: Did I say anything? No, I didn't, but I knew that I would have a chance to say something, and I did. I will tell you about it. 

Well, anyway, the injuries that the rest of the girls had received was-- was unbelievable. And now we were in this cattle car with those, uh, near-death people from this accident. And it took five days to drive or be in the car to travel 120 miles. That's all it was. We were in the middle of a battle, and two or three of these cars were actually hit by guns on either side, either British or German. Greeks were in these cars, and they were all killed. 

We finally arrived at Bergen-Belsen after being completely starved and in terrible condition. It was about the 25th of March, about. They opened the gate. We were let go in. 

Nobody looked at our number. Nobody counted us. I said to my girlfriend, this is the end. If we don't make it out of here, that will be the end. We heard the battle going on during all this time. 

INTERVIEWER: You had a number? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You've tried to take it off. 

SUBJECT: It has been taken out. Because I worked in New York in a very fancy place, and people asked me morning till night about it. So I-- But I could not totally take it out, because the ink had penetrated down to the flesh. 

I stayed in this camp, losing weight, getting weaker. On the 15th of April, 1945, we were liberated. I was unconscious, because I weighed only 72 pounds by that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Even though you had eaten well up to that-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, but I was starved from the middle of March to the middle of April. Uh, hardly anything to eat. Uh, we had no water. We had one cup of soup, watery soup with one potato swimming in there. That was our total food. 

So later on, the girls told me that first came a tank, then came a car with a loud speaker. And a Czechoslovakian sergeant and man I later met, said in 15 languages, ladies and gentlemen, you're free. That was the end. 

I stayed in Belsen, refused repatriation, although my parents, my German background goes back to 1458. I have the papers. My father's background. My mother came from Alsace-Lorraine and was a first cousin to Captain Dreyfus. His father and my mother's father were brothers. 

So I did not want to be a German anymore. I learned English. I never had an English lesson. I learned it from the British soldiers who liberated me. And three months afterwards, I knew enough English to start working as an interpreter. 

I worked first for the British and later on for the American Joint Distribution Committee in liaison between the Immigration Department of Joint and the American Consul General, who issued the visa for an immigrant. In 1946, when all the soldiers had returned and the first transportation was available for us, I had a visum for the first ship, but the American consul asked me to stay on a little longer, because there were very few interpreters. Until I could train somebody else, I did do that. And I left Germany on the 6th of September, 1946. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back, Mrs. Bauer, to your early life in, uh, if we may, in Germany. You were-- after all, you were a mature adult when the war broke out-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --and when the Kristallnacht occurred. Talk about your-- your life in Germany. Do you ever feel anti-Semitism? What happened back then-- 

SUBJECT: Did I ever feel anti-Semitism? 

INTERVIEWER: In 1930, 1933, 19-- 

SUBJECT: Well, yes, of course. Hitler came to actual power after having had many years of trying to come to power. On the 31st of January, 1933, that same night, a group of maybe 10 or 12 SA men in uniform came into our hotel. 

There was a big library. They took the books and threw them into the, uh-- the back of the house. They went into my room. I have been collecting books since I was a very small child. And they burned thousands of them. 

That was the beginning of the anti-Semitism you talk about. I still remember my father saying, they began today because that's also the beginning of the end. The minute you burn books, you are not going to be successful. And it- it-- that's how it was. 

Now, things became worse. Every year, something else was taken away from us. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- tell us about it. 

SUBJECT: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us a-- 

SUBJECT: Typewriters. Sewing machines. Bicycles. Radios. Uh-- the curfew was declared for us. And one thing after the other came like this. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh-- describe this. You mean in 1931 it began for you-- 

SUBJECT: '33. 

INTERVIEWER: '33. And then edicts? How did-- why-- about the typewriters and the bicycles? How-- 

SUBJECT: Well, Hitler just felt that the Jews don't deserve all this. He-- we all read his book Mein Kampf. In it, he says that he would destroy us. But nobody who has been there for so many years, whose family background goes so far back, would believe that. 

By that time we really saw what he meant, it was too late, because my brother-- I had one brother-- had left as a very young man for South America. He lived in Montevideo, Uruguay. My father, although having brothers-- one brother-- and two sisters here in the United States, only wanted to go and live with his son in South America. My brother was unable to get the necessary papers to go there. 

And we just took whatever came. No bicycle? No bicycle. No sewing machine? No sewing machine. We just took it all. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't anyone think-- 

SUBJECT: Waiting. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't anyone think to protest? Was there no-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. There were there were groups. There was a bomb group in-- in, uh, Germany. If you are interested, I possess a book-- their book-- which names all of the different books-- um, different groups aside from the actual Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. But it describes all these different groups. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, what did you see? What resist-- 

SUBJECT: What did I do? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: Well, let me tell you what I did. In the first camp where I was, I said we had to fill these high barrels. I remember spinach, for instance. There was, um, something a little bit bigger than this room. You waded into it, and you cleaned the spinach. 

And we filled the big barrels. I looked around, and as soon as I saw nobody watched me, I took the sand that I had just taken out and shoveled it into-- back into it. This is one-- my-- it was my way of getting back. And all of us did something like that. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what I was asking is what did people do back in '33, '34, '35 when they saw that bad things were happening and they were being abused? 

SUBJECT: Many, many left. Many left. There were not many German Jews left-- German Jews-- left. 

The first ones Hitler deported were those that were, uh, not of German birth, people that lived in Germany but were, let's say, Polish or Russian or whatever. Those he deported first. He did not touch the German Jews-- their lives. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. But Mrs. Bauer, we think here in America, we're very safe, we're Americans. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt you were in Germany, very safe, you were German. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw things happening about you that were very disturbing, ways in which Jews were being singled out for punishment or for discrimination. Did you do nothing? Did no one do anything? 

SUBJECT: We couldn't. What could we do? What could we do? Think of a town that has close to 2 million people. Germany, at all times, even before Hitler, had only 1% Jews. 1%. 

Now, many of them had already left. I have relatives-- have had relatives. They've since passed away-- that came here in the late '20s. I've had one uncle here that came here 1894. Now, the ones that were left there, those very few-- we were helpless. We couldn't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what I'm asking you is, weren't some of the other people alarmed-- 

SUBJECT: Germans? 

INTERVIEWER: Germans. Alarmed by what they saw happen to Jews? Why not? 

SUBJECT: No. No. First of all, to understand that, you must know the German mentality. By that I mean, all of them, Germans in general, are like a herd of sheep that follow the lead ram. That's number one. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: The German mentality. That's a fact. And then, at a time when Hitler came to power, there was what I would call political chaos. Total chaos. There were something like 120 different political parties. 

And he promised-- many, many out of work. Conditions were terrible. And he promised to get them back to work. And he was voted in and started out to do just that, put people back to work. 

The Autobahn, or highways, that they have now were began by Mr. Hitler. That was his program. So at first, the first two years or so, except in isolated circumstances like the people coming into our house and burning the books, this was a rare occurrence. This was something that didn't happen to others. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they select you out to do this? 

SUBJECT: Because a hotel, restaurant. Uh, a private person, they would not think of going there. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't there friends, neighbors, people you bought from that were outraged by this occurrence? 

SUBJECT: Of course they were outraged. But Germans didn't do anything. They don't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends who were not Jewish that you discussed this with? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, of course. I still correspond with them. They were here to visit me. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- 

SUBJECT: But they couldn't do anything. All they could do is send me packages when I was in camp. 

INTERVIEWER: I meant-- after the books were burned, what did they say? What did you talk about? What happened? 

SUBJECT: We talked, but it had to be closed and uh, soundproof, because a young man would denounce his father. A neighbor would see that his neighbor was taken into a camp or in to jail. The chaotic situation there is something that, as Americans, we cannot-- I know, but in general, Americans in general cannot believe it. Uh-- it has been shown in films. 

INTERVIEWER: But I want to know what you saw, what you felt, what you knew. 

SUBJECT: Well, I saw it every day. 

INTERVIEWER: Saw what every day? 

SUBJECT: Saw what every day. Saw-- Today I cannot take the, the-- the streetcar. I have to be home at 9 o'clock. 

I have no more bicycle. I have no more radio. I have no more wedding band. It all goes. They took all this from us. And I couldn't do anything. 

My husband, as well as I, decided that we will stay with my parents and go wherever they want to go. And we were waiting for the visa to go to South America. So we suffered through all of this where others left. 

It was an awful lot of immigration. You have a lot of people from all over Europe that immigrated from Germany or wherever they were. And others decided-- it would have been easy for us to come to the United States. 

He had brother-- a brother-- a wealthy brother. Two sisters. My father didn't want to go. He wanted to go to his only son, who was in Uruguay. 

INTERVIEWER: When things got very bad in '37, '38, '39, what did you see? Now they had done more than just taking things away. What did you see at that time? 

SUBJECT: Well, '37 was-- uh-- we had to let our maid go, who had been with us for many, many years. That was actually '36. '37, [SIGHING] it was hard to get food. We had food stamps already at that time. 

That was the beginning of the food stamps, '37. And we got less than the general population. Being Jewish, we got less. 

'38, [SIGHING] Huh. '38 was-- uh, you could see. You could see that things got from bad to worse. You could see it. And yet I couldn't do anything about it. None of us could do anything about it. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you see it? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: What did we see? I couldn't go out of the house. If at 9 o'clock I was in this building and I want to go to the next building, I couldn't. If I-- If I had to go home, I couldn't take a streetcar or any other transportation. 

Uh-- The-- He had riled up the general population to that such extent-- this is why I do not believe that they weren't Nazis-- because he had riled up the entire population to such an extent that, uh-- you just couldn't do anything. You had to be afraid of everybody. You had less food. They were afraid of each other. There were non-Jews afraid of their own children. 

Uh-- This was a madman who was leading a group of misfits, half-idiots-- Genius. A genius. One. Goebbels, who at the same time was one of the worst of them all. 

And yet, we couldn't do anything. We had to wait. America issued visum like you give eye drops. One here, one here, one here, one here. There was the Evian conference. Maybe you know about that. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear Goebbels speak? 

SUBJECT: Many times. 

INTERVIEWER: What did-- 

SUBJECT: Goebbels didn't speak very often, but whenever he spoke, you heard it over the radio. Goebbels was the speechwriter of Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you hear? What did you think? What did you feel, as a Jew? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I felt as a Jew that my days are numbered. And if the papers from South America don't come soon, it will be the end for all of us. They came. They came in June 1939, uh, four months or so before my father died. My father, as I said, was in excruciating pain and near death already at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: From the beatings? 

SUBJECT: From the beating, which he received in November '38. We packed our things in what we called a lift, which actually is a tremendous wooden box where you put your furniture and your belongings in there. And it was taken to the ship. And we went on the ship at night. 

It was supposed to sail the next morning. During the night, during that particular night, there was a revolution in Uruguay. In the morning, we heard over the loudspeaker of the ship to all come to this and this deck, assemble there. And we were told all the people who have papers for Uruguay, leave the ship, because all our papers were null and void. That was the end. 

Now it is the end of June 1939. First my father died. Then my mother died. Then I was taken to the first camp. We were unable to do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when they took you off the ship? 

SUBJECT: What happened? I found two furnished rooms, one for my parents, one for my husband, myself. We never got our belongings back. They were auctioned off. 

I later got $110 for everything. They claimed that's what they got for it. Amazingly, they had papers for it. 

Um-- At first, we didn't do anything, hoping that the new regime of Uruguay would issue new papers. But the war started for Germany in '39, the end of '39. And so it was the end, the beginning of the end. My father died. Six weeks later, my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: And-- 

SUBJECT: Then I was taken to camp, and then from one to the other to the other. In '42, my 33-year-old husband was taken from me and put into a-- not '42, '43. Put into one of the transports that went back for work into Germany. We did not have shoes. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you in '40? 

SUBJECT: Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You were together in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, but not together. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: We were not together. We were both in Auschwitz, but not together. Uh, the men's transport left first. It may have been the beginning of '44, come to think of it. It was the beginning of '44. Right. [COUGHING] 

We had no shoes, and we had to walk in the streets that were filled with glass and rubbish, because the bombs fell night after night after night, mostly British at that time. And so what we did-- most of us did-- we found a piece of wood, we tied it under our bare feet, and that's how we walked. 

My husband had done-- I found this out later, because some of those fellows that went to this camp came back. He had this tied around his leg-- his foot, and the cord rubbed his heel. It started to get infected. 

He could not walk anymore. He could not work anymore. They shot him. He was 33. [COUGHING] Or 34, maybe. [CLEARING THROAT] So when we were liberated, I found out that I'm a widow. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with from this? 

SUBJECT: What am I left with? I have a marvelous life. I marriage, in '49, a wonderful man. I have worked at first as a designer, in my profession. 

Then I found out that it isn't worth it to make ugly women look beautiful. I'm going to do something more worthwhile. And I worked for 21 years with blind, mentally disturbed, crippled people until I retired. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- What gives you that spirit to want to help other people? Can you-- 

SUBJECT: That was very important. Extremely important. I had a lot of things to be grateful for. 

Number one. We went into the camp 11. I'm the only one that came out. The 10 others are dead. So I was alive. Even partly crippled-- I still cannot walk straight. 

And number two, I am in America. This is very important to me. I went from the justice who had just sworn me in to the Red Cross to donate blood. And then we went to have lunch. I first donated blood, and then we went to have lunch. 

INTERVIEWER: When you got your citizenship. 

SUBJECT: Out of gratitude. Right. And I felt I got to do something for America and for people that are less fortunate than I am. So I taught blind people, mentally disturbed-- some of them dangerously disturbed-- and crippled. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in these camps, one camp after another, how did you maintain your sanity? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. That is a very good question. I had a friend, highly intelligent man, who said that now, when we are here, you have to look straight ahead if you have blindfolds or blinds on like a racehorse. Only look straight ahead. Don't look what's going on on either side of you. 

And become selfish. I'm a very unselfish person by nature. And I am again today. But I was, during the time in camp, a very selfish person. 

I did not let concern anything going on around me. I didn't let concerned it myself. I just lived, looked, but I didn't feel anything. I became selfish. And that was the only thing. 

That's number one. Or I should say luck is number one. That was number two. 

And number three, my inherent curiosity. I wanted to see the end of it. I made up my mind I'm going to see the end of it. I did. That's it. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- Do you trust people now? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I've had a very, very intelligent father who used to say, "You must first think that everybody is bad until he says-- he convinces you that he's good." And my answer was, if that is so, if you really mean that, then I don't want to live. I was 12 years old at that time. 

But he only tested me. Later on, and during the course of the years, he says, "You must think that everybody is good, and only if he's bad, don't like him anymore. As long as he's good, it's fine." 

INTERVIEWER: Do you believe in God? 

SUBJECT: [INHALING] I believe-- well, that also a very good question. I come from a very religious home. I went to Hebrew and Jewish philosophy classes from 6 to 18 years, 12 years. I cannot go to synagogue today. I see my parents in the condition they were-- my very religious, good parents-- and I can't go. Yet I do believe that there is a supreme being, but it isn't what it was when I was young and believed. 

INTERVIEWER: When you saw-- did you see people go to the crematoria? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Did you ever hear them singing? 

SUBJECT: [INHALING] We all sang. 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT: We marched and we sang. We, uh-- [LAUGHING] We marched to work and sang the Marseillaise, and the dopey Germans didn't know what we were singing. That's what we sang. 

Uh-- we did everything-- you had to have something to hang onto something. We hung on to the fact that they are not as smart as we are. And so that's why we did all these things. 

To give you another idea about how do you get satisfaction, how do you-- what do you do after you have no guns, or no means of retaliating in any way, what do you do? You go and you sabotage as much as you can. 

So we had a house to build-- houses to build. Many. And there was one plate-- pre-fabricated-- one plate that had a hole in the center. Through this hole went the, uh, pipe into the stove. Well, we built the whole house, but that one plate, we dropped. The house was never finished. That was one of the things we did. 

We unloaded, uh, barges with, uh, bricks. Well, two, two, two, one to the next, to the next. When he looked away, we took the same bricks and put them down again. And then up again, down again. That barge never got unloaded. 

We repaired, uh, oil pipes, which were ceramic. We had a pick ax, and we made room, and then we repaired the hole. The minute he turned away, we made a new one right next to it. Those are the things we did, little-- little things of sabotage that give you the feeling that you, after all, are not a sheep. You're thinking for yourself. 

As I said, I cooked for 55 soldiers. We had mostly horse meat. Only horse meat for the prisoners, but also for the guards, which I had to repair-- prepare. 

There were a few steaks. I ate one of them, and my commanding officer got one out of horse meat, which I put there. He never found out. 

I could have been killed many times. But you see, you had to have something to hold onto. Something. And we-- that's what we did. 

We-- You cannot-- How can you-- weakened, without any means of fighting, not even a stake-- how can you go against people equipped with tanks and all that? It's impossible. Yes, you can walk against the electric-loaded fence, commit suicide. Many of us did. 

But I have never felt that way. I just was, as I said, determined. Determined. I-- I'm-- have a great amount of willpower, still today. Determined to see the end of it. I never would give up. 

As a last-- [LAUGHING] I must laugh, because it's funny. As a last act of defiance, the whole train that took us from the last camp to Bergen-Belsen was loaded. I was the only one who wasn't in there yet, because I had prolonged my cooking process for them. And they had what I call milk soup, which was a sweet soup with farina in it. 

And so the last day, I finished the soup and burned it. They couldn't eat it. Then I went into the cattle car. And the commanding officer said to me, listen, you are a very good cook, and the minute the war is over, I'll get you out of the camp, and you come to my house, I'll buy you a nice uniform, you have your own room, and you can cook for me. So I was-- the door was this much open. I said to him, "You should live that long!" And I pushed the door closed. That was the last thing. 

Then, when I was an interpreter, and I knew what he had done with the babies, I went to the commanding officer. And I got together the commander, two sergeants, three corporals, and myself. And I still see myself with a gun. I couldn't shoot. Just uh, holding it. I was in uniform, and I knew where he lived. 

And we got him. And he was sentenced to five years of hard labor and let go after a year. I never told them that he beat me. I did not think that important. But I told him about the two babies. That I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Was humor-- you-- you told a joke. Was humor any part of your ability to survive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my particular part, yes. I have a great sense of humor. And today, we laugh about the situ-- except when it comes to my parents. I can't joke about that. But about my own happening, what happened to me? Yes. 

I have a sister-in-law. We call each other "goat"-- "ziege" in German, "goat." Why? Because we ate the grass. We had nothing to eat. We ate the grass. And we constantly joke about it. 

And even at that time, when things are happened, when things were going on, we joked, because there was nothing else you could do. You could either see all the things, feel badly about them, be affected by them, and eventually either become mad or die for one reason or the other. Or you could glide over it, joke about it, not see it, and just go on as best you could. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: That's what I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Your Jewishness. Did you ever hear anyone speak or sing Jewish songs, prayers, going to the-- 

SUBJECT: To-- to the camp? Into the camp? No. I heard many people sing Polish songs. That I heard. Not Yiddish, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Hebrew? 

SUBJECT: Hebrew? No. They-- most people that spoke Yiddish, speak Yiddish, still here, they don't speak Hebrew. 

INTERVIEWER: Some people said that they used to sing Ani Ma'amin when they went to the camp-- to the crematorium. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Some people-- I know that, for instance, those that were selected-- the selection process in Auschwitz was something that I also have in-- in a book. [SIGHING] There were about, let's see, 20 women that had to be totally undressed and run in front of a selection committee. Those of the women who had, for instance, varicose veins, they were selected for the gas chamber immediately. 

I don't have any. I still don't have any, even in my age. And I was selected for work. But my girlfriend's mother, who was a doctor-- she was about 40 years old. She was sent to the gas chamber because she had varicose veins. 

Those people that were sent to the gas chamber, they said the prayer of the dead. Others sang "Eli, Eli," for instance. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember "Eli, Eli"? Do you remember them singing it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- Can you tell us how it goes? Can you sing it? 

SUBJECT: I cannot sing anymore, no. But I-- It's a pity that you're not in my house. I have all this material. 

INTERVIEWER: But just say the words. Like-- 

SUBJECT: Eli, Eli, lomo asavtoni. With Feuer und Flamm, hat man uns gebrennt. And I don't know any. I have a marvelous record of it. Amazingly, it's writ-- it's sung by Johnny-- Johnny-- what's his name? Mathis. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the-- What do the words mean? "Eli, Eli"? 

SUBJECT: Eli? God. Eli is God. It's a lament, actually. What happened to us? Why do you let all these things happen to us? But this song does not stem from Hitler's situation. That comes from pogroms in Poland and Romania and Russia. 

INTERVIEWER: But they sang this going to the gas chambers? 

SUBJECT: They sang it. It's one of the most famous and important songs. Some of them sang it, yes. Some of them sang Kol Nidre. Do you know what that is? Uh-- Many people believe that it is, uh-- Many people believe that it means all sins. It does not. 

It means all vows that I have given. The fact that I have promised to be a non-Jew, a Christian, Kol Nidre comes from the time of the malaise in Spain. And that, some of them sang, the words. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember that, them singing it? What did you feel when you heard them sing? 

SUBJECT: At that time, I was already hardened because of my parents' deaths. And I knew where these people were go-- will go. We knew they were sent to the gas chambers. We knew. We saw the chimneys. 

We smelled bones that are smelling-- if you, if you pass a little fire, somebody has put on a fire, and the bone smell-- this-- this smell, today, still gets me sick. They, uh, would sing, and know, at the same time, what would happen. But there was nothing they could do or we could do. We just had to take it. 

There was no way, particularly not in Auschwitz. I mean, that was simply impossible. Uh, Bergen-Belsen, we had nothing to eat. No food, no strength. 

The other camps, oh, yes, we did what we could. As I told you, we sabotaged whatever we could. And in those camps we didn't sing, remarkably. We were too tired. 

When you have to get up at 4:00 in the morning, march for three hours, work for eight hours, march three hours back, you don't sing. You sleep. And first we had to wash our coverall. 

We had no underwear, nothing. And no shoes. Just like, uh, like a mechanic wears. That's all we had. And we had to wash it every night and sometimes put it on frozen and stiff and wet and damp and go back to work. 

So you couldn't sing then. All we would think of is slice of bread we get, plate of soup, or whatever. That is all. The survival, the sheer survival is all you had in mind. You couldn't think of anything else. 

You could think of religion. And we were not only Jews. I was with nine uh-- novices. I guess you know what that means. Postulates. Young women who were about to become nuns. 

There were, with us, nine of them. And they were very young and some of them very pretty, and they were sent in Auschwitz into a house with nine little cubby holes, and the soldiers went there, one after the other, day after day. It was a bordello, a whorehouse for them. 

INTERVIEWER: They violated the nuns? 

SUBJECT: Yes, all day long, morning to night. That's what they were there for. So then, after liberation, we were put into-- I have given you one of the pictures there-- into one of those houses, and three, three, and three of the nine had three rooms. And one morning we came in, and they had all committed suicide. All nine of them. 

Look at Goebbels. You asked about Goebbels before. Goebbels was a man with a clump foot, uh, tiny, meager, ugly-looking man. Highly intelligent. He was, uh, left in front of a small monastery by his parents. 14 monks-- or 18 monks, I'm not sure anymore-- in this little monastery, they took him in, they saw his genius, they went out begging-- this was a very poor order-- went out begging and educated this man. 

And his first act after he came to power with Hitler, he took these 18 monks and had them killed. That was his first act. So it wasn't only the Jews. 

Our commanding officer, whatever you want to call him, in Auschwitz, in this particular group, was a criminal, a murderer, an eight-time murderer from Hamburg. A most handsome man, but a murderer. Not Jewish. 

He was killed, too. Why? He went once to the nuns, and they weren't for him. They were only for the soldiers. So they killed him. 

So, uh-- you see, with a logical mind like yours, or other people who try to think this out, you are looking for a certain way of-- a rule that's being followed, of a certain way they did things, they had thought out and would do things. There was no such thing. They would improvise at first, and then, when they were successful, follow that, enlarge it, do something else. There was no set rule that you could say, oh, this one here comes by every night, let's drop uh, a big stone from the roof on top of him. He might not come ever again. 

It-- There was no rule, no set rule. One: kill the Jews. You know, the first thing Hitler did, he emptied all the mental asylums of anybody. Nobody was left there anymore, Jewish or not Jewish. He emptied them. They were, uh, a class of people that did not match his master race. 

We were the next. The Gypsies. The Jehovah's Witnesses. And certain Catholics. Communists. There was no rule. Just killing, that's all. That is, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yet it was a very ordered-- it was a planned extermination. It was-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, they had to plan it, because-- you see, to-- to exterminate the German Jews would have been a snap for them. There weren't many left. But there was Poland with a tremendous amount. There was Russia with a tremendous amount. 

There was Hungary, Romania. Very few Italians, very few, uh, Dutch people, Belgian people. So he had to go methodically, and he was helped by German industrialists and even by one American, which we know of. 

And so, many, many were killed. Many. More than our human mind can comprehend. I can tell you about a family of 11 or a congregation of 300 or 400, and your mind is able to understand it. 

But when it comes to figures like 5, 6, 8 million, and you think that, for instance, 3/4 of the city of New York is suddenly empty, our mind cannot comprehend it. It's impossible to understand. This is why it's better to talk about a certain group of people or a certain family, like they've done in The Holocaust. 

The Holocaust, that was the one good part of it. Otherwise, the film was not very good and idealized too much. But I can understand it, because if they had shown it the way it was-- really was, nobody could have looked at it. It would have too horrible. 

Can you understand that? So therefore, it is impossible for the human mind to really comprehend the situation. It's just simply impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think it could happen again? 

SUBJECT: Well, I'm doubtful. Can you read it from there? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: I have written this-- I have not stopped talking about it, to the great dismay of my husband, who always thinks that I suffer too much. I have to suffer-- oh yes, when I think back. But I feel I have to keep on talking and inform people. 

That's why I think this program will do so much good. If we are able to tell a lot of people about it, maybe at least we can prevent it from happening in this country. We can't be responsible for other parts of the world. That we will not be able to do. Just look, uh, how the situation is today. We can't do it. 

But at least here. Let's try. 

