INTERVIEWER: It's-- it's-- it's-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: It's one of those strange things-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --that's like, people denying-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --in a way. I know-- I know what you're saying there. 

SUBJECT: Well, take my wife. Because-- because of that, she survived. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. I realize that, but-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: I think we ought to say that because it doesn't matter that Mr. Schwimmer had dark hair-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --and he said he didn't look Jewish. He looked Polish. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And she-- missus-- and-- and-- and Schipre said she didn't look Jewish. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And Mr. What's-his-name, Mende Schliefer said he didn't look Jewish. So you know, nobody looked Jewish, and they were the only ones that s-- I think we ought to clear that up. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? Because otherwise it looks-- it sounds-- 

SUBJECT: No, I-- then maybe you could cut this out. 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, no. I don't want it cut it out. I don't want to cut out a thing. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: I mean, I just want-- I want to understand it. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? So you tell me when. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Any time 

INTERVIEWER: OK, go ahead. Explain that about-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I would say this. They want what they looked Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say "look Jewish," do you mean their perception of what Jewish is? 

SUBJECT: Well, Jewish people, I would say 70% or 80% in Europe had a dark-- darker complexion. Here in the United States is entirely different. You have complexions. Italian have the same complexions as Jewish people. Or you have here in the United States all kind of nationalities. In Poland, you have not so many nationalities. It was very easy to recognize from a dark complexion to a blond complexion. And if somebody in Poland was that time a blond complexion, and when he spoke the language well, then he had a chance to do something with his personality with himself. That was a help. Doesn't mean that everybody went through-- everybody lived through because you-- you looked Jewish. But some of them, one maybe of 100,000, had a chance. And I was maybe one of 100,000. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back and pick up the story where you were. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Where was I? 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They surrounded the ghetto. And in the morning, the Germans, they-- because we-- that time, in 1942, were 60,000 Jewish in Czestochowa. Really to say, we had only 40,000 Jews till 1939. But why we had so many Jews in 1942? Because from the small towns, they brought them in. And because of that, we had so many of them. Then they start to liquidate by sections. I know I was-- wherever it is the dangerous situation, I tried to be always the first one. Then I said to myself, well, they liquidate the ghetto today, I going to go to that section where they are liquidating today. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I want to get over with. Number one maybe why, because I had in the ghetto, some Jews had working papers. I worked. It means I worked for the Germans. I had working papers. 

And I had a brother, and this I will never forgive myself. Even if I want to, I can't. I had a brother. He was 16 or 17 years old. He was taller than I. He was bigger than I. 

And I said to him, son, brother, you haven't got no working papers, and I am afraid that you will not be able to survive. Come on. Take a chance with me. Let's go together. 

Why did I take him with me? Because I had the working papers. And I thought maybe, because I going to go in this-- to the right, I know it. The people what they had their working papers, they're going to go to the right because Germans need people in the ghetto to finish the job, whatever they had to do. He agreed with me. And the same time, I said he's built, tall, then maybe he's going to have a chance. 

When I came to the gate where the selection was, then the Gestapo said to me, I show them my papers. You go to the right. I said this is my bo-- my brother. He gave-- he whipped me over my head. He said, he goes to the left. 

And from this time, I didn't see anymore my brother, or my brothers, or my sisters, or my parents. And bec-- I know it not my fault, but my conscience has bothered me. I got nightmares. I think all the time that young men, maybe he wouldn't go with me, maybe he would survive. That terrible tic. It's almost 40 years and still bothering me. I still got my brother on my conscience. God forgive me. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you then? 

SUBJECT: I was-- they sent me to a camp in Czestochowa. I was in that camp four or five months. One night, SS men call for everybody out. And that was the end of the liquidation of the ghetto. They sent-- they-- those people supposed to go to Treblinka. Then our transport supposed to have so many people in the 5,000. He was short 104 people. Then from that camp, he took out 104 people, and I was between them. 

INTERVIEWER: You were one of the 104? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Send us back to the-- to the transport, where those 5,000 people were. 

INTERVIEWER: Were your parents there? 

SUBJECT: No. No, they were not there. And we were there. We were waiting there for four or five days in a certain place. I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know where that place was? You-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, exactly. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you say "in a certain place"? What was the pla-- 

SUBJECT: That was-- it used to be a building for a union in Poland. That union used to be called the Zet Zet. Zet Zet was an anti-Semitic union. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that why you referred to it as a certain place? 

SUBJECT: Why they picked that place, I don't know. But I think they picked that place to put us there because it was enough to put together 4 or 5,000 people. When I came in there, I felt the end is coming. SS all around. Ukrainians all around. Polish Police all around. 

That was the end of the ghetto. That was the last end of the ghetto. The liquidation. Again, I and three of us, we sat down together. We said, again, we haven't got nothing to lose. We have to escape because that transporter's going to Treblinka, and we knew already what is going on. We didn't know 100%, but we knew from the rumors what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: What rumors? What did they tell you? 

SUBJECT: We need-- we know already that they-- because the German used to say that we are going to Germany in camps or whatever it is. But we had already rumors from people that it is-- they are liquidating Jewish people. It is a camp in Auschwitz, and it is a camp in Treblinka. 

So we-- I-- there was something in mine-- inside, like a devil. Let's see what you can do. Again, I-- I and three-- three follows, we sat down, and we start to talk. How can we escape from here? 

And we came to some conclusion. If we're going to st-- try to escape right now, they catch us. It's no good. But when the last minute when they're going to liquidate everybody, when they're going to take us to the train, to the transport, that time they're going to be busy with 5,000 people. Then maybe we're going to have a chance. 

We prepared myself. We made a hole in the roof. And we said, when they're going to start to liquidate, when they're going to start to take us to the transport, that time, we're going to try to escape. 

Which the time came was late in the afternoon. Very late in the afternoon. Maybe they did it so late in the afternoon, maybe people shouldn't see so much about it or should know it-- so much about it. I don't know. I and three friends of mine, we escape through the roof. Now, in Czestochowa, where I lived-- 

INTERVIEWER: Through the roof of that building? 

SUBJECT: Of that building. We went on the roof. From the roof, we nay-- we went-- went around to a different building. We did hear shooting, but nobody got injured. That was the ho-- that was still the ghetto. But nobody lived in the ghetto anymore. Everything was empty. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean that special place? That certain place? That hall was in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Was near the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Near. 

SUBJECT: Was connected-- 

INTERVIEWER: I see. 

SUBJECT: --with the ghetto. It was the first building connected with the ghetto. When we escaped, we went to a different building and to a different building, and we sat down over there. And again, what are we doing now? And we came to-- to a certain conclusion to-- we have-- to come to the end of the ghetto, we had to pass four or five more buildings. If you want to pass the four or five buildings, we couldn't pass in the inside. We had to go on the roof, and from one roof to the other, till we passed to the last building of the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you had any food? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: For how long? 

SUBJECT: Only-- this was only overnight. Then we-- when we passed, we came to the last building, where the end of the ghetto was, and we sat down again. What are we doing now? We are looking outside. We did see that surrounding with SS. 

INTERVIEWER: Even an empty ghetto, they surrounded? 

SUBJECT: Well, but around the ghetto because they were-- they surrounded because for looting Polacks, so it shouldn't come and take out whatever was left over there, whatever it is. It was-- wasn't surrounding so much when they liquidate together, but still were surrounding with SS or Polish Police. 

How can we come out from there? Well, we have to take a chance again. But when I sat down with the three fellows, I said to them-- and this I remember just like that was-- it was today-- it would be today. I said, fellows, if we go together, it's not good. They catch us, we'll lose our life. But if we go everyone separate, maybe one has a chance. 

Now, they knew that I know the city better than they do. I said, I'm sorry. And I just must say it. I can't deny it that if a person come in a such a situation, the person is selfish. The person is looking that time only for himself. In that time, I looked only for myself. I was talking to myself. 

And I said, we were a family from 96 people-- uncles, aunts, cousins, grandfathers-- and I'm the only one and I'm still around. I said, I going to fight till my death. And my generation should not disappear. At least one must live. 

And when I had the conference with those three fellows, and I told them that everyone has to do by himself, now how? The guards, the German guards or the Polish guards, they were not standing on one place. They're going back and forth. Then we had to take a chance that time when he was-- his back was to us. And we slipped out. From the roof, going in the building again. And through the win-- through a window, we came on the Polish section. 

INTERVIEWER: What season of the year was this? It's hard to-- 

SUBJECT: What year was that? 

INTERVIEWER: Season. 

SUBJECT: The season? That was in fall. I came out and the next strip was the police department. I just walked through straight. Walked out from the ghetto. Then I knew that is there some place the Polish underground. I was hiding for two days and two nights in-- in a park and trying to get in touch with the Polish underground. 

And I had a friend, which I did some business with him before, and I know where he lived. And I was near his door, and something was in me, telling me, don't walk it. I couldn't get in touch with the underground. I didn't walk into that friend, the Polack. I walked back. Hungry. Ate something, whatever I found in the park there. 

What do I do right now? I made a crazy decision again. I'm going back to that labor camp. Haven't got no-- no other way. To be outside, I haven't got nowhere to go. I went back to the labor camp. I went back to the labor camp. I came in. Again, dangerous to slip in to the labor camp. 

First thing I sawed, a friend of mine, which he is in New Haven here. His name is Pepper. His brother was on the same transport sent to Treblinka. I don't know. He doesn't know where he is. I'm sure he lost his life in Treblinka with that transport. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me. We have to change the tape again. 