INTERVIEWER 1: All right. You started to say the trouble is these-- 

SUBJECT: Well, the little things, um, are very hard to-- to remember in detail, uh, the kind of things that I might have exchanged with my father when he came back on his way to England. Uh, you remember the event. Uh, you remember the overall, uh, feeling of, uh, um, a change in the atmosphere in my father, uh, my father's views. Um, but I guess people very seldom, except in the movies, make heroic statements to each other. That's the problem. Uh, the act is heroic. The whole event is heroic. Uh, what happens to the family is heroic. And the whole thing is, in perspective, has all the makings of a-- of, uh, the kind of, um, radical change in-- in-- in views that people have about, uh, society, about life. But, um, um, I guess you're very-- you're very lucky if you have a-- maybe I was too young to remember a particular incident-- small incident which, uh, would reflect, uh, so centrally on-- on-- on that change, I think. Um. 

The problem, I guess, is that most people, uh, sort of react to a-- to a situation of that kind by saying, OK, this is how he's changed. Now what do we do next? Uh, they don't take stock as much as they should. Or they don't make generalizations as much as they should, that sort of thing, or what do we do now? It's like a-- a-- a-- a-- a mouse in a-- uh, in a predicament. Uh, where's the exit? And I guess our view at that point was, um, exit. At that point, the whole family was focused on exit, while previously, we were still focused on how do we survive? How do we, uh, live with this terror? Uh, it's incrementally gotten worse every year. But it may, again, if my father, who is, after all, authoritative, would again get better every year once Hitler has enough success. And um, now it became really a question of how do we get out. 

So after my father had-- had left, uh, for England, uh, in February or March of '39, then, uh, the question was, how do-- how do the rest of us get out? Now, we were supposed to follow him as soon as we could get our papers in order. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your mother went to jail. 

SUBJECT: My mother went to jail later. That was actually later, in, uh-- I guess we're getting two stories intertwined. Um, in terms of the sequence, um, March, '39, my father left. We tried to leave for England. And by the time, uh, the papers were ready, war came between Germany and-- and England, which was September, '39. So that particular avenue for the rest of us-- and that was my grandfather, who was in his, I guess, late 60s, um, my mother and my brother and I-- uh, we could no longer go. Then in that winter, the incident with my uncle and my mother occurred. My mother went to jail. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So that was already during the war. 

SUBJECT: That was-- yes, that was in probably-- in, uh, December '39. And, uh, we were left both of us with my grandfather. But there were relatives and friends who came in and, uh, provided us with, uh, you know, food and, more important than that sustenance, advice, uh, holding our hands and so on. And the other lawyer-- there had been two lawyers left in town, Jew-- Jewish lawyers. The other lawyer, I remember him, Dr. Youssef, uh, made a-- made several visits, uh, to, uh, get my mother released. And, uh, again, I think that, uh, within a very, very bad situation, uh, the fact that he intervened-- and he and my father had been sort of the-- the final remaining Jewish lawyers who were permitted to practice, and he had been a friend of my father's-- let them to let my mother out after, I think, six weeks or two months. And she'd just been in a normal person. She had not been, uh, in a camp or anything like that. In the downtown prison, as you-- you would have somebody picked up for-- for loitering or whatever. She had not been mistreated. It's just the-- the uncertainty always about what would happen. Would she stay there? Would she be sent to a camp? And the uncertainly on our side of what would happen to her was-- was-- was pretty terrible. Um. 

Then we-- to come back to the immigration, uh, uh, side-- we-- things, of course, were getting worse all the time. But, uh, uh, this was now wartime and ration books were out. And-- and you mentioned earlier that Jews had special rations with J stamped on them, and they were less, uh, than non-Jews. And, uh, some items we-- we couldn't buy at all. But still, it was-- you know, it was not, uh, starvation, but it was, uh, it was increasing deprivation, an increasing pressure. Um. 

My father then left England to go to the United States and try to get us to come over, uh, to the United States, uh, with the help of some relatives we had in the United States. Uh, we had several narrow, uh, misses. The sequence that I remember was we almost-- is that we almost went England, then war came. Then in-- when he went to the States in '40, he tried to get us over here. And we were in a, uh, uh-- we were getting our visa under the American quarter in Stuttgart, through the American consulate, when temporarily, at least, there was some break between the United States and-- and, uh-- and Germany in 1940, not war but a break of relations or some diplomatic impasse, which meant they were no longer permitting Jews at that particular moment to go to the United States. 

So I remember we were in the-- we were there to get our visas to leave. We had our tickets and everything paid for. Uh, and they said, no, you can't go. And, uh, I remember very well this was in the US consulate, and my mother broke down. I remember the American, it must have been a second secretary of the US Embassy consulate saying, uh, "Wenn sie weinen, muss ich sie herauswerfen," which translated as, if you cry, I'll have to throw you out, which I always remember coming from an-- from an American consular officer. I would really like to know his name. When I was later on in the State Department in high office, I would have liked to know who he was, but, uh-- always-- I always remember that one. Which-- which-- which leads me to the conclusion that, you know, these things are not, uh, the kind of attitudes towards, uh-- towards unfortunate people. It's not something on which, uh, Germany had the monopoly. Although the-- clearly, they-- that particular Holocaust experience is unique in some respects, I think we have to be on guard not only in not letting it happen again to us as Jews, but you have to watch about a Holocaust to anybody else, as well. I'm firmly convinced about that. 

Anyway, come back to my-- the main theme, which is immigration. Uh, we couldn't go-- leave-- leave Germany at that time to the United States. Then we tried to go through Vladivostok, through the-- there's another escape route through the Trans-Siberian Railway, which is the way some people have left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. We left. 

SUBJECT: And others, including the ex-secretary of the Treasury. Blumenthal went to Shanghai that way. Uh, well, again, we got ready to go. It seems like, uh, one of those Perils of Pauline. We had tickets. And I remember the-- were ready to leave when the headlines-- I remember the headlines in a German newspaper, "Treason in Moscow," which meant that, uh, it was a reason for a German attack on the Soviet Union in, uh, it must have been the-- in-- was that 1940? It must've been late 1940 when the Germans attacked the Soviet Union. So of course, that was the end of that particular escape route. And, uh, uh, everything was closing down at this point. 

And, uh, the only thing that was left was, uh, to go to-- through Spain. And so after very long further efforts, finally, uh, we left quite late in, uh, October, 1941, through occupied, uh, France, Spain, Cuba, and ultimately the United States. But that's just to give you the sequence of, uh, the many efforts-- failed efforts, uh, at, uh, immigration, which we initiated seriously, I think, for the first time with the Kristallnacht. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you have the money to be constantly buying these tickets? Uh, they did not confiscate your funds once your father was gone? No one to protect your resources. 

SUBJECT: Well, I think you should appreciate that the policy was piecemeal on that. For example, they would-- we had-- one time, we were supposed to bring in all our silver and gold. Silber und Gold Abgabe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the order? 

SUBJECT: I remember-- I remember the family talking about this new order. Uh, all silver and gold is to be delivered. Uh, order-- there was a-- an order saying you have to give a special, uh, tax. But it wasn't that all at once there was a complete expropriation. Uh, I remember sort of gradually it whittling away, but they didn't confiscate all one's assets until one left. Then, at that stage, all you could really take was, uh, suitca-- two suitcases and 10-- 10 mark. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When your family bought the gold and silver, uh, to wherever, were you with them? I mean, do you remember them packing it up? Do you remember-- 

SUBJECT: I remember-- I remember packing it, and I remember going with my mother because at that time, I had become sort of the head of the household in a sense. My mother was not a very strong woman. And, uh, she-- she relied on me pretty heavily, even though I was only 11 or 12 years old. So we did a lot of things together. I remember packing stuff up. And we wondered whether we could af-- keep some things like that were, you know, of religious, uh, significance, of family significance rather than value, but we decided it wasn't worth it. So we packed everything. I mean it wasn't worth taking that chance that they would come to the house and find that we hadn't given up all the gold and all the silver, you know. Germans obey orders, and we were ordered to provide all the gold and silver, and we provided all the gold and silver. Uh, there was-- I think they permitted her to keep her wedding ring. That's about all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were there people who sort of give it to German friends for safekeeping? 

SUBJECT: Uh, we-- we did not, uh, because, uh, you know, you have to have somebody extremely trustworthy and reliable. It's very risky to do that. Um, I know some of our friends did that. There were also some people who had sent things earlier when people had left, in the '30s still, when people-- when it was easier to leave with, uh, goods and with foreign exchange. But there was a so-called Devisensperre, blockage of all foreign exchange, and, uh-- I think as early as '35 or maybe '36. So, uh, the ability to-- to do that was-- was very limited unless you left it with a-- with an-- with an Aryan-- with an Aryan friend. And not too many Jews, I think, had-- which is very strange in a large country, uh, with-- with-- with so much assimilation. Still, very few Jews had enough friends-- enough trustworthy friends-- they could take a chance with on that score. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you go with your mother to wherever you had to bring this? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We had to go to Finanzamt. Uh, you know, the orders were sent by the-- by the political people, by the-- by the Gestapo, whatever, but what you-- where you went was just, you know, normal German officialdom, normal officials who handled all your ins and outs. They had nothing to do with this. It's just their orders, you know. That's the one you always-- thing you always found-- people always saying to you, well, it's very-- we're very sorry, but, you know, it's our orders. I guess that's what people, uh, like Eichmann used to say and their trial and-- and-- and much wittier things. But n-- nobody ever was in-- in charge. They were giving their orders. Where we went to-- to-- to-- I remember, to give our gold and silver was where we had to pay our regular taxes, like the IRS here. That's where we paid our gold and silver. And it was a, you know-- a normal kind of person who would-- who would accept your taxes. And this is simply the-- this had been ordered by a special letter by-- coming from another source. And, you know, you'd get-- get even sympathy sometimes, at least orally. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they give you a receipt? 

SUBJECT: I think they gave us a receipt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For itemized things? Or just that you came? 

SUBJECT: No, that we had paid. That we had delivered, not that we-- that they owed us so and-- so much. It was that-- that we had done our you know-- because one of the things that, if you ever want to leave Germany, uh, we knew we had to have a piece of paper which says that you don't owe. You've done all the things that were ordered of you, paid all your taxes, and-- and been responsive to all laws that were passed. So that-- you needed that piece of paper saying you've given your gold and silver up before you could ever hope to leave, among many other pieces of paper. That was one of the hardest pieces of paper to get for leaving Germany, that you had done all the things that were required of you through all the years of increasing pressure. You know, we were asked to do this and that and pay this tax and give up that. And if you didn't have all those pieces of paper, you couldn't leave. 

Uh, um, I forgot the name for that, but it was a very important piece of paper, one which that the state says that you have done all that was asked of you under the increasing, uh, uh, regulations, which were-- which were-- which were meant to, uh, squeeze you, uh, persecute you, and also to deprive you of, uh-- of, uh-- of your income and your capital. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any other orders to bring things or to do things such as that order? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think, uh, early on, when we still-- um, I'm not sure whether it was in connection with our effort to go to the United States-- uh, we, uh-- we thought we could, um, send a lift van of unaccompanied goods, uh, to the United States. That time, I guess, it was still-- it must have been still feasible. And, um, we were asked to, uh, make an inventory of what we wanted to send out. And, um, I remember that, uh-- that lift van was, um, sent to the free port of H-- of Hamburg-- Hamburg had a port which was a free port-- and it was supposed to be moved from there to the United States. And then one day, uh, we were told that the lift van had been confiscated in the free port, which was supposed to be sort of an international harbor. And, uh, we were asked to come down to-- to headquarters-- I'm not sure whether it was the-- which office it was-- to i-- to identify, uh, certain religious objects that were in lift van and claim them. And you could buy them back or something like that. They-- they then auctioned everything. But they needed us to buy back-- to buy back our own goods, uh, but only those goods which were-- which were sort of you know, religious value. Nobody else would bid for them, so we were able to buy back at low prices a small, uh, number of personal items. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you make-- 

SUBJECT: Everything else was confiscated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you-- where did you buy this back? Where were you? 

SUBJECT: Uh, well, back in Darmstadt. They had, uh, confiscated the lift van, uh, auctioned it, uh, kept a few things which nobody wanted to buy, obviously, because they were personal things, religious things, and sent those back to Darmstadt and permitted us to come and buy them back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh. Did you go with your mother to buy them back? 

SUBJECT: I remember-- I-- I remember doing that. I remember, uh, getting some pic-- family pictures and albums and things of this sort back. And, uh, uh, I guess the-- you know, initially, we, uh-- we thought, if we have a w-- meant there was a free port, and then we thought, well, uh, the, uh-- we would-- well, you know, also why do you get greedy? You just know you have no rights whatsoever. You know, one right after another, you're-- you're just beginning to realize that you're at-- completely at the mercy of whatever war-zone donations they make. But the funny thing is that Germans always tried to make it seem, uh, legal. 

They would say, you know, we confiscated this, uh, because that time it-- it couldn't be sent, and then, uh, it was sitting there and you would have had to pay high demerits charges. And you'd always have a reason-- a logical reason why they had to do what they had to do. And then they, um, uh, deposited the proceeds of this auction to our account. So, uh, you know, they confiscated the lift van, auctioned it, and, uh-- and they deposited, uh, the, uh, proceeds to our account. It was, again, you know, very trivial, uh, who's-- who bought these things. And nobody could have-- possibly look into that. So, uh-- and then later on, of course, that was also taken over when we left. But they were always-- the Germans have a-- a penchant for some sort of residual, uh, official legitimacy to the most illegitimate acts you could imagine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was-- it was 1938 your father was arrested, 1941 when you left. What happened to you during that time? Did you go to school? Did you-- 

SUBJECT: I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was your life as a child? 

SUBJECT: I kept going to school. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To those Jewish schools? 

SUBJECT: To the same Jewish school, with, uh, you know, increased, uh, um, hazard, uh, because the older you get, for one thing, the more you get beaten up, uh, the, uh-- and the more frequently. So it became a, uh, uh, you know, a traumatic, uh, experience almost-- almost daily. And yet the-- the feeling for learning was so strong that, uh, we did go to school. Um, I'm not sure whether it was, uh, mandated by the state or not. I think there is a truant law which applied to all the schools, including the Jewish schools. But still, I can imagine that, uh-- that, uh, sometimes we would have liked to stay home. But, uh, our mother, and I think all the Jewish families-- the attendance, in spite of all that, was-- was very good because we felt we had to-- we had to be educated in spite of the risks of getting-- having these incidents as we left, in spite of the sort of increased-- increased cl-- closing in on-- on-- on us of the-- of the-- of the situation. Um. 

I remember, uh, during that period, I had a friend who was atypical in the sense that-- atypical in the sense of that he was perhaps more courageous and more risk-taking, uh, friend of mine. And once, when we were-- we were having, um-- being chased by some of the neighborhood rowdies, shouting "Jude Jude scheissen in Tuete" as they used to say. Jew, Jew, uh, making-- making the in the-- in a bag. That's the way they-- it's a-- it's a-- "Jude Jude scheissen in Tuete" is a dirty word which says, Jew, Jew, uh, ma-- you know, make into a bag. You know, make a-- uh, defecate into a bag. That was the-- the common expression on the street. And, uh, they used to chase us. And I remember this, uh, kid. I was very impressed with that because he-- when we got to the door of our house and we went inside, and that was just the ends of sanctuary, you know, closing the gate-- he-- he took a, um, bag of, um, sand, gravel, whatever else, and-- and went out again after them. To me, it was a very big moment because we'd always sort of run, you know. We were always afraid, always, uh, uh, hoped that nobody would notice us. The biggest thing was not to-- not to evoke attention. That was what life was all about. Try to not be noticed. 

And he would-- he would, in fact-- he opened the door and engaged them. It It was a big revelation to me that this could be done. I guess this has-- you know, sort of in terms of what the Jewish-- the whole Jewish experience at that time, which Hannah Arendt and other people wrote about, I think, it's a very important question. Why wasn't there more of that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened with him? 

SUBJECT: Uh, at-- at that particular incident or in general? I think he-- he migrated. I remember his name was Hans. I don't remember his last name. His first name was Hans. And I admired him very much for that. Uh, he was not one of the better students. Uh, he was, a very unusual person. I think that I saw very little of that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did it make you think that perhaps there should-- that you should react that way? Or did it just further make you meek or timid? 

SUBJECT: No, it made me think that maybe I should have-- I only had the-- the courage of my convictions. It made me think that-- and, you know, sometimes I noticed, when you did stand up, uh, sometimes they would shrink back. Um, I remember there was also one frien-- another friend of mine who was in an upper grade in the Jewish school who would, uh, really fight back when the leaders attacked him. And-- and they sort of res-- respected that in a strange sort of way. Uh, they would, after a while, let him pass not because he was able to, you know, successfully beat them off. They were many. We were few. Uh, but somehow, that deviant behavior impressed them. Deviant from the point of view that very few-- few Jews did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they have, uh-- did the Hitler Youth or the Brownshirts or whatever they were, these gangs, did they have weapons? 

SUBJECT: Um, no. The only time I remember-- one time, uh, I think they were just beating us when we came out of the schoolyard. One time, they, uh-- they took us to a square nearby and tied us to a tree and threw knives at us. I remember that's the only time I'd ever seen it. I don't remember-- that was only once. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why do you think peop-- gangs of Jewish children didn't-- didn't organize and fight these gangs of-- of Brownshirts since they were children and you were children and they weren't armed? 

SUBJECT: They weren't armed, but they were, you know-- they were-- don't forget, the Hitler Youth was a military-- quasi-military organization. Uh, they were, you know, many, first of all, tough, second of all, and the idea that you would mobilize yourself as a group to fight a-- a vastly superior, uh, force of that kind in uniform, uh, I don't think it ever occurred to anyone. An-- an individual might have felt, gee, I'm going to not put up with this. And there were individuals, but I remember only two-- the ones I had mentioned. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were no uniforms for the Jewish schoolchildren? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the school-- Jewish school population remain fairly stable, or was there-- were there people that just didn't come one day, disappeared? What? 

SUBJECT: Well, people migrated. Uh, and, uh, there were some people who-- who-- especially in the-- in the-- in the rural areas, who, uh, came less frequently because, uh, they were-- there was even less security in some of the rural areas because, uh, in a big city there are at least other Jews. There was some camaraderie. If you live in a small town, you have that local enemy. You could be in-- living in serious difficulties. So we had-- I think the-- as I recall, some of the rural, uh, children came less frequently over time. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: They came in a bus? 

SUBJECT: Um, I'm trying to remember. Uh, I know they had transport. Whether it was a bus or whether there was sort of a carpooling arrangement or a train-- probably train-- by train. Uh, there weren't that many cars around yet. But I'm not 100% sure how they got there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They weren't attacked as a group, coming in every day by train? 

SUBJECT: Well, they would have the same problems that we were-- we did. And they-- and some of them had problems at the other end, in-- in their own town. Uh, they made it quite-- quite independent if they're going to school. It's just that in the-- I remember in small towns people told stories about sort of local vendettas, you know, local problems that, uh, people really felt they had a free hand to exercise whatever. Imagine the real past, uh, difficulties they might have had with each other by just, uh, taking-- taking the law in their own hands. 

Again, this was not a question of, um, people getting killed, but people, uh, you know, getting-- getting, uh, beaten up, getting, uh-- getting-- being-- things being stolen from them without recourse to the authorities. But it was not yet, uh-- it was just terror, uh, with the official-- uh, uh, official looking the other way, basically. And-- and-- and you couldn't tell where it would end. I mean, you couldn't tell whether the next day, uh, the same gang could-- could, uh, do you bodily injury or-- or kill you or-- or do anything else, or whether or not that would be-- where the boundaries were. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you didn't know where the boundaries were, how did you know they wouldn't invade your home? Once you got to your home and shut the door, you felt safe. Why? 

SUBJECT: Well, because it hadn't happened yet. We-- we felt safer. Put it that way. We felt safer because it hadn't happened. Uh, and my-- you know, it-- certainly th-- the, uh-- what we considered to be safe and unsafe changed all the time. That was part of this, uh, gradual evolution of security that we felt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Um. You were at some point almost like an orphan, from mother in, uh, prison and father in concentration. Were there other children in the same situation and what have you, where both parents were taken? 

SUBJECT: Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know anything like that? 

SUBJECT: I didn't-- well, there was, um, my-- I think I told you about my uncle, who went to-- who was in snow detail-- snow removal detail. And he had a daughter exactly my age. We were quite close. She was a cousin of mine. And, uh, she and her mother were living alone. But she-- her mother was not, uh-- was not, uh, uh, put in prison, but I remember seeing a lot of them because the mother was relatively helpless and quite, a dependent sort of a person. They lived, uh, maybe two, two or three kilometers from our house. They, uh-- they kept waiting for my uncle to come out, and he never came out. And so they never got out, either. They-- as I heard later on, they-- I think he died in Dachau, but they were taken to Bergen-Belsen and, uh, never came out. They had a chance to come out, but because he was never released, they refused to leave. 

I had another, um, case of another uncle, this time on my, uh, also my father's side. His sister, who had, um, uh, a daughter who had been injured, uh, by-- on a b-- bike accident, a, uh, train accident. Her-- her legs had been cut off by-- by a train accident. I know that she was a very gifted young lady. She must have been in her teens when I was about 10. She must've been 18 or 19. And, uh, she could not, uh, get the papers to-- to migrate, I think from the US side. As far as from the German side, I didn't-- it was difficult for anybody who was-- who was crippled. So the parents also decided-- this was a frequent decision taken-- one member of the family can't go, then nobody goes, uh, the exception being men who were in the-- in the concentration camp. So they also stayed behind. They also all got killed. This is in Kassel, relatives of mine. 

In fact, the same thing almost happened to us at the very end. Um, I mentioned before that, uh, we left finally in, uh, October, '41. But just before, uh, we were to leave, finally it'd been arranged to go through, uh, um, Spain to Cuba. Uh, the law was passed saying all able-bodied men and women, mostly women at that point, between the ages of, uh, I think it was 18 and, uh, 45, uh, can no longer leave the-- leave the-- leave Germany and must work in munitions, uh-- in munitions plants instead. This was a gradual shift from the pushing Ger-- Jews out to making them work to-- in February of '42, as you know, at the Wannsee Conference, the final solution was adopted. So in fall of '41, uh, my, uh-- my mother fell into that category. 

And just as we, again, had the tickets in hand, ready to go, uh, and were leaving, uh-- about to leave, this law was passed saying that my mother was in the category where she could not leave. Uh, so we, um-- I remember talking about whether or not we should go without her, my grandfather and the two of us, or-- that was really never an issue. We-- we just-- we never thought of that very hard. So we felt we had to stay. We went to the, uh-- again, this Dr. Josef who was still in town, the, uh, other Jewish lawyer, um, went to the Gestapo and said we-- we already had everything ready to go when this law was passed. Wouldn't a-- since-- since it was ret-- would be retroactive, we already were going. It's just a question of not being able to make the, uh-- the particular connection with the boat in Spain. Would they permit us to go? And well, they said, well, it's all right with us, but it is not our decision. It's a central Gestapo decision. 

And, uh, so, uh, we left Darmstadt, uh, to join this transport, which was going to be closed-off transport which was being, uh, officially permitted to-- to carry children, old people whose property was being confiscated at the same time-- this was still part of the Push Them Out policy-- but not knowing whether or not we could join a transport, you know. If we went to Berlin to see if the Gestapo would-- in Berlin, the headquarters would, in fact, go along with the Darmstadt Gestapo notion that they would permit us to go in spite of the fact that-- I mean, because of this-- the fact that we already had everything in hand when this law was passed. 

So I-- I guess, of all the terrible times, the-- the worst time I remember is the 10 days in Berlin, where we were, uh, living with some relatives, uh, and not knowing which way they were going to decide. Um, the, uh-- I remember there were-- there were-- there were some attacks, air-- air attacks during that, uh, period almost every night. Not heavy like later, but, uh, air attacks on Berlin. And, uh, we thought we couldn't sleep. Uh, we had to go to the basement every night. And during the day, we would go to the Gestapo and sit and wait and sit and wait. And it was 10 days like that. It's probably one of the worst periods I can remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were you doing? Just-- 

SUBJECT: Just sitting and waiting. We were-- all of us were. As I said, nighttime was in the basement, usually. And daytime, waiting for this answer, and knowing that, uh, you know, some whim-- some whimsy by some official would decide whether we would go or stay. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have to report anywhere to find out? Or did-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We went to the-- we had-- we went to Gestapo headquarters to see what their decision was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Every day? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, every day. But they wouldn't tell us when they would tell us. They just said, come back tomorrow. Come back tomorrow. Come back tomorrow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that? You mean you got up in the morning and you went to the Gestapo headquarters? For h-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We went to Gestapo-- well, there's nothing-- you see, we-- we had left. We had pulled up everything and left, sold everything. We were not allowed to keep anything. We had our two suitcases, our 10 mark, and, uh, we were supposed to leave during this transport in Berlin. But we were-- when-- when this law was passed at the last minute, we didn't know whether we were permitted to go. So we had pulled up our stay-- our roots. 

I should mention that, at this time, we knew that the other states around us had already been pretty much cleaned up of Jews in the sense that, after Jews who had-- they were left behind in terms of not being able to migrate or not-- for one reason or another had been "Judengesaubert" which was the word cleaned of Jews, by having put-- everybody was being pulled into-- put into, uh, concentration camps. Most of them were sent to a French camp, Gurs, uh, at that time. That was a-- not a-- it was a different kind of camp. It was an internment camp. And they had done this in Baden, uh, in Breitenberg, in most of the states around us. So we knew in Darmstadt it was only a question of, you know-- Hesse was a little slower. We found out later that it was done in, uh, about two months after we left. So we had put up-- question was, you know, we go to Berlin and, uh, what do we do if we-- if-- if my mother is not permitted to leave? Do we go back to Darmstadt together? Or do we separate? Actually, as I remember, the separation idea was discussed but never really seriously considered. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You only had 10 marks. That was about two dollars. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you live on that 10 marks? 

SUBJECT: We were-- well, we were, uh, living with relatives in Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They fed you? 

SUBJECT: We were living off them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was anyone required at that time to wear the Jewish star or-- 

SUBJECT: Not yet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not yet. 

SUBJECT: That was later. There was also a so-called Judische Hilfsverein uh, Jewish, uh, how do you say that? Jewish, uh, assistance organization, which was organized, uh, by the-- it was working with the Germans on migration matters. Judische Hilfsverein actually was a, uh-- a very important, uh-- I guess something like what you saw in the Warsaw ghetto, uh, if you've read the stories about that. The-- the-- the-- the, uh, Jewish organizations work with the Germans to carry out 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you mean like the Judenrat? 

SUBJECT: --the work. Something like the Judenrat, expect they weren't governing. They were just sort of assisting in Germany. Judische Hilfsverein was there for a long period of time. I have some mixed emotions about Judische Hilfsverein. Uh, but, uh, to answer your question about, uh, our financial situation during those 10 days, my guess is that they also supported us, uh, in addition to our relatives. I'm not sure about that, but I would think that they normally did things of this sort. Um, then, uh-- well, they-- every day, you asked me, uh, going down there was-- the idea of, uh, the torture of not knowing when and not knowing what day by day and every day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was it for a 12-year-old, 13-- a 12-year-old Jewish boy to confront the Gestapo every day? What did you think? What did you feel? 

SUBJECT: I was terrified of going to the building, even. But you sit in this big room and, uh-- and you see all these important, mean-looking people walking around. And, uh, you just hope they don't notice you. And that, uh, uh-- you know, it's-- it's-- it's-- it's-- it's, uh-- it's just terrifying because you don't know who's going to-- who's going to decide to, uh-- to knock you over or to, uh-- to, uh, uh, send you away somewhere, or-- I mean, everything was possible. So we just-- so we would go to the guy and say, do you have any-- you have any answer? And they said, just sit down. He'd treat you like-- you know, like dirt and, uh, uh, gloat over your anxiety. And, uh, then they would tell you to come back on Tuesday or Wednesday or just every day, come back tomorrow. So we would sit there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was there? Your mother and you? 

SUBJECT: It was-- it was my mother and I. I think my-- I don't remember my grandfather and my brother going with us. Usually the two of us usually went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And-- 

SUBJECT: So 10 days of this. It's hard to reproduce that because it's-- you know, it's sort of your-- you-- you have to pinch yourself. Try to remember how, you know-- how that was. But I-- I remember it was the worst days of my life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You sat for a whole day on a bench, waiting every day. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And sort of, uh, not violent, they would-- they would talk to you in the morning, and they'd talk to you when they closed, or they would, uh, you know, actually say, come back tomorrow. In other words-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there a large group of people or were you j-- 

SUBJECT: No. No, we were in this rather unusual situation here because we had just been caught by this-- there were other people sitting there for other purposes, I'm sure. I don't remember that too well. But I-- I don't think there was a large group of people who were sort of in our particular category. And, uh, well, finally, after 10 days, um, they gave the permission. 

And then the-- then came another-- you know, there was-- once this-- scare is too soft a word. One terror after another. The next terror was that, uh, I guess sometime during this period, the, uh-- we had been told that, if we left with this transport, that we should not come to the, uh, Tempelhofer. Uh. I think it's called Tempelhof, the, uh, station Tempelhofer, one of the main stations in Berlin, with, uh, you know-- with a taxi or with a car or anything like that, uh, even though we each had two suitcases. Uh, learn not to-- again, not to, uh, attract attention. They were always saying if you attract attention, the people are going to take after you. And that was always the official answer for everything that you-- it was just like the protective custody idea. It was always, the rules were always made in order to protect you in court. 

Well, I remember the final scare, the very serious scare, was that in waiting for 10 days and in, uh, not knowing whether we go or not, we had forgotten this, that notion that you're not supposed to come to the ai-- to the station with a taxi. And having, uh, that many suitcase, we did-- we did ask for a taxi and we went to the station. And then the-- the-- I remember very well, very vividly, the, uh-- the fellow who was-- the Jewish fellow who was in charge of the, uh-- the Hilfsverein took out tickets and said, you ha-- didn't follow orders. I have to withdraw your tickets. And this was a Jew-- a Jewish fellow, now. Uh, and-- and we didn't know for a full day then. I'm not sure it was a full day, but it was I know many, many hours sitting in the station, not having our-- our tickets have been taken fr-- away from us. 

Or whether he was just trying to s-- you know, I don't know wh-- whether he was worrying about his own skin, that if he let this go un-- unnoticed or unwarned or unresponded to. But in any case, uh, the, uh-- that was, uh, you know, we thought we were finally home free, but, uh, this was a final sort of blow and, uh, to let us sit like that for whatever hours they were, I know what that took out of my mother. I know she was, uh-- she was kind of a-- a broken woman after she got out because she had just too much to carry. She was never-- never well-- well again after the-- after-- after we landed in the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your parting with the family that had kept you in Berlin? I mean, you were leaving them. Uh, weren't you concerned about these people who had taken care of you? They're your family and you were leaving, and they were staying. 

SUBJECT: That was happening all the time. Uh, they-- they were not close relatives, but that doesn't really answer the question. They were, um-- let's see. She was the sister of a-- of a-- an uncle by marriage who happened to live in Berlin. We didn't really know them very well. But that doesn't really answer the question. But, you know, the-- the question of saying goodbye to people under these circumstances was-- was not an un-- an infrequent occurrence. And very often, people refused to say goodbye and said, we'll stay together. Uh, but that wouldn't come up in this particular relationship because you were not that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, but-- 

SUBJECT: --not that close. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they want to leave also? 

SUBJECT: Um, I don't know enough. Uh, I know that they-- they-- they-- I know they died. Uh, and I know also that, uh, in fact, her husband just passed away very recently. And we-- we talked about it maybe six months ago that they had, uh, uh, not made any effort to leave until very, very late, even later than we from Berlin. Even perhaps more-- more, uh, assimilated than we were, this particular branch of the family. But I really, uh, uh-- I think they simply, uh, took us in for that week, and 10 days as a-- as a-- as a-- as a courtesy, but it was not a very close family ties. That was-- was that what you have in mind? 

INTERVIEWER 1: They didn't discuss with you while you were leaving what had-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, everybody wanted to leave at that point. I mean-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: They wanted to leave, too? 

SUBJECT: Oh, anybody wanted to leave at that point. There was no one in Germany who didn't try to leave after, I would think, '38. It's just a question of being able to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Uh, I think my father was a rarity, uh, even as late as '38. It was a question of nobody wanting to take us in very readily. I mean, the US had a quota. Uh, the, uh-- the only as-- you know, other place were blocked by war. The only escape route at the end was Cuba, and Cuba exacted a very heavy price. You asked me before about, uh, money and so on. My father had come from England to the United States, and he was working in the United States. He was collecting funds for this, for the passages. And also, as I was mentioned, Cuba, at that time, Batista was, uh, president of Cuba-- same Batista whom Castro nearly replaced. This was his first regime. And he made a lot of money on the European situation. He-- he asked people to make deposits, which were not returnable, things of this sort. Uh, he was, uh-- he made a good-- a business out of the leverages. 

In any case, my father collected from relatives here. Um, and we had some relatives, uh, who had left Germany in the '20s, who had established themselves in Alabama-- Mobile, Alabama, uh, who were quite well off. And they-- they gave a lot of so-called affidavits, you know, giving the basic assurance and supported, uh, the funds that had to be sent out. And I think we owe our lives to them more than anybody else because they-- they made it possible to-- to, uh-- for my father, who-- who couldn't have afforded it just from his own earnings, to provide what Batista asked for, what the various-- the various, uh, tickets that were used, not used, uh, required, and so on. 

So we did finally, uh, uh, make the transport. I remember a attack came as we were leaving, and we-- the train rolled out of the station. And then we were under sort of Gestapo supervision. It was a, um, sealed-off train. We weren't allowed to open the, uh-- the window shades. I remember we were fed in Paris by the, uh, Jewish, uh, uh, Hilfsverein, the same auxiliary agency. And then we were pushed across the border, Spain Touille. 

And I remember one, uh-- one thing that really impressed me was, when I was in Spain, I saw some German soldiers. And that was very-- I got very depressed. I still don't know why they were there. I guess there was close relations at that time between Franco and, uh, Germany, but-- they may have been on furlough. But I remember being terribly scared, uh, by the fact that even after having left Germany-- and the finally-- the final border search, you know, was the most traumatic thing. You s-- you know, it's always some question of where they finding us out. And a very long, uh, search of all the baggage and everything else. 

There was always a fear we have some piece of paper that isn't there. This fear, this constant fear, and the uniforms. You know, the uniforms are the final thing that might say, no. So we finally got across, and then we see German soldiers in-- in-- in, uh, Spain. Uh, I think we-- we're still not out. The long fingers of Hitler are still-- still able to reach us. But then we-- we, uh, uh, went from there to Cuba. And instead of just passing through Cuba on the way to the United States, by that time, Pearl Harbor came. Instead of spending six weeks there, we spent a year and a half in Cuba. Just a-- when we were supposed to leave to the United States, Pearl Harbor came. 

And so we've-- we're leaving Germany in October, '41. I became bar mitzvah in Cuba and then, uh, came to the United States in February, '43. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Had you-- was your father able to rejoin you in Cuba? Or did you have to wait till you came? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. He had to wait here because, uh, you're not al-- we're not allowed to work. And he had to, uh-- in Cuba, they simply-- as I mentioned, they utilized us as a business. I mean, we were grateful they were in the business, but it was a business for them, and they didn't let, uh, the, um, refugees work. They kept them, uh, uh, and, uh, as I said, they-- they exacted certain down payments and other payments. And, uh, my father worked and sent us what we needed during that period. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you had a bar mitzvah. How did you have-- how did you study for your bar mitzvah? How did you happen to have a bar mitzvah? 

SUBJECT: There are a lot of refugees in Cuba. There was a little congregation there, wherever they are. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you embarrassed? 

SUBJECT: Wherever there are Jews. In Cuba? No. We-- we lived in Havana, on the economy. Uh, there was-- I remember we lived in an old, rundown, uh, hotel, which was converted into a little-- a little, uh, I guess you'd call them efficiencies. And, uh, there was a congregation that I took-- I studied for my bar mitzvah. And, uh, there were-- you know, this was the-- at that point, it was one of the major remaining, perhaps the only remaining, uh, way out of-- out of Germany. A lot of people got caught there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Got caught? 

SUBJECT: I mean got caught in-- in-- by the, uh-- by war, by Pearl Harbor. Caught meaning they couldn't move out quickly. So it was a substantial-- substantial, uh, uh, congregation. In fact, I'm still in touch with quite a few of those people. I mean, we spent a lot of time in Cuba. A lot of time to talk and exchange, uh, experiences. I remember at that time, I wrote-- in Cuba, I wrote some of my recollections of all my experiences. And I sent it to my father, and he had it, uh, translated here. And it was-- I became a small celebrity. I sort of had it, uh, circa style and sent around in my-- it's called Reisen Berichte. It's the-- it's a report of my travels and a report of-- it's sort of like a-- like a little early autobiography of a 12-year-old. 

So we had a lot of time, uh, because rem-- you know, I went to school. I went to a, uh-- actually, I went to a-- a fairly good school. Public schools were not available really. I went to a, uh, school of La Salle brothers, Catholic brothers. And, uh, it was, uh, you know, I didn't know any Spanish at the time, so I was, uh, thrown into a Spanish-speaking school system. I went to the sixth grade three years-- once in Germany, and once in Cuba, and once when I came to the States because I-- language changes all the time. But, uh, I was-- except for the fact they tried to convert me, there-- there was a very pleasant, uh-- pleasant environment. The school was a very good school, and they tried to be very kind to us, the brothers. La Salle is a-- is a very nice-- is, my opinion, a very good Catholic order. They-- they're very kind to us. They did try to, uh, very subtlely-- they gave me rosaries for-- for good behavior and things of this sort. But it wasn't anything offensive. They would have liked me to convert. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To go back to Germany, uh, were the Jews helping each other during that time, or? What was the situation? What do you remember about that? 

SUBJECT: Well, the one thing that, uh, has to do with the Hilfsverein-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Uh, they were-- the Judische Hilfsverein had come into my life even earlier because there was in each com-- in each, uh, town, there were officials who were appointed by the-- by the, uh, Nazis to, uh-- to-- to help them to their Jewish business. And, uh, that's always been a-- a-- a troublesome thing that sticks in my mind that, uh, these people were often pretty nasty to their fellow Jews. Now, whether they felt they had to be in order keep their jobs, or whether they felt they had to be nasty in order to-- to get some advantage for themselves, or whether they felt if they weren't doing the job, somebody else would do a worse job, that's a hard one, I'd say. It's a, uh-- I think it's a very complicated matter. 

I sometimes get the impression that they were unduly harsh and unduly trying to earn points with, uh-- with the Germans. I know this has also been a subject which, uh, has bothered a lot of people in terms of what happened at concentration camps and who was selected and who was not selected and who was in charge of other prisoners. These are very hard things to sit in judgment of. You have to be there in order to sit in judgment. But I do know that it's a real-- it's a really important question which hasn't been very researched very much. And I think peop-- many people have guilt feelings about it. Many survivors of the concentration camps have guilt feelings about it. And they don't like to talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are you left with from all of this? You have a successful life now, a-- an incredibly successful person, internationally, even. Uh, you mentioned several things about trying not to be noticed. I wonder if that's a lingering feeling with you, whether it relates to any of your attitudes, other people's at-- well, what has this done to you? 

SUBJECT: I'm sure it's left its mark. It's probably changed one's personality. I'm very-- it probably requires a-- a psychiatrist to give you an answer. Maybe three psychiatrists would disagree. But, uh, I'm sure it's made me probably more uptight than if I had, uh, with the same gene-- genetic pool, been born in the United States. Uh, I'm-- I was of-- old before my years. I was kind of an old man at 12, and it's kind of hard to be, uh, very relaxed, I suppose, and really free, easy-going, uh, once you've had that particular heritage. 

I-- I think I'm not unduly warped by it, but that's a hard one to-- to know about oneself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your attitude toward, uh-- 

SUBJECT: I'm sure it's changed me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your attitude toward, uh, others, toward your feelings about your Jewishness? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think it's-- it's definitely made me more of a conscious Jew, uh, than I-- I would have been growing up as a-- as a assimilated Jew in Germany. Uh, I think, uh, as I said before, I feel that, when something goes wrong in Cambodia or in the Peruvian embassy in Havana, that's of concern to me, too. 

Uh, I'll tell you what I can. I mean, I think that, you know, I-- I-- I do feel that-- that "never again" is a very important motto, but it should not be interpreted as "never again to us Jews." It should be viewed as "never again to anybody." And sometimes I-- as I see the Jewish community in the United States, it's too much "never getting to us," but then they don't get moved as much as I think they should by what's happening to others. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. Israel? 

SUBJECT: Well, Israel, I, uh-- I feel very strongly for Israel. I love Israel. But I you, uh-- I have these honest disagreements, which may not be relevant here, about current Israel foreign policy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, but I-- Israel in terms of-- 

SUBJECT: But Israel in terms of my love for Israel-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

SUBJECT: --and my support of Israel? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Israel in terms of, had there been an Israel, do you think the German policy would have prevailed? 

SUBJECT: Had there been an Israel? You mean, had there been an Israel at that time? I'm not sure that, uh, if it had existed at that time that would have really changed events. Uh. I-- I don't think that, uh-- perhaps there might have been a quicker response, uh, from the rest of the world to what's happening. I think many-- many people, uh, rightly, uh, criticize the West, uh, for being very slow to acknowledge what was going on, and even slower in trying to do something about it. And perhaps if-- if Israel had been-- existed in that time an independent state, it might have been influential in, uh-- in breaking the conscience of the world a little earlier. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then some place for them to go. 

SUBJECT: As an additional place of refuge, yes. Clearly, that's-- that's clearly true. That, uh, there wasn't-- this avenue wasn't there. And clearly, the Israeli policy would not have been one of quotas and restrictions if it had been-- of course, there were people who went to Palestine, but it was a very limited, uh, escape route. Yes, certainly, had it been possible, uh, in-- in the '30s to have an, uh, completely, uh, open, welcome sign in a country like Israel, that would have helped. I remember there was a discussion at that time about a place in Africa-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uganda. 

SUBJECT: --which-- that's right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Madagascar 

SUBJECT: Madagascar. That's right. And my father, uh-- my father was in favor of a number of these places sort of all trying to take in the Jews. What he worried about was having them all congregate in one place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: As I recall, that was a discussion. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember your father being active in trying to alert the American government to what was happening to the Jewish-- Jews of Europe? 

SUBJECT: You mean after he got here? Uh. By the time he got here, it was-- by the time I got to the United States, it was '43. 