INTERVIEWER: Describe Lemberg, describe your-- 

SUBJECT: I didn't live in Lemberg. 

INTERVIEWER: Or wherever your lived. 

SUBJECT: I was living in oil industry, in Boryslav. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, wherever. I thought you said Lemberg. That's why I said it. 

SUBJECT: I was in a concentration camp in Lemberg. 

INTERVIEWER: Ah, OK, I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: My first concentration-- 

INTERVIEWER: My error, my error. Just start back from your very earliest memories, when you were a child-- your family, your friends, the school you went to, the town. Describe it, because one of the terrible losses of the Jewish community is not only the loss of life but the loss of a whole culture, a loss of our understanding of what it was like then. Because there's no one left to tell us. 

OK, you're rolling? 

CREW MEMBER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. So, I would like you to start, Mr. Flashenberg, by giving us your name, your full name, when you were born, where you were born, everything you can about your family. 

SUBJECT: I was born in December, in December 8, 1900. In Sambor. Sambor was a town with 20,000 Jews. Not a big town, a small town. 

We belonged-- the stage was-- our stage was Lemberg. You know? Today they call it Lvov. Because this belongs to Russia. And Sambor belongs to Russia, too. 

I belong to a society, Landsmanchaft, from my town. You know? I belong to that. We are meeting, now, in, uh, that house, 130 East 59th Street. This house belongs, I think, to the Jewish Philanthropies. You know? We are meeting now there. Otherwise, we used to meet in Roosevelt Hotel or something else, somewhere else. 

Since I came to the United States, I belong to them, because they are people that was growing up with me together, as children. Later, when I came out from the army, as I told the gentleman, I was five times in the army. One time, when I was 17 years old, they took me to the Austrian army. So I was in a town called Jaroslaw, not far from Przemsyl, on the other side, when you go from the other side, through state of Lemberg. 

And, from us, you have just 75 kilometers to, to Lemberg, my town. From there I couldn't remember how far to Lemberg. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: How many brothers and sisters did you have? 

SUBJECT: I got-- when my father died, we were six children-- three brothers, and three sisters. A year later, one child died, because my mother was hiding in the time from Russia, in the basements. You know? Until Russia went away, it was a little easier, so she went out. 

And this child, the child was throwing down. And it was seven weeks old, was the child, you know? They grabbed my mother, they want to, uh, you know how they are-- 

But, you know, I was in the house. And I think one was a Ukrainian, a student. You know? He finished high school. And he was-- he was-- they called him [INAUDIBLE]. You know? 

He was a pharmacist and a tall man. He was-- got a mask, a little mask, and he's-- you know, not-- not really a mask, a-- [BURST OF AIR] make his eyes. And he make himself some, uh, these-- you know. With a little mustache, so, couldn't recognize him right away. But I think I-- this was this man, he came over Cossacks to look for-- a rich Jew. Money. 

And my father was hidden with-- with rifles and me. And I was 14 years old in this time, not even 14. But I stand up against him, and I don't let him. And I got hit more than he. Every time, as soon I fell down, I-- quicker, I stand up. And I want not to let him kill him. 

But still they broke him. He's-- this-- in the-- hit him in the kidneys. You know? So he got sick. And later I have to go in, in, the whole winter, you know, to bring doctors from Lemberg to Sambor, because our doctors they took away to Russia in this time. It was the time from the czar. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe the town. Can you, a little bit, describe the town that you lived in? 

SUBJECT: It was-- Well in my town? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, the streets, the-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, some people went to bring food so from over there. And it took 10-- it was not far from, nine kilometer from Sambor was, uh, a village, a big village, you know? Austrian Germans were-- they speak just German. The people, a whole village, a big village. They got big horses, nice, big farmers, you know, rich farmers. 

But the Jewish people in the town, they want to bring over from Lemberg to buy some food, because they robbed our town, the Cossacks. So, uh, they went. And I went with always with them there. 

And, from over there, I took a carriage with two horses, like they have on 59th Street, here, you know? And I paid four times as much as the doctor's taken. Because got two horses, got to travel 75 kilometers. It's maybe, uh, 60 miles. You know? 

With horses. With the cars, it's nothing. It's like this. In an hour or so, there, but we have to travel, you know, hours, to bring a doctor form over there. You know? 

But, before, you know, the medicine was so low. He couldn't know what is with him. So he gave him some medicine -- by the--. 

He was still sick, and sick and sick. And, every day, more and more. And, and, this was in 1915, four days after they-- the Austrians came back. You know? Because they went just to Przemsyl. 

And Przemsyl was a festung. There was electrified, uh, the town all around. They couldn't came into the town. You know? A lot of Cossacks, and Russian military was-- they fell over there. They were dead. Because whenever they-- they came into this territory with the horse, the horse fell down and was killed, right away. It was electrified, the soil and everything. 

So, after the Austrian came in and four days later was Shavuot, a holiday, a Jewish holiday. And, this first day, he died. My father. 

INTERVIEWER: Were the Jews in your town afraid a lot of the Cossacks? 

SUBJECT: Of course. Of course. 

INTERVIEWER: What could they do about it? 

SUBJECT: Nothing-- what could they do? Some went away to Vienna. And we went to Vienna, too, but they catch us on the way. You know? And return us back to home. 

They took away the horses. Because they needed horses. They took everything. Always is this. 

You know, I got a friend, when I was a builder, and this, uh, the oil industry was building roads and this. I got a friend who brought me, who brought, uh, such a hill, with rocks, you know? And he let to cut out this rocks and brought me for the, for the-- because I have to build the roads, you know? 

I paid him for this, you know? This was going by cubic meters, you know? So I-- and he got two horses still in the house, because he was living outside, not in the middle of the town, outside a little. 

So they took him, that he didn't pay, uh, in Poland, he didn't pay tax. He says, why? I paid my tax. No, you didn't pay-- 

The Russians, in 19, uh, 19-- yeah, this was in 1940. And took him away to Russia, to jail. They make a trial of him, and they took him away, took him-- he was-- he lived through in Russia, in jail. You know? After the war, he came back. 

INTERVIEWER: What did most of the Jews in your town do, to earn money? What-- what was the work that they were engaged in? 

SUBJECT: Oy, some people got stores-- all kind of stores, all kind of stores. I remember I got-- one man was working with me, together. They have a-- they had a store with materials, all kind of materials for shoes, galoshes, with god knows what. You know? 

And the Russian came in, and they took away everything-- the whole store, everything. And later, he was a bookkeeper in a transport place. I start to tell you, before. A communist, you know? He was a communist, before. He's now somewhere in Toronto. See? 

His brother came to me once and asked me to give him $150. They need for a lawyer money, to take him out from jail. 

Later, I went into this, you know, he built up, um, such a transport office, you know? To transport all kind of merchandise with-- that, you know, like, in the oil industry, they need to-- they got trucks, too, to transport some, uh, pipes, you know? Some linen, for drilling, you know? Some parts of the drills and-- you know how they need in this. 

So he made up such an [RUSSIAN]. This was called, in Russian, [RUSSIAN], "transport" [RUSSIAN]. I speak Russian, too. 

So, his brother came to him and asked me, he ask him, why don't you call Jack Flashenberg? He's nothing doing, now. He has a wife and children, and he needs to make a living. And when you were in jail, he gave for you $150 me to take a lawyer. Yeah? To bring you out from jail. Yes? 

So he was, uh, thinking about this, maybe three days. After three days, he met me on the street and told me to give him 1,500 rubles. He will buy, in my name, a horse with a wagon. You know? [RUSSIAN], and I will work there as a clerk. You know? 

And so I went into him to work, because otherwise they would take me away to Russia. Because, [LAUGH] maybe he wants me to go with him to Russia. I says, no. I wouldn't go. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you, after-- 

SUBJECT: Because my wife doesn't want to go to Russia. She got a bad experience. She was-- she was, uh, working for this company, as a-- she was a typewriter there. And she was typewriting there, and she was a clerk over there. And I met her, you know? 

Later, the Russian called her back to work. So she got some bad experience with them. 

CREW MEMBER: At this time, you were supporting your wife, your children-- 

SUBJECT: Yes-- 

CREW MEMBER: And also your mother and your brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: Yes. No, my mother wasn't over there, anymore. My mother died in 1951-- 1929. She was 51 years old. She got the same thing with my father. You know, kidneys. So she died. 

And the doctors was-- they weren't so smart to find it out. They cure her-- her lungs, and gave her food, fed food to eat. But she has sick lungs. She died. She was 51 years old. 

CREW MEMBER: What were your brothers and sisters doing, then, 

SUBJECT: In this time? Nothing. The younger one was-- he went into learn as a-- to be a decorator. And the middle one-- I think, the youngest, and the middle one was doing nothing at all. He was pulling money by me, that's all. I'm not speaking for-- to him 33 years. Didn't behave to me like a brother. I was a brother to him. Not he. 

When I came over, he was looking by me-- to find by me money. Because his wife told him, the refugees bringing money. Not all the refugees bring-- brought money to the United States, it was-- it was people there. We are working on the black market, and they brought money. 

But I was afraid. I got enough. I was four years, almost four year-- 46 months in the-- in the concentration camps. That's enough. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you, Mr. Flashenburg, when the-- when the war began? Or when did you know that something was going to affect you? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. They stopped me from my working. I have to go to work, to them. You know? They pull me to work, they built a bridge, or what, and they were killing there people and hitting people. You know how they were very rough to people. Terrible. You know? 

Later, it was called, by the-- by the committee, the Jewish committee. This was called the Judenrat. You know? 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: This was in 1941. 

INTERVIEWER: Up until 1941, you were not affected by the Germans. 

SUBJECT: No, I was 22 months with the Russians. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm? 

SUBJECT: The Germans came in for eight days, and they went out. You know? And then, when they came in, they got already the war with the Russians. You know? They took away-- 

When you have a fur coat, a collar-- from fur. Everyone one has to give back them. Because they needed for the front, for the soldiers. 

I-- even my children got collars in their coats. For fur-- not even real. Maybe it was from, uh, from rabbits, you know? Have to give it them. 

I got a fur coat, and my wife got a fur coat. I have to give it back. They took it away from me? 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you living, at this time? 

SUBJECT: In Boryslav. In the oil-industry town. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened? 

SUBJECT: Later, they make empty by me everything. And they-- one day, they came in. It was, uh, uh, you know, in August 8. They took us away from the house and everything. And they took my-- my-- 

It was an aktion, you know? They took people. And we saw them pulling people to the railroad station. So my wife and my older child went to the basement. 

And I was sitting upstairs, you know, in my apartment. I was looking down. I couldn't go. I hadn't got-- I-- I got a little-- this over the roof, in the ceiling. You know, because I haven't got a ladder so big get in over there. 

So therefore my older child and my wife went into the basement. And there was not a sign that there is a basement. But the neighbors', the Polacks', children, they were-- I bought the house before the war starts, you know, in 1939. That man was building, in our place, like, you know, it was [NON-ENGLISH]-- 

There was water with people that came in there, sick people, and kidney sick or stomach sick, to drinking that water. This was for cure people, a place, you know how they call it, here? A place where you go in for a cure. 

INTERVIEWER: A spa. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, like a-- here, you say a "spa." He built there a big villa. And he was a neighbor of mine. He sold me the house. 

I didn't make even a contract with him. I gave him 40,000 zlotys for this house. He was still living in that house. And they got-- 

And later, they throw me out from my apartment. They put me somewhere else. Later I am off to my house. Later took off off this house, the Germans. And what they did with this house, I don't know, because it was-- 

In the back was a hill. And on the hill was tank reservoirs for oil. You know? And they have to put pipes through my-- my house, to the railroad. And to put into this big, uh, how you call it? Like you have here, uh, trucks, what-- uh-- bringing the oil. 

So you have-- you have-- you've got there some railroad, uh, with such barrels, big barrels, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah? 

SUBJECT: Put in the oil, right from the pipes, from the, from the big reservoirs. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said that your wife and your child went to a cellar, and you couldn't tell it was a cellar-- 

SUBJECT: And the other child, and the other child was our friend's. It came over, our friend, she used to live over the wall with me, with us, you see? Like in the other room, the other apartment. 

And she was living somewhere else. And she likes the child. And I was glad she take it away. I didn't know it to be an aktion, or-- but it was not, uh-- we haven't got so much food, you know? To eat, because when I got some bread, in the neighborhood, children-- lost their father and mother, there were six children over there, during the-- behind the gate in the other house, you know? 

So I have to give them to, because they were dying for hunger. I got, from my work, 2 kilo bread a day. You know? So I could give everyone a piece of bread, for these children. And they were-- they go together with my children. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened-- um-- 

SUBJECT: So they got killed. Everyone-- no one was there. They took away everyone. So they liquidated my apartment and that's all when they took me away with my children. 

And the little child came over. She went to the police to take her, because she had father and mother was--ta--Aktion was taken away by the, by the, uh, soldiers. So she wants to go, too. 

I was very mad when she came there. She says, well, she wouldn't take-- tell me, I wouldn't know it. But I know you're going to be killed. I want to be killed, too. That's all. She came over. So they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did they take you? 

SUBJECT: In-- in Shtetele Belz. You know, it was a city called Belz. It was-- it is-- in America is a song about the Shtetele Belz. You know? 

There was living a big Zaddik, once, in that, in that-- it was known in Europe, this little town. Because in there the Russian build up over there a chemical factory. You know? And then the German took it over. They make a crematorium over there. 

And they build up a swimming pool, lout out with heavy, like a half-an-inch metal sheets, you know, inside. And this was electrified. And when they brought in the people over there, the poor-- to take a bath, first, people didn't know. They went in to take a bath. And they put down the electricity. [CLAP] They were killed, right away, in the water. They didn't take-- 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: No. I know a friend. I got a relative. My wife's relative. He was an insulator. You know? And they took him, and they ask him what he is. They took him over there. 

Later he ran away way to that Lemberg, where-- where I was. They brought him to Lemberg to buy, you know, parts, to insulate some this. So he-- when I went into, to, us, these two SS went in from the truck to the store, and they left him on the truck, he jumped over from the truck and came into this concentration camp over there. 

And he heard that I went away. Because it was reported, you know? They report right away. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you? what did you do? You said you were taken away. Where did you go? And what-- 

SUBJECT: I went first in Lemberg was a ghetto, to this ghetto I was two days over there, two nights and three days. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was it like? 

SUBJECT: Thursday, Friday, and-- it was two nights, there. It was Thursday the day, Friday the day, Saturday by lunchtime I went away. I went to the railroad. And I went away to my town where I was born, because I knew I have a sister and my brother-in-law, with children. When I came over there, I didn't have anyone. They were taken away three days before us. There, too. 

So, from over there, I went back to that town near my-- where I was living. You know? Nine kilometer-- to Drohobych. 

CREW MEMBER: You escaped from Lemberg. 

SUBJECT: What? 

CREW MEMBER: You escaped from Lemberg. 

SUBJECT: From Lemberg, I escaped, yeah. I am telling you. When I escaped from over there, I came into my town. With the railroad, I went. So, I looked like a farmer. High boots, you know? And you know, pair of pants with-- with patches. And a little jacket. And with a cap, with a long this. You know? I looked like a bum. Or a farmer. 

And I came home to my town, and I find out nobody's there. I met friends. And one of the friends was working. And, uh-- by furniture. They gave out furniture for officers. And they sent to Drohobych some closets, you know, for books. You know? Closets built out for books. 

I went into a closet, and I-- and the truck man knew. He took-- he gave him a few not dollars but zlotys, you know? Gave him something to bring me over over to Drohobych. He brought me over there, where he gave-- had to give back the closets. 

In the morning, when start to be day, I went into the ghetto. Because I know why I was-- later, the-- the Judenrat sent me for this-- to bring in some flour for the baker, to make bread for the Jewish people. Yes? I know this place. And I went back there. 

And there, you know, I was sick, because I got-- they gave me an injection with living germs. And this went on my liver. You see? And I was a sick man. And I fell down on the street. 

And when I fell down, by the street was a-- the doctors make an ambulatorium for people, you know? And they saw that I am laying in the street. Some doctors went out from-- from this ambulatorium and got me in. 

And later they gave me to the hospital. It was a hospital. And I got a friend, a lawyer, he was in Drohobych, in the Judenrat working. He knew it. You know? He jumped over-- they say that I have to kill the people in the hospital. 

So he grabbed, uh, a relative of mine. And he, and they brought me to a private house. And, from this private house, he took me to-- to his office. And the office were not anymore desks, like it has to be. Such big tables, with blankets around that make such desk. 

And he put me on the floor under these blankets, under this table. And I was laying there two and a half days. And two and a half days later, I-- 

I was in that hospital 30 days. And I was without conscience. And I start to think, where am I? Took away, pushed away and aside the blanket, start to look out where I am. 

So he asked me, he says to me, Jacob, how are you? You are better? He was my lawyer. You know? 

You are better, already? I says, yes, where am I? I want to tell you that today are from Boryslav, the director of the approvization, he is now the president of the Jewish committee-- of the Judenrat. You know? 

So, all right, I stand slowly up. He me a little black coffee, to drink, you know? And I was thinking a little, if I can go walk, you know? And I walked out. This was on the third floor. I walked down slowly, outside. And I came to the air. 

I was standing maybe a half an hour. And later I see that man what brought that-- the president in there. So I start to talk to him. And I says-- 

I knew him. And I says, would you take me to Boryslav again? It was nine kilometers to go. He got a horse and a carriage. 

He says, I don't know. if-- they will take you. He said, no, I'll be shot. I says, he will take me, don't worry. And when I saw he is coming, I grabbed, you know, by the horse, the, the, what you [LAUGH]-- 

INTERVIEWER: The reins. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And I was holding in my hand. And I was-- I know-- I know him. I was-- I was talking to him like to-- to a brother, you know? 

I says, Joseph, I want to go home. What kind of a home you have? I says, what kind of halfway you are. You have to take me over there. I was living here 16 years, in this town. 

I want to go. No, I can't take you. You will take me. Otherwise, I will start to scream here and the SS will come. He saw I'm not stupid. 

Says, all right, sit down. Sit down with that man what-- he's driving the horse. And he wants to sit in the back. So he brought me over. 

INTERVIEWER: How did he-- how did you-- 

SUBJECT: He called up a man to take me to his house. That man what he called out had three little boys. And they went away-- the mother was taken away by the Germans, for killing. You know? 

And the three little children, little boys-- one was five, one was six, and the other one was seven years old-- they went away as Gentile boys. And the night they came over from Przemsyl to his father, his father gave him some money, and go! You know? And I think he's alive. 

He's somewhere in Hungarian. Because he married a goy, a shiksa. And he's living with her and-- and he never come to the United States, never come to Israel. I knew there, because her father was a director in that company where I was living over there 16 years in this house. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you happen to go to the concentration camp, then? 

SUBJECT: They took me away, with my children and my wife, I'm telling you, on August 8. It was the day-- Tisha B'Av was in this time. In Tisha B'Av, on the day of Tisha B'Av, you know, they took me away. 

And they brought me in a, in a big hall where was a movie, you know, in this place. 

INTERVIEWER: A theatre. 

SUBJECT: A movie theatre, yeah. And they went through the whole night. I was sitting over there with the children. The younger child, they brought in later. And my wife. And a lot of friends and relatives were there. I couldn't do anything. 

Just I went to ask the, the, the Ukrainian, they were the, the right hand from the, from the SS, you know? And the children want to go to the toilet somewhere. He-- no, he says no. But they have to! They have to go out. 

And they took him right away outside the door for a minute, and I have to stay with him. So he hit me with a rifle on my, on my shoulders. I says, why are you hitting me? It will smell bad when the children will do it here. So they want to go, you know, children. 

And he take me, and I get inside with the children. In the morning, they took us to the railroad station. So, we were staying on the place, and waiting, in the, the, the, the, in the railroad, the, the wagons, you know, the cars, where you, you put in cows and horses in these cars, you know? 

So they start to pack us. 40 people-- in a days, 40 to 45, like, like herring, in a jar, you know? Tight, one by the other. So I was together with my children, when they brought us to Lemberg, you know, to the main rail-- this station. 

It was called-- by Austria, it was called the Wiener Bahnhof, the Vienna railroad station. It was two there. And when they brought us over there, they opened it and went in, inside. Jude, come out. Jew, come out. You know how they call. 

I didn't-- I didn't, uh, answer them, I didn't talk to them, nothing. I didn't want to go out. I want to go with my children together. Where they will go, I will go, with my wife. 

So they went in, inside, and they start to hit me me with their rifles. So my children start to cry. You know? Daddy, go out! We don't want to see how they will kill you. Because they will kill you, here. Go out. Listen to them. 

So, and they start to push me out, the children start to push me. When I went out, it was tank. Not to tell you a lie, maybe 200 men were staying there, from our town, you know? My age, younger and older. You know? 

I was, at this time, 43 years old. Because I was-- this was in August, and I was born in December, December, it was '42. She went out, I have to go. But later I got the chutzpah to ask him, where our children are going? You took me out from the crowd; tell me where our wives and children are going. 

He says, to the Ukrainian, for working on the fields. This was not true. This was a lie. Because later, when went away from over there, somebody went to hide to our town, from Lemberg, you know? And he brought me a little, uh, writing in Jewish, you know? Jewish words. 

INTERVIEWER: Yiddish. 

SUBJECT: That boy was a cousin-- his mother and my wife's mother were cousins. His name was-- he got two names. Klinghoffer and Pomeranz, you know? Because his parents were not-- they haven't got-- they were married by a rabbi, just, and the rabbi didn't make it over through the government. So Joe was his name. We call him Yosik. Joseph. 

And Yosik write me that he came-- he is writing me a note I shouldn't wait for my children, because he-- with his hand, he put into the oven on the wagon to the oven, his children and my children and his wife and my wife. That's all what I knew. Nothing else! 

But then I was holding that little ticket, in a little pocket. And when I come over to, to, already, when I come over to Mathausen, they took me away everything. I got a smaller picture from this. And I-- I was begging them a smaller picture from this. And I was begging them to leave me this, this little picture. 

No. They took me away and tore it and put it away. To the garbage. And you couldn't go back there, because they have to take off your clothes. And they get to stay in the line. 

The whole night, it was raining! Until the morning, you got-- you-- when you were lucky, you got underwear, a shirt, and a pair of [INAUDIBLE]. And when you were not lucky, you got a shirt-- shirt or a pair of underwear, one or the other. 

Because there was a Polack. And I was speaking Polish to him. Because I hear that he speaks Polish. And I was speaking Polish. He thought I'm a goy. He gave me a shirt and a pair of long-- long, uh, pants, up to here. You know? And this, this was holding me by-- in my life. 

And in Mathausen we went to the Steinwerke, without shoes. Every step was higher than this, here, higher. You know? And every rock what you have to take out, we built a road over there. 

But you have to carry out from the, from the-- from the-- they cut the rocks, inside, some people. And some have to carry them out. I was carrying them. Not I, a lot of us. So was every step higher than this. You see? Got some 86 steps, to go from downstairs up, with the stone has to weight at least 75 kilo. 

So, you were not dressed. You were without shoes. And you were there's every stone has a point. The blood was running from your feet. You know? And here, when you brought this, you, you got the blood over here. You know how it was-- hard work. 

And they they were hitting us with their rifles and with rubber pipes, so heavy pipes, like this full, you know? Rubber pipes, inside was a piece of iron. When they hit you, you fell down. You were dead. Don't worry. I haven't do something. 

From over there, I was four weeks over there. And believe me, I know doctors were with me there. One lost his glasses. He's living in Staten Island. His name is Ludwig Gross He lost his-- he, he, he was going like in the night. He was blind, directly blind, because he was shortsighted. 

And the other doctor-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did he manage to survive? 

SUBJECT: They send him to a place somewhere in Austria. And they survived, two doctors. And after the war I met them. 

And when he came over, we still see each other sometimes, because, one, [INAUDIBLE] is my wife's cousin. You know? He's living in East Meadowbrook. He's a doctor over there. He has already a married daughter, and our son is now-- uh, he's a doctor, but he's working in a hospital, as a resident. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were doing all that work with the rocks, and you were hurt-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that was-- 

INTERVIEWER: --you were doing all that work with the rocks-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: --when you came back to that camp, or wherever you were, at night, 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: --did-- what happened, then? Did you just go to sleep? Did you talk? Did you-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I will tell you what happened. After this, you know, it was, uh, three places filled with a lot of such beds, you know? With three, like, three floors you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Bunks. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. When you were in the middle or on downstairs, in this broke-- this breaks, so you got tear off your, your, uh, hat from the-- it was raw wood. 

INTERVIEWER: Splinters. 

SUBJECT: Yeah Don't-- don't ask, when you want to go into the toilet was staying a bastard there, on the toilet, doesn't let you in. And then was hitting you. You know? We got a terrible time on there, in Mathausen, a terrible time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk-- 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk to each other, the prisoners? 

SUBJECT: With whom? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you talk about? 

SUBJECT: What can we talk about this, here? You know, this-- we are very unhappy over there. You-- you couldn't go to a toilet, even. You know, it was taken, and was hitting you. For what you're hitting me? Let me in! I have to go in! No. 

You know what it means, that person? Have to go in and you can't? Don't worry-- went through a lot. What I want to tell you, you couldn't report anywhere. You couldn't do anything. 

And outside there are staying a lot of Spanish, the Spanish communists, you know? The Germans take them into the concentration camps. You know? There-- and there were beating Jews like hell and killing directly, with rubber pipes. You know? 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what I wonder-- 

SUBJECT: We went through a lot, don't worry. Was no one, no one to talk to. 

INTERVIEWER: But, Mr. Flashenberg, how did you keep up your spirits? How did you manage to have any hope? 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you what it is. When I-- when I came back to Boryslav, I was once in a big jam. Because I was hiding. I was sitting in a, you know, in a stable. End of the wall, end of the, uh, floor, you know? They were sitting you know, two men, a woman with two children, and her mother. This means her two brothers and her mother, and she has two children, was eight people, I think. 

And that man let me in there over there. But I was after a big sickness. I was coughing. I was afraid they will-- I will give out them, with my cough. So I went out from over there. 

And I was hiding in the night. And in the daytime, between the walls. You know? Between stables, between god knows what. Stockroom somewhere. 

And there was a, a front house and a back house. And that man was living in this back house. And it was a big akion. They're taking a lot of people. 

And I was hiding in a store, you know? And, in the night, I want to take off the-- there was this-- uh, this, sabers, they start to cut the, the, the, metal. And I was inside. I was very scared, too. 

So but what could I do? I couldn't do anything. So, in the night, I went in-- I was very tired, already, staying, day and night, between the walls in this. You know, and looking-- maybe it will be night, it will be better. 

One night, I was so tired, I went into bed. And I fell asleep. It was an unclean house, very dirty house, I want to tell you, with, uh, some living, uh, things were there. You know? But I didn't look. I didn't. 

And I went into-- and I covered myself and started to sleep. Couldn't do anything. They'll come, they will take me, they will take me. 

I want to tell you something. You may believe me or not. I believe in God, therefore. 

My father came to me. He was dressed, you know. I never see him so real, he was a modern man. He got a little beard, long mustache, and hair on his head, you know? 

He was wearing a suit, with a hair-- a hard hat. You know, they used to have-- before, to such hard hats. And he came in, dressed like a, like, a, this, like an orthodox, you know? A long this, with a Torah in his hand. 

And he told me, come on, dance, because today's Simchat Torah. I shouldn't stand up from this place, if I am lying you. I says, Daddy, how could you tell me to go to dance? 

I'm after a very big sickness. It hurts me. It still hurts me. And I lost my children. How could I go to dance? How could I? 

Come on, it's Simchat Torah. You have to dance. I says, no, I do not dance. I'm telling you, nothing will happen to you! [TAPPING] And I knew nothing will happen to me. 

I will tel you something else. And I was already in Linz, before-- two days before the liberation. They put us in in a bunker. In a bunker, you know? The bunker was big. How can I tell you? Maybe 30 meters long, and maybe by 10 meters wide. 

They fill us-- there was a, a factory of motors. They used to make motors, you know? And I was there. I was making the cyles. You know what a [INAUDIBLE] is? No. From wood, to, to hit the wires in, in the place. You know? 

INTERVIEWER: Hmm. 

SUBJECT: Such pieces of wood, I was making. And I was making [INAUDIBLE], you know, such pieces, with a saw. With a little saw, you know? 

This was going between the wires. You know? You build a motor, you see they have such [INAUDIBLE] in between. It's not wood. This is hard like it, like hell, but you can saw it with a, with a saw. 

There was a lot of people there working. Women and men. But the women, first they put-- pushed in the men. And later the women. And then the soldiers were pulling us to work. You know? And was watching us not to run away somewhere. 

So my place was on the wall, over there. You know? It was no concrete, nothing. Just-- just soil. I was standing out on the soil. You know, tired, hungry. You know. I fell asleep-- --standing. 

I saw my mother. Came to me, brought me bread, and a big piece of, of butter. She has such a high piece of butter, on her hand. And here, full of bread. 

And I thought, I am staying, you know, in a make--, in such soil, was cut, uh, uh, pieces of straw. And I mixed this together with my feet. And I make from this bricks. I got such a great-- standing, there, inside. I was very tired. And I, I was standing on the wall. You know? 

The soil make me-- this was from the earth, cut out this. You see, and this took me over this wetness, you know? And I fell asleep, standing. 

Come out from over there! Take out your feet. I says, I can't. I have to work here. You see, I'm scared for the Germ. Don't worry. Nothing will happen to you. 

A second time she told me. Two days later, I was liberated by the American army. Nothing happened to me. I was strong enough to hold it up, everything. You see? After such a big sickness what I have with my, in my liver. And after everything, my mother brought me up and cream, sour cream, butter, cheese, and milk, mostly. Every breakfast, in our coffee, with milk. I have to, to eat this. You know? 

When I was 17 years old, they draft me to the army. I got such muscles. I weighed 86 kilos. You know? 

A kilo, a pound has 45 decagrams. And a kilo has 100 decagrams. You see? More than two pounds was-- was-- 44, just, has a pound. 

It was 88 decagrams was 2 pounds. You know? And a pound has 100 decagrams. You know? This means a kilogram. You know? I was so heavy and so strong, like a bull. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you-- 

SUBJECT: I could lift 200 kilo in my hands. Not today. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that you survived-- sir, because you had these visions of your parents? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did-- how did you keep up the spirits of other prisoners? If you had this strength, how did you try to keep the spirits of others? 

SUBJECT: Listen, I knew a man who was in the-- in our company. He was a draftsman. He was a football player. He was playing in the [INAUDIBLE]. It's called the Jewish, uh, you know, footballs. 

And he was a strong man, a strong boy. You know? He was a good football player. And you see going with me to work. On the street, in the middle of the road, he fell down and died. He was 28 years old. I saw it, on my eyes. 

INTERVIEWER: You think it was your visions which kept you alive? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I think so. And I believe in this. At this, how comes my father came to me, after so many years? He came to me. And I saw him like I-- like I would be not sleeping. 

And he talked to me, and I answered him. But these people, these two people, both were staying there in the house where I was sleeping, by the window, and they're looking out in the night. It was dark. They heard Talking me. 

And they asked me later what I was talking to-- to whom I was talking. I didn't want to tell them. But I-- I was afraid they would laugh at me. You know? And I'm telling you, I cannot forget it. Not this, with my father, when I saw my father, and when I saw my mother. I think they were watching me. The whole time. You see. 

Therefore I'm a believer. I believe in God, and I think it is another world. After a man is dying, he has-- he comes-- this is called, this world, Olam Hazeh, and the other world is called Olam Haba. This is forever. 

When they came to-- to save me, my life, must be something. And therefore I am a Jew. I believe it. 

I'm not too, too, too big for nothing. You know? I'm not going every day to the-- to the synagogue. I'm going once in a time, when I have to pray for memorial days, you know? I am going Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, to pray. I'm paying for this. 

Last year, I was praying in Tully Hall. You know where Tully Hall is? No? Alice Tully Hall. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. There. I was-- I paid for this $50, to let me pray over there, two days Rosh Hashanah, one day Yom Kippur. But, uh-- 

CREW MEMBER: Who do you-- 

SUBJECT: With my wife, I can be too, too, too much of nothing. And I was never a fanatic. But I'm a regular man, that's all. And I'm keeping what I have to keep, that's all. 

When it comes to the-- this, uh, shabbat the two days' holiday, the first day I have the memorial day after my father. And you know? And other nine before, uh, before Pesach, I have my mother's-- the day when my mother died. I always go for kaddish. You know? When I have a few dollars, I'm leaving for the people to buy them-- see what they need for the synagogue. You know? 

But the rest of the days, I'm praying sometimes in the night, before sleeping, that's all. 

CREW MEMBER: What do you pray? 

SUBJECT: I pray [INAUDIBLE]. You know? [INAUDIBLE]. So I pray, pray-- I remember my children, I remember-- I'm praying for her children's health. And that's all. 

I'll be in December 8, 81 years old. I never believed I will be-- ever live so long. 

INTERVIEWER: Some people say that-- 

SUBJECT: I can't forget my children, believe me. I never forget them, not for a minute. Never! Innocent two children, got killed by Hitler, a lot. 

They were not politicians. They were nothing. They went to school, that's all. I just know they are Jewish, that's all. 

That's my life work, nothing. I will die. Whom I'm leaving? No one. My name will [WHISTLE]-- no more. 

Listen, I have no children, no one will pray for me when I will die. So, what is the worth of my life? Nothing. She's a nice woman. I like her. 

