[SIDE CONVERSATION] [INAUDIBLE] 

[INAUDIBLE] 

[INAUDIBLE] 

MR. WALTER: I don't think we get to that already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Walter, we're pressured, unfortunately. And so we're going to probably have to have several other sessions, but-- or at least one more lengthy session with you. So I'd like you to fully describe what life was like, as much as you remember from wherever you came from, as graphically as possible. 

And uh-- and I also want to leave time at the end to talk about your adjustment to the life here. 

SUBJECT: Well, we're not taping yet, are we? 

CREW: No. 

MR. WALTER: No? OK. 

CREW: Would you like me too? 

INTERVIEWER 2: This will be repeating some of what you told me. 

MR. WALTER: Well basically, it will be, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You tell it beautifully. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's an important story. It's all right. 

MR. WALTER: Thank you. My name is Sigmund Walter. I'm 61. I now live in West Hartford, Connecticut. I was born in Berlin in 1921 of parents of Polish descent. My parents came from Warsaw, Poland to Berlin. And I lived in Berlin, Germany until 1939. I had my schooling, my education, in Berlin, graduated in 1939, and then moved illegally from Berlin to Antwerp, Belgium with my parents. My father had left previously. My mother followed later on. 

We lived in Antwerp in 1940. In 1940, the Germans invaded the lowlands. We tried to go to southern France and Germany successfully cut the Maginot line and trapped us near Dunkirk, and we returned to Antwerp in 1941, moved to Brussels in 1942. 

I am, due to my background, and due to my education, my upbringing, et cetera, thoroughly acquainted with the Nazi era and with the persecution that I personally experienced, starting in Berlin in the 1930s all the way through the concentration camps and my liberation in 1945. 

And when we talk about Holocaust and about extermination-- I like to use the word "extermination" rather than genocide-- I think that one should go back to the very beginning, to 1933, and follow these sequences from then on. 

I think, though, that I will concentrate now on the later period-- on the Holocaust itself and on the concentration camp time itself. And we moved from Antwerp to Brussels in 1942. Jews were not permitted to live in Antwerp then-- no longer permitted to live in Antwerp then-- because it became an area which was sensitive to the German defense. We were already wearing our star. 

In September, 1942 I received a convocation to go to Germany-- to go to Europe, to Germany. We knew, at this time, what going to work to Germany meant. We knew that it meant a slave labor camp. We knew that it meant maybe a concentration camp. 

The existence of concentration camps was well known by this time. It was documented. I remember myself listening to a BBC broadcast at the beginning of 1942 which gave, then, a very accurate and very precise description of the extermination camps at Auschwitz, at Birkenau, of the rail road spurs et cetera. 

Obviously, there was no way that I would follow this convocation. And I was active, in touch with the underground, and with forged papers-- with forged papers-- I left Brussels in September, 1942-- beginning of September 1942-- made my way across Belgium into occupied France. Crossed occupied France, from village to village, from location to location, and arrived with a group of about 10 or 12 other men, some of whom were, like myself, called for service in Germany. Others were French-- were British POWs who had escaped. There was an Alsatian who had been drafted into the German army and who had deserted, et cetera. 

This group crossed the demarcation line-- the line between the Vichy, France-- unoccupied France-- and occupied France. It was a great feat. And we succeeded and arrived into Vichy, France. 

The object at this point was to cross all of unoccupied France and try to get into Spain, where you through away your papers and you said that you were a British citizen. As a British citizen in neutral Spain, you could be interned or maybe make your way to Gibraltar, from where you could resume fighting. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can I just ask, how did you know that this was an option for you? 

MR. WALTER: Oh, we knew. The-- I mean, the underground and uh, the-- the Belgium and the resistance was very active, and the options were known. Until-- you see, another option, which was canceled out by this time, was to attempt to go to Switzerland, which many have tried. 

But the Swiss sealed the borders in 1942. And even if you did succeed, which was-- it's difficult to describe-- a tremendous feat, to cross the occupied zones and territories. Because you could not move-- you were not permitted to move from one area to another and finally cross into Vichy, France. And if you successfully arrived at the Swiss border, the Swiss just turned you back. 

We felt relatively free in the Vichy, France, which was a mistake. Because a few days after our arrival, where we stayed, the place was surrounded by French gendarmerie, by French police. We were 12 men. We had about 20 gendarmes. And they put us on a train and turned us back to Paris, handed us over to the Germans outside of Paris at Drancy. 

I understand, at this time-- I do not know if my information is correct, but I understand at this time that there was an agreement between the Petain government and Germany, that for every two workers that would be sent to Germany, one French POW would be released. 

And obviously, it's a lot easier to send workers to Germany who are not French. I was turned over to the Germans at Drancy. Stayed a very short time in Drancy-- I believe just a couple of days. You've heard of Drancy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did-- that was-- they must have thought you were Jewish, then. Had they-- 

MR. WALTER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --seen through your false papers? 

MR. WALTER: The papers did not matter any longer. They-- I do not know at this point-- I do not really remember if the question ever arose. I think it was almost taken for granted that anybody who came-- who spoke-- who came from Belgium, and who did not belong there, who could not identify his residency, must have been Jewish. I assume that this was taken for granted at this time. 

In Drancy, we were loaded-- now it was a bigger group. This was September, 1942. We were loaded onto cars, onto-- not a cattle car, but a regular box car, on an incredibly long train of boxcars. Every one of us was given a loaf of bread, a few cans of sardines, and the bucket was put into the car. The car was sealed. And I stayed a very long time on the railroad spur. And then-- after hours. And then time started to disappear, you did not know what time was anymore. 

There was very little room on the car. There was barely room to squat. The train left. And we were en route for-- I believe it was approximately three days, crossing all of Germany into Eastern Poland, into Silesia. 

The train stopped at times. We were not permitted off the train at all. You had to use the bucket. There was a little opening on the side where you could empty it. 

We were given water at one or two stops on the way. We were not given any food. People died. Many people got sick. And well, we finally arrived in the area-- not in Auschwitz, outside of Ottmut whether there was a railroad spur. It was late in the evening. We were taken off the train, and there was an immediate selection by an SS officer. 

I remember it very vividly. He walked down. He had boots. He had a whip. And a woman-- women, children were put on one side. And then you were asked if you were sick, or infirm, or could not work. And if you said yes, then you were put on that side too. Without any question-- they did not question your ability to work or lack of ability to work. In other words, if you felt that you would do better by not working, going on that side, well, then you just went. 

And then the other group was separated, and we were subsequently sent to a camp which was not a concentration camp yet. It was called, in German, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I think a correct translation would be-- let's call it slave labor camp. 

The slave labor camps, I think, were as bad or worse than the actual concentration camps, in some of which I was later. They were smaller. They were basically camps where German contractors had to perform a certain job and bought a boat, or hired labor from the German government for a fee. 

I was in Ottmut for a short time. From Ottmut I was sent to Trzebinia. Trzebinia is inside Poland. And got to Trzebinia, I believe, October, maybe November 1942. 

Trzebinia contained-- we had a group of approximately 500 men at Trzebinia. It was not far from a Polish town-- the Polish town of Chrzanow, where there was still a Jewish ghetto who could not have any contact with us whatsoever. 

We did have-- we did not wear uniforms. We did not have striped uniforms at this time. We were still wearing our clothes in which we had been arrested. Except stars of David were cut out of the clothing on your left side and on your chest-- on your back-- so that you could not escape. 

The work was a-- the construction of a railroad spur or railroad siding with German foremen and engineers ando ur SS guards. And we were worked from sundown-- from sun up to sundown-- with a small ration of bread, and one bowl of soup, with the most incredible, brutal treatment that could be imagined. 

If you were not working actively, you were clubbed. If you did not walk properly, to the work, or from the work, you were clubbed. To speak up, to speak to anybody, was actually suicide. 

The death rate at this camp was tremendous. I believe that it was approx-- I would estimate that it was approximately 10% every three to four weeks, you know, that people became ill and died. We did have a quote, death bed 

Every three to four weeks, an inspection came with SS, with a truck. They took away the people who were in the sick bay. They also, at roll call-- which occurred every day, obviously-- at roll call, asked you if you were sick or if you were not well. Then you had to remove your shoes and your outter clothing, and you were loaded onto a truck. And we knew that this truck went to the gas chamber. 

It is amazing that you know-- that you knew. Because we had no ways-- real ways of hearing about it, or knowing about it. But there was a grapevine. There was a means of communication. And it was a logical thing to assume that this was certain death. 

The Polish winter in 1942 -43 was very rough. And we worked outside in our summer clothing, in which we were transported from southern France. My finger froze at this time. It remained frozen. 

I survived the winter. A few people who were-- who were in my barracks-- one person committed suicide at the very beginning. It is really the only suicide that I saw, that I witnessed, in my 33 months of being in camps. He was a professor of romance languages of the Sorbonne. And he was a man in his early 40s. 

And he said, there's no way that he will survive, and he hanged himself by his belt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Had you talked with him before he did that? 

MR. WALTER: No. He was a neighbor in my barracks. We talked, but there was no indication that he might commit suicide. He-- we talked. He voiced his opinions about the unability to be able to accept that this is being done to a human being. 

At this point already, I learned very quickly-- which was probably one of the-- which is probably one of the important factors of my survival-- to preserve my strength. Anybody who survived survived because a number of factors-- the will to survive, the will to resist. Survival, per se, in my opinion-- and I will philosophize a little bit-- survival per se, was the ultimate resistance, I think. It was the ultimate-- the ultimate that a prisoner could do in the face of Nazism to show that he did not agree with the regime. It was-- it was the ultimate feat. Survival in itself was-- the will of survival was the ultimate feat. 

There's no way that physically any of us should have survived, or could have survived. The physical suffering, the lack of food, the exposure was normally not survivable for any human being. To go without food in the snow for three days or four days is not feasible. But it was done. The will is what did it. 

But in addition to this, other factors intervened, very obviously. One of them is a tremendous amount of luck that you had to have. And luck meant primarily to be assigned to a job where your exposure to the elements was reduced. Maybe some contacts with non-concentration camp workers who could get you some food. Maybe also-- this was a prerequisite-- a tremendous physical condition to begin with, and cunning. Cunning became very important. 

Cunning was to preserve your strength, to preserve your forces, to preserve whatever was left in your body to a maximum. To make believe that you work while you did not work. To make believe that you moved a shovel while you did not-- when you were looked at-- just enough so that you did not get beaten, but not so much as to consume your energy. 

I did this to the best of my ability in Trzebinia in 1942. Then I observed, naturally, what happened. It was very obvious. You didn't-- the gas chamber itself. The gas chambers, the ehh-ehh were the easy way out. It was much more difficult to survive than to go to a gas chamber, I think. And I also think that the concentration camps and the slave labor camps were an integral part of the genocide. Because they were extermination, but only one step removed from the gas chamber. All that was being done is extract the maximum of work, the maximum of power, that was left in this human being prior to killing him or her. 

The-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think we have to stop here. 

CREW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just to change the tape. 