[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: --they died. I mean-- 

SUBJECT 1: I don't-- 

INTERVIEWER: But I haven't met any adults. Mostly the children survived. OK, we're rolling. Oh, will you please start by giving your name and-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. My name is Eva Schlesinger. 

INTERVIEWER: And it was? 

SUBJECT 1: And I was born in Hungary. Debrecen was the name of the city I was born. 

INTERVIEWER: And your maiden name? 

SUBJECT 1: My maiden name was Horowitz. 

INTERVIEWER: And what-- and your family? 

SUBJECT 1: My family, my father's name was Arnold Horowitz, and he was a businessman in Hungary. And I don't know what you would like me to tell. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your family like? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, well, my father-- my father was in the business, wine and liquor business. Unfortunately those were the first businesses were taken away from the Jews. So my father lost his business already 1941. 

Most of the Hungarians, Jewish people, could keep their businesses almost to the very end. There was a reason for that, really. The Hungarians were not quite ready to take over businesses. They were not businesspeople. They were either farmers or very high class people. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you show us your picture of your family? 

SUBJECT 1: I have a family picture here, which are very fortunate. We have-- my aunt had this in Israel. My mother sent this shortly before our deportation to Israel. So after the war, a few duplicates were made. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have-- can you identify those people? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, this is my mother. She's not very good in the picture, but my father looked exactly like that. My four brothers, [INAUDIBLE], my sister [INAUDIBLE]. 

This is me. I was 12 years old here in this picture. Underneath it's written a date. The date is the day we arrived to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: The day-- pardon? 

SUBJECT 1: The day we arrived to Auschwitz. I wrote that date there. 

INTERVIEWER: What is that date? 

SUBJECT 1: The date says in [SPEAKING HEBREW] in Hebrew. I wrote that, a Hebrew [SPEAKING HEBREW] date. That's the date when I observed my-- that date when I lost my family. 

INTERVIEWER: They all went to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 1: We all went to Auschwitz. My father and my mother and two of my brothers were taken directly from the train to the gas chambers. This brother of mine was seen in 1945 marching in the snow without shoes. He could not walk, and those who couldn't walk, we all know now what happened. They took them in the woods and shot them. 

My brother who was also a little younger than I am but was a big, strong kid, I was told when I went back to Hungary in 1946, because I was searching for my family, I was told that he was healthy. Had no Typhus like I. He was shot the day before the liberation. They said, Jews step out. And he stepped out. 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister? 

SUBJECT 1: My cousin told the story, and I asked him, how come you didn't step out? He said, the little French what I learned in school, I thought I'm going to use. If they're going to ask me what nationality I am, because were together probably, these French prisoners of war, I will tell them I'm French. My-- my brother stepped out, and they shot him the day before the liberation. And the two younger ones were too young, and this is probably why I lost my father, because he had their hand, and they sent them together. 

And my mother was also a real youthful-looking woman who didn't have a gray hair yet. I was walking with her in Auschwitz as we arrived. You know how we all were sent in the cattle wagons. 

We arrived to Auschwitz, and I was walking with my mother. And a man came over to me and grabbed me away from my mother and said to me, don't walk with her because she won't have to look. She will have it better than you. And of course, I didn't realize what happened, that those who went on that side were sent to the gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a number? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't have a number. They didn't give numbers at that time anymore in Auschwitz. It was 12,000 people arrived every single day from Hungary when I was there. They murdered-- well, I'm reading it now in books. About 25,000 people were killed every day in those days in Auschwitz. They had no time to tattoo people. 

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask Mr. Schlesinger. Perhaps you can give us some perspective. You were in Germany. You were born in Germany? 

SUBJECT 2: I was born in Germany, yeah, in Breslau, Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you start by telling us your whole, your first name, and the city? 

SUBJECT 2: My name is Carl Schlesinger. My father had a custom made-- a store of custom-made clothing. And when Hitler came to power, I just was in my junior years in the high school. 

And since I was a very good athlete, maybe this helped me in later times in the concentration-- when I was in the concentration camp, to survive. Here is one of those diplomas I got. And here's a picture of myself. Here, this was before Hitler came. Hindenburg was the president at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: That was a certificate of-- 

SUBJECT 2: Of-- for sport. For sports, yeah. So as I said, I was a very good, one of the best athletes in my city there. So when-- 

INTERVIEWER: What are your earliest memories of change in German society when Hitler took over? Changed? What did you have happen to you? 

SUBJECT 2: When in school? In school, it was very-- I was the only Jew in my class, and since I was a very good athlete, they didn't dare to harm me. But other kids, they beat them up, and they had a very tough and very hard in school. Even the teachers, they changed suddenly from-- when there were Nazis, they were Nazis, they had to change. And they showed it to me and to other-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember their teaching courses in raciology. Do you remember any of the Russian Kanda? Did you have that? 

SUBJECT 2: No, this wasn't. This was in later years. I finished high school in 1934. Then really, all the laws, the Nazi laws, came after that. So I didn't experience those things. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do after 1934? 

SUBJECT 2: '34, I wanted to learn a craft, but this wasn't allowed for Jews anymore, so I had to go and learn some business. Wasn't much. And then everybody wanted to go in other countries, was allowed Jews. They had a permit or visa to go to Israel or South America. 

They could go, but those countries only accepted the Jews that had a craft or something. So I went on a chicken farm near Hamburg. My uncle there who lived in Hamburg had a friend. He was married to a known Gentile woman. And he had a chicken farm. 

And that time, the Kristallnacht, on November '38-- 

INTERVIEWER: May I go back a little bit? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1936, there was an Olympic-- the Olympic games were in Munich. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: You were a star athlete. Were you invited? 

SUBJECT 1: In Berlin. In Berlin. 

SUBJECT 2: I couldn't, no. They wouldn't take Jews anymore. Jews weren't permitted, even if I would have been one of those top athletes. I wouldn't be permitted there. 

INTERVIEWER: There were some Jewish athletes-- 

SUBJECT 1: Could I say some-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, but they are really outstanding there. 

SUBJECT 1: --in between? What I wanted to say, as long as you brought up the subject is the Olympic games, and not that I like to butt in with him. But in the-- because we talk so much now about the Olympic games, it was so important to the Hungarians that there was a Jew in my city who really won the wrestling in 1936 in the Olympic games, and he was one of the two people, person, out of 10,000 Jews in my city who was an exempt on deportation. He wasn't deported, because he won the wrestling in the Olympic games. It meant so much to them. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the day that Hitler took power? Where were you, and what was your reaction? 

SUBJECT 2: I went still to school at that time. And the change in the school, I was the only Jew in the class, and I didn't experience it much. Everybody had to go in the Hitler Youth, and kids in the-- boys in the other class and lower class, they didn't know that I was a Jew, and they asked me, so why don't you join the Hitler Youth? And I couldn't participate anymore in the last year, in my senior year, in sports events, because before I was always in those teams. But then I wasn't allowed anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Breslau was a big city with lots of Jewish people. Why were you the only Jewish boy in your class? 

SUBJECT 2: In that particular school, I was the only one. It was not a Jewish school. It was a Protestant school. So. 

INTERVIEWER: You were going to tell us what happened after you-- 

SUBJECT 2: The Kristallnacht? 

INTERVIEWER: --went to the chicken farm, yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. That wasn't-- the Kristallnacht was November-- November 8, I think, was it? And on the weekends, on the weekends-- it was outside from Hamburg, the chicken farm-- I took the bicycle on the weekends and left at the station and went to Hamburg for the weekend for to visit my relatives. And that particular weekend, when I left, the gendarmes came to the chicken farm, wanted to pick me up to arrest me. But in that time, I was in Hamburg, and he came with his car right away to my relatives and told them that I had to go in hiding. 

So I was hiding in different places, outside on the balcony, and they put a rope on in case they come to pick me up, they could escape. Was hiding in the basement. So for a whole week, I was in hiding. Then he came and said that the action is over. I could go, come back. 

When I went back again, they wanted to arrest me. They found out something. They wanted to arrest me in my uncle's apartment. So but the times got worse. My brother, in the meantime, he was in a concentration camp in Breslau, and from Breslau sent to Buchenwald. He-- they let him go, and he escaped to Belgium. 

He wrote to me, come, I'll tell you how to get there. So I went back to Breslau, and it was a friend of mine started to-- my plans to escape too from Germany. We went to Aachen. 

And from there, there was one young man who said the night before, he was trying to go over the border, but he couldn't make it. And he knows somehow how to get there. So with eight people we went to the woods. This was in February, at the beginning of February of '39. And we had to go through barbed wires, and we had already the Germans with the dogs behind us. 

But we just made it over the wire, and we walked all night with this deep snow. We were so exhausted when we came in the morning, there was another barbed wire, and there was certain Deutsche [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], German water. And we didn't know if we were on the Belgium side or on the other side. 

So we were so exhausted that we didn't care anymore. So one of us went in the farmhouse nearby there and was asking. He said really we are on the Belgium side. So they gave us a guide. You had to pay for them, but we had watches or something that we took along. 

And he brought us to Antwerp. My brother already lived there for a short while. But there were too many people came in the small Belgium there, and the Belgian government wanted to protect themselves, and sent all the unmarried people in the camps. And there in this camp I stayed for a whole year. 

And the war broke out in 1940, May 1940, beginning of '40. We had our German passports with us. He said now you can go. You know, they let us go. We went with all the other refugees to the Dutch refugees and the Belgian refugees, they lived in this neighborhood there, this border section. 

We were on the road. And the Stukas-- the German battle-- how do you call-- airplanes. They called them Stukas. Dive bombers, yeah. 

So these are shooting us. And on the way to Antwerp-- we wanted to go from there to Antwerp-- they arrested us, and they found German passports on us. We were a group. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have a-- 

SUBJECT 2: And they wanted-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have a J in your passport? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, they had a J in the passport, yeah. They wanted to arrest us, the Belgian soldiers, and they wanted to kill us. But one, then, no, no, no, let's-- because they thought we were the Fifth Column. It was a German spy group that lived in Western Europe. 

INTERVIEWER: Even with the J in your passport, they thought you were-- 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't know what it was, the J. And they brought us and the cousin to Antwerp. And from there, it was a transport. It was a big transport. They thought-- they brought us to France, to Orléans. 

In Orléans they separated us, the Jews and the Germans. They separated us. When it came to my turn, he didn't send me to the Jews. He sent me to the Germans. And the French, they wanted to send us to the Foreign Legion. 

But the German advance too fast in France. They had no time anymore, and they brought us to southern France, and the-- to the Pyrenees on the Mediterranean in a camp. And there, when the Germans overran France in three weeks or 14 days, what it was, they separated again the Germans and the Jews. The Jews stayed there, and the Germans they sent back to Germany. 

And from there, they'd send us in different labor camps. In those labor camps I stayed for two years. In 1942, the Germans asked the Vichy government to send all the Germans, to hand them over to the Germans again. So they sent us to Paris in a big camp, and from there they sent us to Poland. 

In Poland, I arrived in Poland. I was in a forced labor camp. And after a year, they sent us to Auschwitz. In Auschwitz, they separated it again, the one left and right. The ones who went to the right, they went to the gas chambers. 

The ones to the left, they left, and they gave us tattoos. The tattoos, everyone who had a tattoo survived, I mean, temporarily. And the other ones they didn't tattoo, they went in the gas chambers. 

So I was there for four weeks, and there was a transport. They put all this transport to work in transports to other camps. So I said I want to go to another camp. And they sent us to Warsaw. In Warsaw, most people don't know that after the uprising, there was a concentration camp Warsaw. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: In Warsaw, in the ghetto, there was a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT 2: After the uprising, in the ghetto, in the ghetto they made a concentration camp Warsaw. Yeah. A lot of-- most people don't know about it. 

INTERVIEWER: I thought the ghetto was just completely destroyed. 

SUBJECT 2: It was destroyed. But in the destroyed ghettos, they erected a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: And they brought Jews in from-- 

SUBJECT 2: From Auschwitz, mostly from Auschwitz, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: To do what? 

SUBJECT 1: Clean up. 

SUBJECT 2: To clean up the-- 

SUBJECT 1: Clean up the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: To clean up the destroyed ghetto. 

SUBJECT 1: There were no Jews left, and they were brought in. 

SUBJECT 2: So after year 19-- this was in 1943 to 1944, the Russians started an offensive. And they wanted to liquidate the camp. They said everybody who can't walk, we put them on trucks. But they didn't put them on trucks. They killed them all. 

So we started to walk for six days. You can call it like a death march. It was hot in summer at the end of July. It was so hot. We had nothing to drink. 

And every night, when they surround us, we thought they were going to kill us again. We had nothing to drink. With our hands, we digged holes in the ground to get some water, groundwater. When we saw a little dirty, on the way that we're marching, a little dirty water, we were drinking from those. 

Then one day they bought us to a river, big river. And the Nazis, the SS was on the bridge with machine guns. And everybody who went too far in the river was shot. On the sixth day, by marching, everybody who couldn't march anymore, they took them aside and they shot them. 

So on the sixth day-- there was no rain until then-- on the sixth day, then they put us in a wagon. Before the last day, it was raining like-- it was very-- it rained very hard. And we had-- they gave us one blanket. The blanket was soaked with water. This soaked blanket, we used. They put us with 90 people in the wagons. 

And the middle was free, and on both sides there were 90 people, 45 people sitting there in the crouched position with a blanket, we blanket. And after that, we were riding, riding for five days. Just this steam, you know how it is in hot weather, temperature. So everybody want to try to move a little bit around or got up. Everybody who got up, they got with the rifle butt, hit him to death. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean for five days you stayed in a crouched position? 

SUBJECT 2: Crouched position, yeah. And they gave us a bread, a bread we couldn't eat, because it was so try, we had nothing to drink. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't relieve yourself? 

SUBJECT 2: What? 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't relieve yourself? Nothing? 

SUBJECT 1: They drank their own-- 

SUBJECT 2: They drank their own urine, people. We are sitting on the dead, people on the dead bodies, for five days. And once I couldn't sit anymore, I got a little bit. He noticed it and they hit me with a rifle butt on my head, too. 

And there was a German couple. He was a prisoner himself, but he was not a Jew. He was in charge. They called him Kapo And he like-- I knew him. I was under his commander in Warsaw. And he saw him beating me, and he said stop this. And he listened, and he really saved my life. 

And one day, on the fourth day, we came to Dresden. In the station there were German soldiers. And they stopped the train there, and they handed us boiling tea. And I grabbed one of those dishes there. And everybody was jumping on the same dish. 

The boiling tea went on my chest. So you could say I had a second degree burn on my chest for another two days until we arrived in Dachau. In Dachau they separated us again. Because I had a burn there, they wanted to treat me for this. But the rest of us, they sent another camp again. I stayed in Dachau. 

And this was in another year. 1945 in April, there came a appeal from Himmler that all the Jews had to be liquidated. So they did put us on transports again towards the Alps. But we were surrounded by the American army already. And on the 29th of April, we were liberated by the American tanks. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back a little bit. First of all, you have a pair of glasses on your-- 

SUBJECT 2: Oh yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How could you-- I thought they took everything away like glasses and hearing aids. 

SUBJECT 2: Most of them then, from the-- I saved them, because I was hold in my hand. I took a chance. Hold in my hand. Every time I saw that some danger was arising, I took my hand and saved it. 

The middle is broken. The side pieces are two different ones. And a German civilian worker fixed it for me. It was just in the last, because everybody wanted to go in the last stage of the war. And he wanted to be good to me. And he fixed it to me, for me. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Schlesinger, I don't understand how you were able to hold onto those glasses, having gone through the procedures at Auschwitz of being stripped and all that. 

SUBJECT 2: Taking away everything? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: No, they didn't take away glasses. They took-- the glass, the piles of glass of what you saw, they were from dead ones. But they went out for people-- they had the war glasses. Because they figured if they destroy them, break them, then you're lost without glasses. 

SUBJECT 1: Carl, why don't you tell the story how you kept that picture between your teeth at Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, yeah. If I can go back to Auschwitz. [INAUDIBLE] Auschwitz. They took everything away from us, but I had one of family pictures. And I took a chance and put it in-- I folded it up a little piece, and I put in my mouth. 

And when they sent us to Warsaw from Auschwitz, they checked us again. And I was afraid, if they find this in my mouth, they kill me right away. But I took this chance. 

And in Warsaw, [INAUDIBLE] in the barrack. I showed it to somebody there. And they said to the block [NON-ENGLISH]-- this was the head of the block. Said oh, look, he has a picture there, a family picture. And I showed it to him. 

And he noticed my brother, who was in Buchenwald, he was together with him in Buchenwald. So from that point on, [INAUDIBLE] and I had it better. He preferred me, gave me a little better, more, a little more extra bread, a piece of extra bread. 

It was very important there. And I kept the picture until about three weeks before the liberation. And I lost it. 

Nobody took it away. I was hiding in my belt, my head, everywhere. And I lost it. But it's the same picture. My brother had the same picture in Belgium. He lived underground, and I got it back from him. 

INTERVIEWER: There's so many questions I must ask. First of all, you met in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: No, no, no. 

SUBJECT 1: We met in Bergen-Belsen after the liberation. 

SUBJECT 2: After. 

SUBJECT 1: Because Carl heard that his parents, very fortunately, survived the war, and they were liberated in Theresienstadt. But he wasn't quite sure where they are, and he went from camp to camp to search for them. And that's when he met me. Because I was still sitting in Bergen-Belson in 1947 because I had nowhere to go. And that's where we met in 1946. 

INTERVIEWER: You were liberated in 1945. 

SUBJECT 1: '45. 

SUBJECT 2: --5. 

SUBJECT 1: And I was still there at the middle of 1947 in a displaced person camp. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel to be in the same place? 

SUBJECT 1: Not-- it wasn't exactly the same place. They moved us where the officers used to live. It was a little better, and the food was better, and I worked for the United Nations there. 

But it was Bergen-- still Bergen-Belson. The old camp was burned down because it was typhus and full of billions of lice in that old camp. That was burned down by the British. 

But I had nowhere to go. I had no-- I went back to Hungary in 1946 because I thought that I have to convince myself that I might find somebody. And but of course, I didn't, and I went back to Germany again. 

I have to mention this before we go any further, that I was not talking about this for 25 or 30 years at all. It's just lately that I began to talk about it because I feel that it's my obligation. I feel that the memory of my parents and my four brothers, my grandparents, my hundred relatives, and for 6 million others, the memory should be kept alive. 

I'm not talking about this because I certainly don't enjoy it. But I feel that it's my duty. And I don't know if I should mention this, if it can go on a camera. Before we were deported from Hungary, all the women were examined by the-- in their inside by a midwife so that they shouldn't smuggle any diamonds out. 

And as we were taken into that room, my mother begged the midwife, my daughter as a youngster. Don't touch her. And she didn't, and she said then you go out. Tell the soldier who was standing outside with a gun on his shoulder. Tell him that I examined you. 

Afterwards, all the women were sent out to the field, stripped half naked, thousands of them. And the soldiers were lifting up the breasts one by one, all the women, to search for diamonds under their breasts. 

Maybe they pasted a diamond there. They wanted to be very sure that when we leave the country, there will be no jewelry or anything smuggled out. And then, I mentioned already our arrival to Auschwitz. As we arrived to Auschwitz, my father looked out and he said, what kind of a place is this? Men stood there with a striped uniform. He says, what kind of a place-- where did we come? 

And he was Polish, so my father spoke to him in Jewish. And a man said to him, in Hebrew, that [SPEAKING HEBREW]. It means that a shroud like this, a shroud where you bury-- they bury you in, you will get also. Well, my father never got a shroud like that because he was taken directly from the train. And he turned to us, my father translated to us. 

And I-- that's the last time I saw him, holding my two younger brothers in their hand. And my mother called over, take care of the children. But just to tell you that how little we knew in the crowded wagon where we were, and this was end of June, very, very hot. 

My mother somehow found a little corner in the wagon, 75 people with bundles. Wanda put a nail there and hung up my pleated skirt and said, Eva, wherever a young girl arrives has to always look neat. So she took care of my pleated skirt. 

And when we came down from the wagon, they quickly, quickly had to get down. Everybody was allowed to take only a knapsack. At home, we sold these knapsacks, and my mother made them out of tapestry, because she thought when we come home, she will undo the knapsack, and she will have her tapestry back. As we got down from the wagon, because we had to get down so fast, my mother said, Eva, you forgot your knapsack. I said, the man said he's going to send it to us. I had no idea about anything. 

And then, as I mentioned it before how this man saved my life. When he saw me walking with my mother, he said that my mother wouldn't have to work, and I am younger. And so I was so glad when we went into the barracks, and I said I'm so glad my mother is not here with me, because she wouldn't be able to take this. They have it much better. 

And that same afternoon, a Polish girl gathered us around. She was a kapo. And she said to us, you foolish Hungarian girls, how naive you are. That same, very same day, we were already shaven and everything. Nobody had any hair. She said you are so foolish. Your parents are not alive already. They are all murdered. Same day. 

And we didn't believe her. We didn't believe it all through those months when we were there. We just simply didn't believe it. And maybe it was lucky for me that I didn't believe it. Because if I really would have known that when I'm going to be liberated, all I will have is my sister, I don't think I would have wanted to live. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you lose track of your sister in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 1: Matter of fact, I did. In the first few weeks, we were not together. And then by such miracle that would take me a while to explain, somebody happened to know us from another city, who happened to vacation in another city. She was [INAUDIBLE]. 

Saw my sister, and she yelled over to me, in a place where you saw thousands of girls naked, we went to the bathhouse. She called over to me and she said, Eva, I saw your sister. And then I knew that where my sister is in what camp, I begged the block leaders to let me go over there. Let me do some work. 

It was unheard of. And they let me go. And that's when I went over there, and my sister wasn't there. And then she was sent away to the bathhouse. So I lie down on the floor and fell asleep. And all of a sudden, I hear somebody's voice, and she said oh, that's my little brother. 

In other words, in the five weeks where she didn't see me, I shrunk so much that she thought I was the little brother. Of course, I had no hair, and I looked very much like my brother. But I looked like a very little-- well, at the time I was liberated, of course, I weighed 60 pounds. 

I was just skin and bones. And the doctor said that a few more days and I wouldn't have lived. And that was lucky for me that Bergen-Belsen was liberated three weeks before the war ended, because in Bergen-Belsen, nobody would have been alive by May 8, nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever hear of medical experimentation when you were in the camps? 

SUBJECT 1: Not in the camp, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Only after? 

SUBJECT 1: But if I may tell one story, that I was taken to Birkenau. And we had no water there, absolutely no water when we came there. Only weeks later, the German gypsies came and dug water, dug from the ground. Afterwards they were all killed, of course. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't wash for three weeks? 

SUBJECT 1: We had no water, none. We didn't wash nothing. We didn't drink, we didn't wash, nothing. Nothing. And then they had some water, and we drank the same water, and we washed our bodies in the same water. 

And as a matter of fact, typhus broke out. My mouth was full of blood full of blood And I went to the ambulance for treatment, and there was this Hungarian Jewish doctor, a woman, who took care of me. And she always would say to me, oh my child, how can you eat? And one day, I went in there after-- you must have heard about the der appell When thousands-- at least 15,000 girls had to stand in the heat, five deep, and stand for hours just to count us twice a day. 

And after the der appell I would go in for treatment. And that one day, the doctor was, what I thought, very mean to me. She said to me, get out of here, but get out fast! I said to myself that she, why is so bad to me? 

I, more or less, went there because she was a mother figure to me. I felt so good. Also, I asked her to keep me there because I was dying to be in a bed. We had no beds. We were lying on the floor like herrings, thousands and thousands of girls. If one straightened out, for the other, there was no room. 

And she just shoved me out that day, and she was-- I thought she was mean to me. What was really that Mengele-- you must, I'm sure you know about Mengele-- he was standing there at the doorway. And that day, he wanted 30 people from the ambulance, because those who were very sick, they went first. And they went on the wagon, and they told him that they're going to go to Auschwitz in a hospital. 

And the doctor, of course, wanted to save my life. And she told me, get out of here quickly. And here Mengele stood on one side of the doorway. How he didn't grab me, I never know. I never know. He could have easily grabbed me, and that would have been the end of me there. 

INTERVIEWER: He gra-- he was-- he wanted 30 people? 

SUBJECT 1: 30 people from that particular ambulance. 

INTERVIEWER: For what? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, to the crematorium. 

INTERVIEWER: Not for medical-- 

SUBJECT 1: Of course not. And they were-- the poor people were told that they will get better treatment in Auschwitz in a hospital. And they went on a wagon, but the doctor knew where they're going. 

And she thought that I wasn't sick enough for that yet. So she told me, Eva, get out of here fast. And here I walked out, and he didn't grab me. I was just very, very lucky. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in Auschwitz, Mr. Schlesinger, you said you met two young men who had returned from the St. Louis. Can you describe that, how-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, from-- not in Auschwitz, I met him in Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER: Start-- can you start from the beginning? 

SUBJECT 2: Those two young men, I knew them from my hometown, Breslau. And I met him in Warsaw, in the concentration camp Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER: Start-- can you say you knew who from Warsaw? Can you start from the beginning of that story? You knew who from Warsaw? 

SUBJECT 2: Two young men. They came from my hometown. They wanted to go to America on the St. Louis on a boat, St. Louis. And the boat, as you know, didn't no port-- Cuba and America didn't let them in. They brought them back to Europe again. And some of them escaped. 

They got to permit to land in France or Belgium. But they came back to Germany. And from there, they took them in a concentration camp. Those two young men, they came to Auschwitz, and like me, from Auschwitz to Warsaw. And they told me in Warsaw the same story. 

And in Warsaw, a typhus epidemic broke out in 1943, the end of 1943. And both of them died there. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they tell you about the trip on the St. Louis? 

SUBJECT 2: They actually didn't tell me, though. I had no idea what it was, what it meant. Only after the war when everybody was talking about it, I knew what it meant. They didn't let them in in Cuba and, then America. But it showed that 1,000 people they didn't let, because they were Jews, didn't let them in in this country while, at the present time, hundreds of thousands of other refugees, they let them in here. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they-- did you-- why did they end up in concentration camps? Some people were-- 

SUBJECT 2: Unfortunately they brought them back to Germany. The other ones, they could land in-- they had a permit to go to France or in Belgium. Maybe those two, eventually maybe they landed someplace in a concentration camp, because all the Jews in Europe were rounded up, and they took them. But some could went in hiding. But those two, they came back to Germany, and from then, the Gestapo took them right away over and put them in concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: You know, you left your family to join your brother in Belgium. Weren't you concerned about leaving your family in Breslau when you went to-- 

SUBJECT 2: My parents, they saw that-- yeah, that's what I wanted to say. The Gestapo was after me. Since my brother fled from Germany, the Gestapo came to my parents' house and they said where's my brother? 

They said they don't know where he is. They said if he doesn't show up, they're going to take me. So I had no other choice to go and escape to from Germany. I just was lucky that they didn't catch me at the border. Otherwise I wouldn't be here anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: What is that currency that you're holding there? 

SUBJECT 2: When I was in Poland in a forced labor camp, I made a trick there. There was a German civilian company that used prisoners for working. And one of those-- how can you say-- worker. 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, no, no. I found out through my brother, who lives still in Germany, he was writing illegally to somebody in the ghetto there. It's hard to explain how he got it. Anyway, I knew that my parents went to Theresienstadt in 1942. 

And after the war, I was-- I went to Munich after I was liberated. And I heard people from Theresienstadt went to Munich too, and I was listening around if I find somebody. And I really found a woman. She said, yeah, I know your parents were liberated. But I don't know where they went to from Theresienstadt. 

So I went on my road, and I went to different towns, cities of Germany. And I came to Frankfurt, and there I met somebody else again. He said, yeah, I know your parents were liberated, and they went to Berlin. And then I started my tour to Berlin. 

This was in the Russian sector. It wasn't the British. I had to cross the border to the Russian sector to Berlin. And I was arrested by the Russians. 

When the Russians, they put me in prison for three days. They send me back again. But I stayed at the border, and I tried again. And finally they caught me again, but they let me go. So I came to Berlin in the end of 1945. And there my parents gave me those money, and they told me about Theresienstadt. 

SUBJECT 1: I just can't forget to mention that his father was very fortunate, that he got a little better treatment, because from the First World War, he was-- 

SUBJECT 2: He was wounded in the First-- 

SUBJECT 1: Wounded, wounded. 

SUBJECT 2: --in the First World War. 

SUBJECT 1: And somehow, the Germans-- 

SUBJECT 2: That they treated him better. 

SUBJECT 1: I wanted to sh-- this was Theresienstadt, you know. He wanted to show it to the world and to the Red Cross that they treat the Jews very well. And he happened to be that-- 

INTERVIEWER: I didn't understand the money, though. Can you hold it? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: They used money in that camp. 

SUBJECT 2: To show the Red Cross who usually made their visits there, and they showed them that they have very good, those Jews in Theresienstadt. It was like a model concentration camp. And they gave them money. They had some stores, and then they could buy things. So those are the money they gave him there. He saved it and he gave it to me after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: You are especially graphic about some of the experiences you had. And you talked about the ride to Auschwitz, or I think you were going to Auschwitz. Were sitting on your haunches. I didn't think it would be possible for people to sit like that without moving for five days. I mean-- 

SUBJECT 2: From Warsaw? 

INTERVIEWER: Where-- this ride that you had to sit with the blanket. 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, in Warsaw, from-- yeah. After-- yeah, for five days-- 

INTERVIEWER: Sitting in one place? 

SUBJECT 2: In one place, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: In one position? 

SUBJECT 2: One position, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Some people died. 

SUBJECT 2: You couldn't move there. 

SUBJECT 1: Some people couldn't take it. 

SUBJECT 2: We were sitting on the dead ones, that they were beaten to death or they died there. They drank their own urine. 

INTERVIEWER: Wha-- how? 

SUBJECT 2: It was just fortunately that some survived, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, but did they have utensils? I mean, how could they-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, we never had utensils. 

SUBJECT 2: It was just-- they couldn't believe it. When they opened the doors when they brought up to Dachau, they wouldn't believe it what happened, how we could survive there. They opened the doors, and they fell out, among them maybe a dozen dead ones in each wagon there. 

INTERVIEWER: Only a dozen? 

SUBJECT 1: That's right. 

SUBJECT 2: In each wagon, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Only a dozen? I would think-- 

SUBJECT 2: Some maybe more, but-- 

INTERVIEWER: --most of them would die. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, we thought too. It was unbearable there. 

INTERVIEWER: You had no food, no water. 

SUBJECT 2: They gave us bread, but the bread without water, you couldn't eat it. It was a big loaf of bread, but nobody could eat the bread. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you undergo examinations such as Eva had to undergo? I mean, not internals obviously, but did you have to undergo examinations-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, they checked before-- as I said, when we went from Auschwitz to Warsaw, they checked us again. We had to strip, and then they checked us if you have anything on you. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you aware that people were being exterminated? 

SUBJECT 2: When we were in Auschwitz, I wouldn't believe it was a gas chamber. They told us, if you don't make it, you go in there. You see the chimneys down there? I said yeah, I see the chimney. 

But you see the smoke coming out there? I said yeah. They burn people there. They gas them, they burn them. I wouldn't believe it until I came to Warsaw, and everybody was talking about it. And then finally, I believed it. This really was unbelievable that they would do those things. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the odor, the smell? 

SUBJECT 2: We didn't-- 

SUBJECT 1: We didn't believe it. We didn't believe it. They kept on telling us, people who were there already for years. They kept on telling us, they are burning people there. We just didn't believe it that human beings would do such a thing. 

SUBJECT 2: --this possible. 

SUBJECT 1: I just simply-- I said they told me my mother is in a better place. She doesn't have to work. I couldn't imagine they would kill her just because you are Jewish. I just simply did not believe. That's all there is to it. They couldn't tell me that. 

So when we were in Auschwitz, they selected 300 girls to this particular work. They looked at our hands. They had their very nimble fingers for that particular work and good eyes. And we couldn't imagine what kind of work we're going to have to do. And we were selected, and suddenly we couldn't go. We were the lucky ones. We're going to leave Auschwitz. 

Suddenly, typhus broke out, and we couldn't leave for another five weeks. Five-- now it's five weeks. We thought it would last forever. And they had to reselect us, of course, because in the five weeks, most people became so weak that maybe, you know, couldn't go. I was very fortunate that night. It was very dark, because they were bombing around Auschwitz. 

And so they kept the camp very, very dark at night. So they reselected us with one little flickering light, of course, undressed, completely naked. And they couldn't see my body. If they would have seen it, I never would have gotten into the transport. I was already so weak and so thin. 

And then they took us away to this work camp. And by the time I arrived at this work camp, of course we had a lot of marching to do, and a few days in the train with very little food. And when we arrived at this work camp, the man looked us over. 

He was a civilian, German. And he picked me out from that group, and he said, why did they send you here? You could never do this work. I was so skinny, he couldn't understand that I would be getting among these girls. 

And he asked me if I could speak German. And I said I can. And actually that saved my life there. Because he said, I need somebody anybody who can translate to the German to other Hungarian girls. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of work? 

SUBJECT 1: The work was-- it was called glas fertigung. They were blowing the bulbs, electric bulbs for airplanes. And the girls, my sister among them, had to stand on their feet from 5 o'clock in the morning. The men were blowing the bulbs, and they had to cut it down. 

I can't explain it. You have to-- they blew it from the-- it was very hard to work, stand on your feet. But I couldn't do it. I was very weak. And because I could speak the language, they used me more or less to be a Dolmetscher more or less, to be an interpreter when they couldn't understand the Hungarian girls. 

Also, an old German man took me under his wings. And I could walk about, because I had that work job, had to clean the place. And so this man brought me food every single day. And I-- and I would, every morsel I would share with my sister. And we went to the bathroom, and we ate it there. And he brought me a sandwich every day. If it wouldn't be for that, I probably wouldn't be alive today. A sandwich and a piece of fruit. 

But we didn't stay too long in this camp, and I don't know if I have the time to tell this, but out of gratitude to this old German, I went and tore off a piece of cloth from my sister's coat. It was a black coat. And I pulled out the threads. In that camp already we had blankets. I pulled out some threads, and I asked the German man if he would bring me a needle. And from memory, I embroidered him on this black material with white thread Hungarian motifs, a cover for a book, and gave it to him for Christmas. 

But we didn't stay too long in this camp, unfortunately. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT 1: Then-- because I think the Russians must have been very near. We would have been probably liberated in a short time, so they dragged us to another camp. They took us near Hamburg, also a lot of marching and a lot of everything. 

We got to this camp. We didn't work there anymore, but we had-- it was a lot of beating going on in that camp. I also forgot to mention that in this other camp, in the other camp, I tore off a piece from my apron, just a piece of material, because it was January, very, very cold, and we were shaven. And I made a kerchief for myself to cover my head, and I was beaten up for that, for doing that. 

So in this other camp, we didn't work anymore, but the men just found pleasure in it, just to beat people, just to-- everywhere where he could find a girl would just hit left and right. 

INTERVIEWER: With their hands? 

SUBJECT 1: With their hands, 25 on the back end. My sister was beaten once by him, because-- because he didn't think that the beds were made right. One day he wanted them flat, other day he wanted-- for no reason. Actually it was no reason. 

And about six weeks later or so, I think the British must have been very near. They evacuated us from that camp, and they took us to Bergen-Belsen. And that was a horrible camp, indescribable. I mean, the picture what I have here-- I don't know where we have the picture. It-- we have the picture right here, yes. It says on this picture that, at the time the British came in in 1945, April the 15th, this camp was liberated by the British. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that you? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, that's me. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold it up? 

SUBJECT 1: But that picture was taken in 1947. 

INTERVIEWER: This was two years after liberation. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh yes. There were 10,000 unburied bodies were found in this camp the day the British came in the camp, and 13,000 people died within two months after the liberation, because they could not be saved anymore in that camp. As we were-- as the British marched in, I could not move anymore. I was up in the fourth bunk with billions of lice, and it was just an indescribably situation. My sister came and said-- really, these were the very words-- Eva, even if you die, you have to see for yourself that we are liberated. 

But I couldn't make it. I couldn't come down by myself. So two girls were holding me, one girl at each side. And the German soldiers put on the white arm band at that time already, because they gave themselves up. And the Hungarians took over the camp. So we came out, and of course those girls who had still the energy to shout, they started to shout in Hungarian very happily that we are liberated finally. 

So one Hungarian soldier started to shoot. This was after we were already liberated. And a girl right in front of me dropped dead. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did he shoot-- 

SUBJECT 1: Why? Because-- because he heard us that we were so happy, that we are free. 

INTERVIEWER: A Hungarian-- 

SUBJECT 1: A Hungarian. Hungarians took care of Bergen-Belson at the time of the liberation, because the Germans had the white arm bands and they gave themselves up. And this particular girl who was shot dead happened to have been a Czechoslovakian girl who lived in hiding in Hungary for years. Then she was deported with the Hungarians. 

And she was the sister of the block leader, so she had it a little better. She worked in the kitchen. She looked very good. And five minutes after we were liberated, she was killed. And the girl who was holding me got a bullet through her arm, the other one under the eye. I was, luckily, saved. But I had typhus, and soon after that they put me in this so-called hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't understand why you had Hungarian soldiers in a German-- 

SUBJECT 1: The Hungarians and the Germans were allies. And I don't know how they arranged that, but the Germans wanted to show, probably, that they are the good ones, and they gave themselves up. And the Hungarians were the ones who watched the camp. 

And these Hungarian soldiers started to shoot. And minutes later, of course, we had to go back in the barracks, because it was too dangerous to be out. So we never even enjoyed being liberated. Because maybe everybody didn't know about this, but this is documented. 

Maybe everybody was liberated in Bergen-Belsen doesn't even know about this incident. But we all had to go back to the barracks, and we never felt for a minute we were free. Because back in the barracks, and that was that. I was taking very short-- a short time after that to this so-called hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was liberation for you. 

SUBJECT 1: That was liberation. 

SUBJECT 2: The later days of the war, the Germans took anybody from Ukrainian as guards for the concentration camps. We had Ukrainians, Tatars, the Mongols, and in Nazi uniform, they were guarding us. They had from Netherlands, from Belgium. 

They all sympathized with the Germans. They had-- they put them in uniforms, and they were guarding us while the soldiers, the soldiers, the German soldiers were on the front. You know, it was already those maybe they couldn't trust, but for guarding the camps, they were good enough. 

SUBJECT 1: As I was laying there very, very ill in the hospital, this girl was with me in the same room. She would tell me all this. Eva, don't turn around. She's dead. This was going on like every hour of the day. How I made it, I never know. I really never know how I-- I don't know. 

Even in Auschwitz, we got just one small piece of bread every day after der appell And if we were lucky, we got a little jam. And that was the portion for the day. So they would give for 10,000 girls the piece of bread. And then they start all over again with the jam. They wanted to put it on the top of the bread. By the time they came around with the jam, usually I had no more bread to-- I ate it immediately, because we were starving to death. 

So I-- excuse me. Excuse me that I did just that, but that's exactly what I did. I licked up-- that was my ration. And what I wanted to mention is this. That when we really felt that we are very close to liberation, all these German women who took care of us wanted to learn a little English. They wanted to show, probably, that they were good to us and everything. 

I also wanted to learn a little English. I knew German from school. But English I didn't know anything, not a word. So this girl who took English-- just like I took German, she happened to think English, because she came from that part of Hungary which later became Romania-- I just asked her to teach me how to say I am hungry. That's the first thing I wanted to know how to say, because I was starving to death, and I thought the first Englishman I'm going to eat, I want to tell him I'm hungry. And that's really-- those were the first English words I've learned. 

INTERVIEWER: How were you clothed in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 1: How I were clothed? As we arrived, they took away everything, everything. And then you would get a rag. You would really just call it a rag. And for some reason, they thought that we have to go through this bathhouse so often, many times I would come back from the bathhouse completely naked, absolutely no clothes. Because there were so many people arrived at that time when we came that they just simply didn't have enough clothes for everybody. 

So many times, I just came home without anything on me. One day, as we walked home and went to the front of the camp where the men were, this one prisoner saw me-- Hungarian by the way-- saw me walking naked. And they worked with clothes, with clothes in that camp, sorted clothes or something. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean you walked around naked? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did many people? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, some. I was too weak probably to go and grab. You had to-- you had to really use elbows to shove and push, which I could never do, to get clothes. And I was maybe didn't shove enough, was maybe too weak to rush. So those who didn't couldn't get anything. 

So I came home completely naked, and this man, he was really waited at the fence for those girls who didn't get any clothes. And he threw me a dress. And he said there's a piece of bread in the pocket. And that bread meant as much as-- if you probably would offer me now $10,000, I don't think it would make me as happy as it-- not that we are rich now, but it really wouldn't as a piece of bread what it meant to me at that time. 

Two days later, they took that dress away from me. So that's how we were clothed. We were not clothed at all. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there problems for you with clothing? 

SUBJECT 2: Clothing? Mostly winter time there. In Poland, it was very-- they have a very cold winter there. They gave us a thin cotton coat and a cotton pant. When you had to work outside, we worked on the railroads that carried the rails. And you know, it was very cold, how you could have worked the-- kept the iron there, lift it up. We were about 50 people on one or two. Everybody was ducking. You know, if you stain yourself with this ration of what they gave you, you die. 

So you had to work with your brain more than with your foot-- or with your strength. And mostly paper bags, cement bags just protection against cold. So if you have to, on the knees, under the cotton coat, we put paper bags from cement that we-- a lot of them worked with cement. 

But you know, and put on the feet, they gave us wooden shoes through the snow. The wood-- accumulated on the wood. You couldn't walk. You had to shake it off, until the sole came off. So you had to walk almost barefoot in the snow. So we put rags around, paper around, and that makes insulation there. 

SUBJECT 1: And my sister-- 

SUBJECT 2: So you have to use all kinds of tricks to survive. 

SUBJECT 1: Somehow, I don't know how, my sister wore an alligator shoe in Auschwitz. She arrived from Hungary in her alligator shoes, and they didn't take her shoes away. She had to give it up very soon, because she couldn't walk in it in Auschwitz. With the little heel, you couldn't. She had to exchange it for a wooden shoe. 

SUBJECT 2: Can I say something on a little incident from Warsaw? There was a Greek, a very handsome young man. He spoke maybe nine languages. So he was preferred in the-- he worked in the laundry. 

In the laundry, in the wagon, there was soldier and the guard, he went outside the ghetto. And there, he met a Polish girl. And they made an arrangement that he wants to escape one day, and he even spoke to the guard to escape too. 

But when it came to it, he backed out, the guard. So he had no other choice. He knocked him down by the rear in the ghetto, outside to ghetto already. But another guard on the tower, he saw this incident, and he shot him. 

So they brought him in the infirmary in the camp for three months. But in the meantime, the report went to Berlin. And one day, on Sunday, we never had a der appell It means when they count you. 

We never had one on Sunday. And the day before, they erected the big, like a telephone pole in the middle of the camp. So on this particular Sunday, they had a der appell We had to stand around there, and they brought him tied. The hands were behind, tied behind the back. And they hung him in front of us. And their own brother had to watch it, so of course he fainted and unconscious. But I wonder brutal how is-- brutal they were, these-- 

SUBJECT 1: If you would allow me, maybe-- 

SUBJECT 2: --Germans. 

SUBJECT 1: Could I say something about it? My feelings about it, are these-- I feel that our deportation could have been prevented. Is it-- would you allow me to talk about that? You see, because it was so late in the day, in 1944, when they deported the Hungarian Jews. 

Please don't misunderstand me. I don't for one minute think that we are more important than the German Jews or the Polish Jews or any of them. But in those days when they took my husband, and they took the German Jews, there are nothing the Allies could have done, because the Germans were ahead. At the time they took the Hungarians, the Allies were winning everywhere. 

I don't know if I brought along that magazine or not. I'm reading this magazine that the Americans were stationed in southern Italy. And they went along on the same track line where we went from my city to Auschwitz. A few miles away from Auschwitz, they were bombing some oil refineries just about three miles away from Auschwitz. 

We even saw those planes. We heard them, and we saw them. And we were begging that they should just come, and we didn't care if we die. We didn't care anything. But we could never understand it. 

And what I'm reading now, after the war, of course, that two men escaped from Auschwitz in 1944, April, April 10th. And that was almost unheard of, because only a few people managed to escape from Auschwitz. They brought the whole blueprint of the camp exactly were the crematorium is located. 

Exac-- exactly where the crematoriums are located and everything. And they sent it to all the governments. So there was no question about it, that they couldn't have at least bombed the crematoriums. The crematoriums were so easily recognizable-- 

[AUDIO OUT] 

