INTERVIEWER 1: Vital statistics. OK, Greg, can you just go back and give us your name and where you were born and so forth, and your circumstances, your family, what kind of a family background? 

SUBJECT: Sure, my name is Greg Fruewirth I have been in the United States since 1956, and that was quite a change because I was born over in Austria in 1941. And I have a sister. She's 12 years older than I am. And my life is somewhat of a lot of varied experiences, and maybe I can tell you a little bit about that a little later. But after being born in Vienna and growing up with the war going on, and my dad serving in the Russian-- on the Russian front for the German Army, we had some minor problems, like the apartment building next door to ours got bombed out, and ours was declared unsafe. 

And so with Dad out in the war on the, on the Russian front, we were sort of packed up, if you will, by the, the Austrian government with a couple of suitcases and a bed, and I think a sewing machine, if I remember right. And put on the train and I don't know what the word is, but I think we were relocated-- I guess that's the official word-- to a small farming town in, in upper Austria, sort of halfway between Linz and Saltzberg. It's, it's a little town of maybe 1,000 people in the foothills of the Alps. A gorgeous place to live if you, if you could just live on, on the, on the air and the vista. 

But turned out not so nice a place to be to live and to grow up because the people there viewed us, us as outsiders, as intruders, if you will. And you grew up, or, or I can remember myself growing up being very much an outcast, if you will. So being a DP, a deported person, in my own country. And that's a strange, strange feeling. 

In retrospect, you, you try to think back about what made the people around you act that way towards you, and it's understandable. The people that live in a small farming town, they worry about their crops and about their chickens and eggs, and basically, they're not usually into politics. 

But what they didn't appreciate is that we, the deported people that were in Vienna, that my dad was a little businessman. He had a barber shop and a beauty shop, which you find typically combined over there. And he didn't care anything about politics either. And, but their perception was that if you were from the big city, you, you were part of the elite, and you had had something to do with, with the Anschluss and the fact that all the ones in Austria belonged to Germany, which is something that was sort of tough to understand. 

But as a result of all of that, there were some very, very negative kinds of, of feelings that those people would express to us on an ongoing basis as a family. And in fact, the government did go to a certain family that had a little bit larger house than usual-- and most of the houses are small in the first place-- and he said, take that room. That belongs to them. And this family now lives here. 

So you know, you can legislate morality and you can force something like that, but you can't force people to be nice to each other. And by and large, they weren't. You know, it was a-- what's the word? Maybe a peaceful coexistence kind of a thing where you sort of walked around somewhat guarded, making sure you never kept you back too far away from a wall because someone was going to get you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you lived with your family in one room. 

SUBJECT: We lived in, yeah, from 1940-- late '44, early '45 until 1956, we lived in one room. No running water, no bathroom. You know, but it was a roof over our heads, and it was clean. My parents kept it, or, my parents-- my mother kept it clean. But it was crowded. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What sort of experiences did you have in school there as a child? 

SUBJECT: Uh, my, my dad-- and this is me perhaps jumping around a little bit-- but after he had come back, so all of his experiences, was unable to find any kind of work in that little town. So he typically would have to go away from home for a period of weeks, sometimes months to have a job that would be able to support us. So we didn't have that much of a regular family life. My mother was there, and my sister part of the time and myself. 

But, but one thing that had come, come through with all this is that you have what you are. And that's, I think, is a message that I sort of got from my parents very early on in life. And it's not-- you aren't what you have. You can have pots and pots of gold and someone comes by and runs off with them. And you can have lots of other things in terms of possessions, but they don't make you a being. But if you are a being, and you've got compassion for other people, and you've learned, you've, you've got knowledge, people might take the clothes off your back, but you still got the knowledge. They can't take that away from you. 

And so from that there came a lot of a push to be successful. Perhaps overly so sometimes. But my parents' view towards school was that that's the one place you had to succeed. And that wasn't necessarily the same view of the, of the parents around there. Sometimes they viewed their kids going to school as being a detraction because that meant one less farmhand around at a busy time. So that was a different kind of a thing. 

There were few kids that I think attended that school system in a little town called Wofsegg that wanted to learn and really wanted to succeed. And a lot of them, their parents didn't provide the impetus to really make them want to learn. So that right away produced a sort of a pigeonholing, if you will. We got stuck in it in one area and there were the rest of them. And then when you put on top of it the fact that we were different, that my grand-grand-grandparents didn't live in the little house next to the castle, which some of the kids did, the fact that the government had come in and thrown us into that community, it produced a lot of antagonism. 

And I can think back, I had maybe, in eight years that I went to school there, I can think of maybe two or three good friends. And kids playing soccer and being left out of soccer games because they didn't want you to play with them. 

So I, I have a lot of recollections of a lot of solitude. Taking my dog, which I had a dog, for a walk in the forest and laying on the grass. And things that I did with kids were maybe through school activities, but not so much through friends. I had a couple good friends and that was about it. That was a long answer to a short question I realize. 

INTERVIEWER 2: These were your own countrymen though. Was it very hard for you to understand how they could see you almost as an alien? 

SUBJECT: Well, what, what makes one person a countryman over another? Sure, you're right. If you were to look at their passport or birth certificate, they were an Austrian and I was an Austrian. But you know, you go down the streets of New Haven and a person gets mugged and they get killed. And the person that's being hurt is an American, and the person that's doing the hurting is being an American. Yeah, it's hard to understand. 

And it wasn't, it was an difficult to understand there as-- and maybe even more so because as a kid, you just don't know why in the world people don't want to accept you. What did you do wrong? Or what kind of funny clothes am I wearing that makes me look like a martian and they, they want to jump on top of me? But it's, I think it's a universal question. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever hear about Jews and what were happening to them? As a child, did anyone ever talk about it? 

SUBJECT: Very little. There was very little said except in maybe a perverse kind of a way in my own family because my dad had been a businessman in, in Vienna. And because of being in business, a lot of Jewish business people were in Vienna, like they are in any place else. It's one of the places that, that I think a Jewish person in a non-Jewish environment can make his mark. They seemed to be darned good at it. 

And so Dad had, had a lot of good associations. And one of the things that always, I think was, was talked about in our family was the fact that we simply couldn't understand some of the persecution that was going on. But that now is a set of conversations and things that took place much, much after the war because I was pretty small. And you normally don't get into those kind of conversations, I would guess, with a four and five-year-old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father was captured? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, my dad, uh, brave man that he was, he enlisted at, at gunpoint after Austria was overrun and said, sure, I'll sign up for a German Army. Seems like a splendid idea and I volunteer. Suppose I'd do the same thing, especially if, if you consider that if you don't, your family won't get fed, and minor little consequences like that, little squeeze plays. 

So he was assigned to an infantry troop that was in Russia. And I don't know the exact dates. My father is very reluctant to talk about those things. It's like, like tearing up old wounds, and I can certainly appreciate that. He, along with a troop of other people, was captured, and he actually was in a Russian prisoner of war camp, to the best of my knowledge, maybe somewhere around 400 miles or so away from Moscow. 

And he had prior to that been hit with some shrapnel and spent some fair amount of time in a field hospital recuperating from that injury. And one of my dad's unfulfilled ambitions had always been to be an artist. He was a pretty good artist. So while he was recuperating, one of the things that he was assigned to was to work in a mapping, the cartographing department of the, on the front to produce all the various kinds of maps that the Army would need. And so that was perhaps somewhat of a stroke of luck that that would happen. 

As he was in camp, he pretty quickly made a decision that he was going to bail out. He was-- because of all of the things that he'd been through and several years of service, he had, had been at one time a strapping young man, reasonably well-built guy, maybe 5'9", 5'10", and maybe weighed 170. And by that time, was, was down to 120 pounds and felt that if in fact he was going to wind up getting shipped to Russia and into, into, getting shipped to Siberia after, after the war, he wouldn't survive. And he would rather take his chance and go on over the hill, if you will. 

So based on his experience in drawing maps and all the things, he managed to find some parchment, made his own inks, and drew a map of Europe from memory, which we still have at home. And then he and seven compatriots went over the wall, went over the fence and survived, walking back over 1,000 miles through through Russia, through Czechoslovakia, part of Germany, back into Austria. And the kind of things that, that I can't fathom-- talks about sleeping in trees for the first six days because it wasn't safe to be down on the ground during the day. So they walked at night. 

But when you don't have a lot of food and you, mental stress is there, you don't trust yourself that you're going to fall asleep and stay asleep on the tree. So you take your belt and you belt yourself to a tree. And you go from tree to tree hoping the bloodhounds that were chasing you don't find you. And in fact, they didn't. And he made it back. 

And amazingly enough, during this whole time, when Dad had first left to go into the service, we were in Vienna. And then during the time that he was in the war, the bombing of some parts of Vienna had taken place and the family had gotten moved to Upper Austria, which is a place that he had never seen before. And when he came back after his many, many weeks of wandering back on foot, he came out of a huge, long forest range about a mile from the house where we lived, which was sort of incredible, but at that time, very much a, a physically and spiritually broken man. He was down to like 105 pounds, 102 pounds. Been sick, been ill, hadn't gotten any food, been chased by farmers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No one in your family knew where he was all this time then. 

SUBJECT: No, we did-- there had been a reasonably steady stream of communication while he was in the war through, through the regular service mail. But when he was captured, that was the end of it. So there was no official word. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. I'm quite sure where we left off. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, you, you went back after the war. Your father and your family returned to Vienna? I don't remember what the circumstance-- your father escaped from the camp, he found his way through Europe, and he found you. 

SUBJECT: Right. And OK, to pick it up there, a couple of strange things happened at that point. At that point, there was a ruling in Austria that you had to be able to prove who you were, where you had been. And a lot of people were on food stamps, as we were because we didn't have any independent means of producing food and things of that nature. 

And with Dad having been in a Russian POW camp, they had taken his papers. So he really couldn't prove that he had served in the Army, or not served in the Army. So the only expedient thing that it seemed to be possible to do at that point was to go and get yourself captured by the Americans, which he did. Which seems a little illogical perhaps that he would bounce back into, into an American prison camp. 

But at least he now was officially registered, and you could prove the fact that he existed. So his family was now entitled to again get food. So that meant we got food. And as a matter of fact, the Americans treated him pretty nice. And he gained, came back a number of pounds, and after three or four months came out quite a bit healthier than what he had been there before. And the only reason that he had to spend some time there is I think was a matter of, of the Americans being able to track down his paperwork from some other lost file somewhere. 

But from, from that point on it was a very tumultuous kind of a situation. The people in town didn't particularly want to talk to us. A lot of times if you wanted to obtain things, things like food from a farmer, you couldn't buy it. You could barter. So you, the few good things that we had left, whether it was little piece of jewelry or a picture or a painting, you traded off for a pound of butter to be able to survive. And it wasn't too long after that the Austrian police showed up, arrest my father, and threw him in jail. 

And personally, this is probably about the most vivid single recollection that I have, and at this, by that point is a little bit after the war. But as a little kid, I couldn't understand why Dad wasn't around and he was always gone, but you know, that wasn't that unusual. A lot of the other men weren't around either. And it was nice to have him back, even though he was pretty sick and on the mend. But then for him to disappear again and not know why. 

And as it turned out, I'm not quite sure how to best describe it, but there was some kind of a movement afoot under which a number of Austrians that had been in the German Army stood accused of having done personal and physical damage to a number of Jewish people who they were supposed to arrest or investigate or whatever. I don't really know what the details of that were directly except that my father stood accused of having done some personal damage and some some damage to a Jewish person's physical property, rather than simply bringing him to, to a jail or to a court. I don't know what the other part of that was exactly, OK? 

And so Dad now, after sitting in a Russian POW camp and American camp, now sat in an Austrian prison and was gone again. And that dragged for, for quite a number of weeks. I would guess maybe two or three months that he was sitting in there. And I suppose in retrospect, that's not all that long, but it was long at that point. 

And finally, his came, his case came to trial. And something rather, rather amazing happened. I guess you could call it serendipity is about the only way to express it, because there really had never been a very clear definition of the charges in terms of who was bringing them. And it was just that he stood accused. And it just so turned out that as his case was, was being laid out and the trial was starting to begin, the person who, who he had allegedly done wrong to showed up. 

And the person was a Jewish businessman who happened to be one of my dad's best friends. And cleared him in saying, by saying, well, geez, I've known Joel. We've, we've treated each other like, like brothers. He no, no more would hurt me than he would go and hurt his own family. And with that, Dad's case was dismissed. 

But it's, it's a very, very grim thought suppose the charges that had been brought had been brought by another one, by somebody else who had not known my father, and therefore, wouldn't have any reason to vindicate him. Who knows what would have happened? And it appeared in a way as if Austria in some fashion was trying to bend over backwards to say, geez, we had some rotten apples, and here they are. And you hold them up and in front and say, see those bad guys? And we're really going to slam it to them. 

And, and, you know, you can certainly crucify a number of people and hold them up as, as examples of what, what this good society of yours is going to do. And by doing that, I guess you can make yourself feel better and, and, say, OK, we've, we've done that. We've, we've exposed all the guilt and now we're, you're beautiful. We don't have anything more to worry about. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But as a child, you couldn't make sense of your father being held up that way. 

SUBJECT: Well, he was in jail. He said he didn't quite understand what it was all about. But from what he know, he told Mom and my sister and I that he hadn't done anything wrong and he wasn't afraid to go before a trial. But he simply, he simply didn't know. It was like you were accused of something, but you didn't know what you were accused of. And the thing that, that's scary, I guess that there were stories around it that people got into these circumstances and they never showed up again. So you didn't know what was going to happen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: People disappeared. 

SUBJECT: People, well, they would just go to prison and you wouldn't see them anymore. So it's, it's-- in, in that age of growing up, I, I was never-- and thank God for that-- in a position to be old enough to really think those things through the way I could now. And I think, think back to, or I try to think back, to what it must have been like for my mother to, to raise me-- my sister was older, so she was pretty well grown-- but to raise me in a very antagonistic neighborhood under very, very tenuous circumstances, not knowing if you're going to get food stamps the next week, and whether or not your husband's going to come back. 

And you know, it's not like being stuck in a camp. But it's an awful lot of uncertainty. And somehow, I think human beings can deal with, with, with bad certainties much easier than, than with huge uncertainties because you got no way to plan. You don't know what's going to happen tomorrow. So I guess I was lucky growing up from that standpoint where I did, rather than being five or six years older. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have you ever gone back there? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I've gone back a couple of times. And the second time was in, in '71. I took my wife along. I had some some business meetings to take care of. And we spent a couple of weeks in Frankfurt and in Cologne, really. And then after I was done with my business part travels, we rented a car. And the plan was to stop in Munich and stay there overnight a little bit, and then go and, and visit Wolfsegg, the little town where I grew up, and then go to, to Vienna. Look up some of the old friends and some, some of the relatives that had never met my wife because she's an American gal that I am married over here. 

And so we took off, and we found a place to stay in Munich, and stayed overnight, and got ready to go the next morning. And my wife said, geez, since we're here, I, she says, I had read about the fact that Dachau is now a museum put together in memory of the Holocaust, and that she would like to see it. And I said, no, you don't. 

I had been in Dachau before. My, my sister had married a, a noncom of the American Air Force, and with him, I had seen Dachau. I think it was in 1948 or '49. I was seven, eight years old. And that left some pretty deep scars to see ovens that people got buried in. I mean, you know, as a kid, that's what you hear. And with Hansel and Gretel, you know, somebody gets shoved in the oven in a fairy tale, right? But to see ovens that, that people died in, and to see showers that people were gassed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember seeing this as a child? 

SUBJECT: I remember seeing, well, I was about seven and a 1/2, eight years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Describe what you saw and what you felt at that time. 

SUBJECT: Just physically, it was grim, reasonably austere. But it wasn't comprehendable. I think your mind goes to a point where you observe it, but you can't, you know, it doesn't compute anymore. You can't make any sense. You can't take your past experiences and relate it to that. 

And I had read some books as a youngster. There was a couple of books that were published in German. One was called A Thousand Days of Hell. And it described a doctor's experience who was not Jewish, but he was very much against the political trends. And I'm trying to remember the name of the camp. It was a camp in Austria. I can't remember it now. But it described the hell and the agony that he went through in working in stone pits and cutting stone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mauthausen? 

SUBJECT: Mauthausen, yeah. And so I had, as a pretty young kid, gotten some exposure of that kind of stuff. I worked in a library also. So I loved to read, and read anything, everything. So I had had sort of an indirect, if you will, exposure, you know, by reading something. But it's not like, like walking through a camp where you thousands of people had died in there. And you looking in an oven and several hundred, several thousand people have, were shoved into the thing and they, they burned up. 

You asked me what I thought? I don't really know how I could-- just shocked. I don't know that it went any further than that because I, I don't think I was capable of putting those pieces together. I really couldn't. And so it was with some, some hesitation that my wife said, well, you know, she'd like to go have a look. And I felt in a way that we probably ought to go and see it. And on the other hand, it's so darn grim, that it, it's-- How do you talk about people making lampshades out of human skin? You know, that's, it's grisly. It's sick. 

But we went, OK? And we spent two and a half, three hours going through Dachau that by now has been rebuilt about as tastefully as you could possibly rebuild something like that. And looked at the photo exhibits and pictures and different kinds of stories and the storyboards, and all different kinds of things that are in a museum. And I don't think we spoke much that whole morning. We left, never stopped for lunch, and drove into Austria. 

It's just, it's the, it's a kind of an experience that just totally, totally boggles your mind, and you can't-- I'm hard pressed to describe it. You, you simply can't, you can't believe that one human being would do something like that to another human being. And you know-- 