CREW: I think your son feels better about talking. 

CREW: OK, I'm rolling. 

CREW: All right. 

CREW: I'm not ready. 

CREW: You ready? 

CREW: Yeah, I'm tight. 

CREW: I'm right there. 

CREW: This-- yeah. No, I was saying to start with a pause. 

CREW: Oh, OK. And it's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Forget the cameras. You are talking just to Mrs. Vlock and me-- that's all. But you hit home. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No-- 

SUBJECT: What is it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Laurel. 

CREW: Laurel. 

SUBJECT: Laurel. 

CREW: I'm sorry. I'm just going to take him in a white [INAUDIBLE]. Could you hold a white kind? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You rolling? Uh, Mr. Fruhlinger you were talking about-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. I took a couple of pills to relax me. And I become a little bit-- I'm relaxed now, and I feel a little bit better. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, tell us about the town that you came from. 

SUBJECT: I came from-- I was born in a small town. They call it Ladmovce, in Czechoslovakia; March 24, 1926. As in 1938, after the Mudich-- Munich Conference, we was Hungar-- the Hungarian took over this part where I was born. And immediately that night, the Hungarian freedom fighters came to the town and-- 

CREW: Here. 

SUBJECT: --beat-- beat up a lot of Jews. As I remember it, as a child, it was a terrible experience for me. And we-- we immediately felt a little bit-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you start again with talking about-- you remember as the-- the Hungarians came, and they beat up, and you remember as a child-- start with that. 

SUBJECT: During-- during the night-- oh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: S-- go ahead, [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: At-- uh-- a night before the Hungarians came in before the-- uh-- the Hungarian took over this area. But they had those freedom fighters came out-- came in to the towns and beat up the Jews-- robbed them, took all their belonging-- jewelry, gold, whatever they-- uh-- have you. And as a child, we was fright-- frightened and-- and we was instantly under tension from the Hungarians, especially my father, uh, Oliver Shulem. He was in a Agrar part, they call it. That was the Czechoslovak National Democratic Party. He belonged in that party, and therefore, the Hungarians arrest them all the time. 

They took away-- he had three licensed, which they took away from him immediately. And we had a very hard life after that to make a living, to survive. We had three children to support. 

And all I know, one day when the Hungarians declared war on the Russians, I guess this was around 1941, some gentile boy accused me that I said that we are-- we going to get guns, and we going to uprise against the Hungarian regime. And from there on, I was instantly in problem with the Hungarian Youth Movement. They had like a Hitler-Jugend. They call it levente. 

And therefore, every week we had to report to this youth movement. I was thrown in almost weekly into the cellar, into the, uh-- the village, uh, commissar, and I was staying there in the-- in that cellar until the exercise took place weekly. But it was already-- goes on for years until I got very-- wearing off, and I went up to Budapest and wanted to learn a trade. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened in '44? 

[CLEARS THROAT] 

SUBJECT: In 1944-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --my parents wrote me a letter that day. They are very sick. They don't feel good. And therefore, I went back to my hometown. 

And from my hometown, I went in-- uh-- I took a basket of eggs to sell to a town-- a city. They call it Satoraljaujhely in Hungarian-- in Hungary. As I was going into the city, immediately I was stopped by a Hungarian police, and asking me for my in-- my document or my "indification" card, which it said on it of-- that I'm a Jew. I'm Jewish. 

Immediately they took me in to a-- uh-- to the-- to the police station. And from there, the-- in the police station, SS officers took-- uh-- took me over. And they took-- put us in a synagogue nearby, which already there was a few Jews there. And they-- were all day long and all night. And next morning was bringing in Jews there, about, I would say, 150 or 200 accumulated-- about 200. 

And then they told us we are responsible of the anything the Hungarian Jews will do against the regime or the German soldiers. We will be shot. Therefore, we should watch our self and behave ourself, and which-- had them for a whole month we stayed there. It was guarded by SS officers. 

A month later, they made the ghetto. The whole county, Jew-- they brought all the Jews in from the whole county, and they let us out in the-- in the ghetto. We stayed for another month. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You met your parents there. 

SUBJECT: They brought my parents in there too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: And with my parents combined we went just before-- about a couple of days-- I would say a day before Rosh Hashanah-- we left this town-- city. They call it Satoraljaujhely We went through Slovakia. We arrived, I would say, about two days later, later after-- uh-- after [NON-ENGLISH]. 

When we arrived in a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You arrived where? 

SUBJECT: In-- in Birkenau, in that-- uh-- we boarded. The train pulled in in a-- in a camp which is-- were covered with barbed wires. 

The train stopped. Everybody had to get out. When we get off on the train, men had to separate-- had to go separate, and the woman separate. Immediately we said goodbye to our parent-- oh-- to my parents. We didn't know what happened. My father's-- he start crying, and he said, "Shema Yisroel." And we never see each other again. 

[SOBS] 

Then we stayed in a line. A man, a good-looking man, stand in a-- uh-- in an SS-- SS uniform. And with his finger he was pointing and whistling [WHISTLES] like left-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: --and right-- with whistling-- which one left, which one right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Whistling-- how whistling? 

SUBJECT: Like, [WHISTLING] and each way-- separating each one separately-- men, woman-- separately. Woman went separate, and the men, we lined up. And when the-- everybody get out from the train, we had to march in-- into the camp, in a "barack"-- in a barrack-- they-- in-- they call it Birkenau. 

When we got there-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, that was when you were separated from whom? 

SUBJECT: From my parents-- from my parents. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Both? 

SUBJECT: Both. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dori could we ask him to do that again with the whistling so that we can see the hands-- the way you did it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell it-- yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do that again. 

SUBJECT: As we was lined up in-- uh-- uh-- with separate and-- uh-- as we-- we-- getting off from the train and lining up-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you-- who is going off from the train? 

SUBJECT: Everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- no, no-- in your family. 

SUBJECT: The whole family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who? Who? You know. 

SUBJECT: My parents, my sister, and I. We was four of us. And the man, a good-looking man-- tall man-- standing with a SS uniform-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean by good-looking? 

SUBJECT: He was a very good-looking man-- tall, uh, very slim, good-looking man-- stand in the front of us, and he was whistling which way to go-- [WHISTLING] left or right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do that again. 

SUBJECT: [WHISTLING] 

And, you know, we had to follow which-- wherever his finger was pointing, that's how we stayed in the-- in the line. And people was coming off from the train and following uh, down from the train, and separating them-- the men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was first in your family? Who came first to him? 

SUBJECT: My-- first, my father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT: Then my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did he do-- when your father came? 

SUBJECT: Well, he-- he pushed. They had to stay in a line and then the other side. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: One at a time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. As it comes, each one of them separately. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you show us what he did when your father came to him? 

SUBJECT: When my father came-- [WHISTLING] to the-- to the right, and the woman-- [WHISTLING] and to the left. And right away we was separated. And that's how when my father said, "Shema Yisroel." You know, he's cried out. And we stayed on the line. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were doing-- 

SUBJECT: In the men's-- we was-- it was in men's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your father? 

SUBJECT: With my father. But my father was a little bit further up because of the line, you know, with more lines. You know, it was a long line. And we marched in. When everybody get off from the train-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were with your father, and your sister was with your mother? 

SUBJECT: Mother, right. When-- and we were-- then we marched into the-- in the camp, to Birkenau. We was in a barrack. And immediately, the man came, an SS man, and he called out anybody who has a trade in his hand, a Fachmann, you know, who has trade in his hand, shoots them out. 

I went over to my father. I kissed him. And he cried out, "What will happen?" I didn't have no choice but to stand out, because the SS man was right there, and I had to step out. Everybody who had a trade stepped out in the side. 

And we slept in the different barrack, what looked like a little-- uh, a-- a low-- like a chicken coop, actually-- how it looked like to me first. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you know that they would know that you had a trade? Maybe they wouldn't know you had a trade. 

SUBJECT: They ask who has a trade should step out-- is was already in Auschwitz-- I mean, in Birkenau. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why didn't your father say he had a trade? 

SUBJECT: He was-- uh, he wasn't-- he hadn't had no trade in his hand, or he was afraid, or I don't know. Honestly, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: He-- my father? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, you. 

SUBJECT: I was 18, 19-- something like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What trade did you have? 

SUBJECT: I was-- I learn in Budapest copper-- a-- a copper smith trade, and that's how I-- I took. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you tell them you had the trade? 

SUBJECT: They said we going to go to work in a factory. Anybody has a trade will have a better job and will work, and will get more food. That's why I stepped out. And we stepped in the-- uh, uh, all the people who had a trade in the hand-- trade in their hand stepped in the different-- in the side and separated us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did-- did your father-- did you think that your father could lie and say he had a trade? 

SUBJECT: No, he was too honest. He was such a honest man. He-- he would-- uh, uh-- he didn't know one way or another what he should-- what will happen. But he was too honest. And he, uh-- that's the last time I saw my-- my father. And I never saw him again. 

And then we stayed in that Birkenau, so-called Birkenau, another day. Next, uh, next morning-- oh that accident. But just before we went, uh, away, we got the tattoo. Each of them was tattooed, which I had that time was-- my number was 12,451. That was my number. 

And they took us next-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you still read those numbers? 

SUBJECT: No. It was-- I remember the number, but when I came to America, I burned this. I-- I went to a-- a surgeon to burn this out, because they was making fun out of me that this is my social security number-- the kids. And any time I looked on it, I was so frightened-- always come back to terrible memories when I looked on the number. So I felt that-- that I should take-- burn it-- go to a surgeon and let it burn it out, which I did. 

Then next morning, we went to Auschwitz, Arbeit's lager. They took the whole group which said had a trade in their hand. This Auschwitz Arbeit's lager was strictly for all kind of factories in-- in a-- OK-- in the industry where, you know. And they put me on a-- first, my first job was working in a place. They call it Muhlfuhrer Kommando. 

The Muhlfuhrer Kommando was-- we was making fertili-- fertilizer from the bread-- what-- all the groups came into Auschwitz-- all the dry bread, they saved all the bread, and they shipped it to us. And we mixed it up with dirt, with a-- a-- and they mixed it up together with the dry bread-- or it was, you know. And we made fertilizers out of them-- big piles of fertilizer. 

And I stayed there, I would say till, uh-- I would say in a-- up to Septem-- around September or October. Already it got cold. And one morning I was called from my barrack. My number was called out. And I had to step out. 

And I stepped. As I stepped out, they call it the Schreiber. You know, he was the-- uh, how do they call it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Describe. 

SUBJECT: Who was keeping the book-- he took me to a place. It's uh, uh, like a hospital. And in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know why you were called? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember what happened, why. All I know I went in that hospital. And they laid me-- uh, laid me down. I had to wait about a 1/2 an hour. Then they laid me down on a-- on a-- in a operation, like an operation table, and covered me up with white-- white, like a sheet-- bed sheet. 

And I saw an officer with three stripes. I heard his name mentioned-- Dr. Klein, Dr. Klein. Oh, he was-- that Obersturmbannfuehrer. He had three stars. His-- his name was Klein. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Fritz Klein. 

SUBJECT: I didn't know that his name was Fritz-- until-- uh, in this country, I heard from the-- World Jewish Congress told me that what was his first name was. 

Well, anyway, I was staring like this, and both side standing. And this Dr. Klein, first he says to close my eye. He's going to do a-- a-- some cutting. For me I should stand still. And they tied me down. They tied my hand down. 

And I saw everything-- whatever. I saw the vomiting blood. It was spritzing out, you know-- coming out on my-- uh-- under my nose, and matter of fact, came on my face too. But I couldn't wipe myself; and just was pulling my teeth together, and grinding my teeth, and just tried to hold on. Whatever will happen, I was ready for anything will if-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: We'll stop. 