INTERVIEWER 1: We're not going to ask you much. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

CREW: Are we rolling now? 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, usually dates and places help. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Names. 

INTERVIEWER: Specific names of people, uh, specific events, but not a general statement helps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We're rolling. Your name first-- your own. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Uh, Ralph Friedman. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where you were born? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I was born in eastern part of Poland, or Lithuania, a city by the name of Vilna. I lived, however, in a small little town called Kabilnick, about 80 kilometers east of Vilna. I lived there up to 1939 when the Polish-German war had started. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was life like in Kabilnick and-- for a child? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I come from a fairly orthodox family. My father is a very orthodox person. He's still alive, thank God. He had also gone through the Holocaust with me, but in an entirely different place, entirely different areas. I was a little boy going to cheder and also to pol-- polish primary school. My father besides-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] in the-- how was the day divided between the two? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: In the morning, I used to go to primary school, and late in the afternoon and early evening I went to the cheder to study Hebrew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have, uh, many friends or any friends who were not Jewish that you were-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I had a few. Not too many, but I did have a few, yes. I will go into that later on as to what has happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ralph, what was it to be in the morning in a Polish school? What was the class like? And when did it end in the day? And how did you get to the cheder? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: During those days, when I was going to school there, the anti-Semitic feeling was already quite obvious. Some of the Jewish boys and girls were congregating on their own, had their own groups, and the non-- the gentile boys and girls formed their own groups. There was not what I would call exactly a friendly type of an atmosphere in that school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many Jews were you in a class? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: In my class, there must have been about 10 or 12 approximately. In a class of 40, I would say a third, maybe a little bit less than a third ratio. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you-- would you mind saying that again-- the 10 or 12-- I mean, f-- 10 or 12 what? And-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: 10 or 12-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, start at the beginning, if you don't mind. Just say, in my school, there were 40 people. 10 or 12-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: In my school-- in my class, actually, there were about 40 people, 10 or 12 of which were of, uh, Jewish origin. And then the morning session was preoccupied by studying obviously Polish, and Polish history, Polish language, mathematics, geography, and all these other little things. And then I used to come home from school, change books, and run-- literally run to the cheder. In the cheder, we had about 8 or 10 boys primarily. No girls attended a cheder during those days. 

Where we studied Chumash, Tanakh, Mishna, Gemara. We studied the-- people call history. It was taught to us by a gentleman who was about to become a rabbi, who was neither here nor there, but he knew his-- obviously his material. 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In-- in-- in the morning, in the school, uh, when you learned history, or when there were religious hours, how were you treated? What was the-- were you Poles, Jews? What happened during hours of religious teachings? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Religious teachings-- there were no such a thing as religious teaching. There was only the religious prayer early in the morning, where the non-Jewish kids did not participate in it at all. They just stood there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They stood up. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: They stood up during the actual prayer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which was? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Which was a Polish type of a prayer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the Polish prayer? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I-- not quite. No. 1939-- talk began in our community about the incoming war between Germany and Poland. Prior to that, however-- prior to '39-- September, '39 it was. The atmosphere of antisemitism had increased immensely. We used to get up in the morning and find caricatures-- very unfavorable, demeaning type of caricatures of the Jewish people, which were posted on some of the telephone poles, some of the walls and windows of Jewish establishments, criticizing the Jewish people, especially criticizing the Jewish merchants, picturing them as vultures, picturing them as leeches and snakes. 

What we used to do is peel them off as quickly as we used to see them, and then within a matter of hours, they used to reappear again. The authorities-- the police authorities, the city government did absolutely nothing to discourage anything like that, which made us to feel that they are definitely in favor of something like this. This is before the actual shooting had began, and obviously the feeling after the war broke out-- the feeling of the Jewish people in all those communities, and cities, and towns was that this was a preparatory trick by Hitler to divert the minds of the Polish people-- the Polish population, the Polish natives-- divert them from the incoming disaster that he's about to throw upon them in the form of a blitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember your young-- 

CREW: Sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were a young child, but do you remember any activity, conversation from the Jewish community as to what they could do about this discrimination. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I certainly have. I certainly do remember. I remember a committee being formed that went to the mayor of our town, and, uh, the mayor was very receptive, very wonderful, smiling, and immensely promising about correcting whatever had to be done, not to fear anything, that he will take care of things. It was never done. It was just a matter of, uh, a pushover thing, or as we call it here, passing on the buck. 

Nothing was done in order to curb this influx or spread of antisemitism. Since nothing was done, then they went to the second stage, and we're talking about those young-- they used to call them endecks. We used to call them endeckis, endecks, endecks, endeckis, something like this. 

They started physical abuse. They caught the rabbi by going from shul one time. Two held him, and a third one was cutting his beard off with a knife-- with a dull knife, just simply cutting-- cutting the poor beard off, OK? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see that? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: No, I did not see that. I saw the rabbi afterwards. After the thing was done, I saw him without the beard. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What crossed your mind? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think of seeing that? The rabbi? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Uh, a fear. A slow developing, growing, emotional disturbance as a little boy. I remember wherever we used to see a bunch of other Polish boys sitting around someplace at a corner, or standing at a corner, we used to avoid walking by that corner, or take another exit or detour from the area. 

Since all these preliminaries were not curbed by the local authorities, they began a more extensive type of a destructive drive by breaking windows in stores-- Jewish stores, Jewish markets, and then breaking windows in Jewish homes. Simply as soon as evening arrives, you were never certain whether your windows will survive through the night. 

And then, the war. September 1939, Germany invaded Poland, and, of course, Germany and Russia had made this subdivision type of a pact. One swallowed up one portion. The other one came to the other part, the eastern part of Poland, which fortunately, at that time, we had fallen under the Russian occupation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see? What did you hear? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: At that time, I recall that I was very happy and very proud, obviously, and all the residents of our community-- that we were fortunate enough to fall under the Russian occupation since they were not as severe in those days as the Germans were. Uh, on the contrary, the Russians had come in and had made everyone feel equal. Antisemitic slogans, and antisemitic remarks and discriminations have disappeared almost overnight-- immediately. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Russians could, uh, restore the order, which the Polish authorities could not. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: They had restored the order immediately within 24 hours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you talk about this with your non-Jewish friends from school? Do [INAUDIBLE]. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Yes, those non-Jewish friends from school who were sort of like on the borderline of anti-Semitic, non anti-Semitic in those days had become very, very close good friends of mine-- a lot closer because of fear that they head for the Russian occupation and the Russian military. They were afraid, at that time, that they will be exposed as antisemites. And therefore will be severely punished. 

The way the Russians used to punish in those days-- they used to pick up those who were unfavorable to them and make them disappear overnight without knowing how, where, what, when. That's it. Exile. And most exiles went all the way to Siberia. So therefore, all my non-Jewish friends who were not too favorably inclined towards me personally before the war had become extremely close to me, extremely friendly, and extremely helpful in every conceivable way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you talk about? Do you remember? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: At the age of eight, child talk mostly. However, growing up, child talk, because of all these political events that had occurred within this time-- then going back to the Russian schools, and learning how to speak Russian, and become influenced by the Russian brainwashing and form of government that they have. However, I do remember that it made us feel so very free in terms of expression, in terms of walking at night without fear whatsoever, in terms of being literally liberated from the antisemitic atmosphere that we had lived under prior to '39. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember any incidents? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: During the Russian occupation? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, things that happened to you-- at home, on the street, in school. Any special incidents. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Nothing specifically that I could really pinpoint. The only thing I do know is that we were very happy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what kind of games did children play in that-- in those days? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Well, obviously, the Russian authorities-- the educational authorities had began imposing their type of educational system upon the schoolchildren in the form of-- like we have here Boy Scouts, they had the pioneers. And everybody had to be a pioneer walking around with a little red scarf and a little star-- red star, and special uniforms, and preaching the Russian constitution. You're supposed to have known this by heart immediately, the learning of the Russian language, the intensity of it, and then, of course, the political meetings that I do recall very, very vividly. 

Those used to be held, uh, in the market-- marketplace, usually on the outside in open air. They used to build some kind of a large tall pedestal where the Russian commissar used to come in, and the Russian police in those days used to round up all the residents all the people from the town in a friendly manner. Knock on the door-- come on, come on. We have a meeting. We have a meeting at the market. You must go. You must go. You have to listen. 

And this is how they used to gather us-- all of us together. This is the Jewish people, the non-Jewish people. Everything had become sort of like one unity, one unit in a unity way. And then, of course, there's communist propaganda, and Stalin was obviously the god of gods in those days. And at the end, he used to sing the Russian national anthem, and that was it. 

The thing that impressed me as a little boy was the movies. In those days, there were still silent movies. And those movies were free. You were able to walk into the clubhouse, which we had only one clubhouse in town, a large one, which would accommodate approximately 500, 600 people. No chairs. There were no seating arrangements. It was all standing so you could get in more people into the area. 

And we used to stand and watch the movies free. Then they used to serve beer to the adults free. Nobody had to pay for anything. 

And then this is '39. 1940-- this is when the KGB began their filtration process. By the filtration process, I mean that they had lists of names compiled, given to them by their secret communist agents who lived in Poland before the war, uh, and they used to come in at night, pick up the family or families, put them in wagons. Not automobiles, just plain, ordinary horse and buggy, but large wagons drawn by horses-- driven by horses. Used to take them away. Give them like one hour time to compile their belongings and take them away. 

None of the Jewish families in our area were disturbed or touched at that time. However, later on, very shortly before World War II, before the actual blitz of '41, they started removing some of the Jewish people, also. And those they had chosen were, uh, the business people who had larger businesses, who had employed non-Jewish people prior to that, who were a little wealthier than the average resident of the town. They used to take those also and take them away. None of those who were taken away were ever heard from to the best of my knowledge. 

They took away also one of our one and only female physicians, who was an excellent physician. She had married a Polish man. She was of Jewish extraction. She had married a Polish man, but she was the one and only physician in the entire town that I lived in. And they took her away, and they sent her away someplace. Her name was Glubowski-- Dr. Glubowski. Never heard from her again. 

We became a-- became accustomed very much to the type of life and the Russian communist doctrine, especially as a child, with this constant brainwashing in school about the greatness and the wonderfulness of the Communist system, and Karl Marx, and Engels, and-- and Stalin, Stalin, Stalin all the time. Our father, our teacher, our lord, our god, our creator-- Stalin. That it had become a part of me-- I actually felt that this is the only type of a system that I should be living under, that this is the only heaven on earth, because there is no better or other place in the world. This is the feeling that I had. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your family-- did you discuss this? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: My family felt entirely differently about that, but their intense focus was primarily on the youngsters-- boys and girls. Now, since I was only very young, at that age, they had placed me in the pre-Komsomol, which is the communist youth organization. The pre-communist youth organization was the Pioneer group. Well, I was a Pioneer, and eventually, if I had lived longer and the war had not broken out, I would have to-- I would be compelled to join the communist youth organization, et cetera, et cetera, and then progressively. 

June 22, 1941-- it was like a blitz, not only in the physical reality, but also in the mental credibility. People just could not possibly believe that Germany had invaded the Soviet Union at such a point. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see, think, hear? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: We heard that there is a war, and we began hearing rumblings of planes in the air. We didn't know whose planes they were, but they were just passing over our heads-- high altitudes. And then, of course, the communication system in those days was very poor. There was maybe one or two telephones in the entire town which were placed in the post office and perhaps in the police station. OK? That's all. 

There was-- if there was one or two radios in town-- in the entire town, that was a lot, and the type of radios they had were those that you had to put the crystals together-- a tiny little needle with a crystal-- and then find the station, if you did find it at all. But the rumors kept on going, and whoever wanted to say anything at all just started spreading the rumors, and the fear began mounting. 

But when we began to see-- this is June 22. I would say within two days, by June 24, we began to see portions of dismantled, or disrupted, or-- or destroyed Russian divisions that began moving eastward by every conceivable means of transportation-- by broken down trucks, by, uh, horses-- horseback, by foot. The Russian soldiers were just moving east, escaping from the German onslaught. 

And obviously, knowing the type of an attitude that the German people-- the Nazis, in reality, had towards Jews, our fear was mounting by the hour. We, in reality, didn't know what to do, except try to escape. Some youngsters from our town with their families moved with the Russian columns, who were intercepted later on, by the way, by being cut off by some of the advanced German Panzer groups. Most of us had left everything in the Lord's hands, and we began looking for and making some type of hiding places, hiding areas. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe that activity-- what you were doing, looking for hiding places. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: OK. I felt like I grew up overnight. I felt like I was 35 or 45 years old. My mind was percolating continually in terms of survival, in terms of safety, in terms of hiding some of our possessions and some of our goods that we had. Hiding places-- and the hiding places were being made with the thought in mind not as much from the Nazi soldiers, because they were just passing by. The fear was that the anti-Semitic people in town would start before the Nazis would, and in reality, that's exactly what happened. 

I personally myself-- all by myself at that age-- I was about eight, nine. I built a double attic right through the night, through the day. My mother was holding a candle for me to see what I'm doing, and I built a double attic in our house large enough to hide four or five people, and it was masked in such a way that no one would ever be able to find it just by trying to find it. It was a total impossibility. It was done in such a way. 

The second area I built in the same house was a double wall, where we could slide a panel and get behind the wall just wide enough to stand there in the event somebody would come to look for us. The third one-- I built an area in the basement where we kept our potatoes. In those days, we had tons of potatoes harvested from our garden in the back, and I built a hiding place behind the potatoes. In other words, that's all I had to do-- is just slide the tiny little board from the side, crawl underneath, and potatoes were in front, and potatoes were on top, and potatoes were all around. OK? 

Those areas were made in-- for-- for one specific reason-- several areas of the house-- that, in case we are caught for the sec-- for the s-- split second at a specific area of the house, the closest hiding place would be utilized immediately. So it would not be only one. For example, if I was downstairs in the basement area and an SOS goes through the house-- so whoever is in the attic area would go to the attic hiding place. I would run to the basement area. Someone else from the family would run behind the wall. It-- it was not one place so just to as avoid panic and pushing one another, and therefore destroying some of the masking on-- on the hiding areas. 

About four days after, the first German patrols passed through our city. The moment the patrols came through and kept going ahead eastward-- the patrols were composed of two motorcycles and one armored vehicle. That's it. The moment that the antisemites-- and I call them to endecks-- they-- they saw the German soldiers and the German war machine in our town. Immediately they had chosen themselves to become policemen. 

And one of them was one of my best friends, a Jewish boy who studied with me, who slept in our house, who ate our food, drank our milk. Immediately he put on a shoulder band, or a-- what do they call that? Armband-- with the swastika. Black, red, and white. Got himself a rifle. He and maybe about four or five others went to our neighbor who was a math teacher by the name of Morris Solomon. Came to his house, took Morris out in the backyard, and shot him through the head. That's an ex student of his. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see that? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Yeah. I saw it because it was a neighbor. It was in the backyard. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Pardon me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you standing? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I was already standing in one of our foyers, which had a little window in it, and I was watching it. He brought with him his own dog, this policeman by the name of Kuchinski-- Joseph-- Joe Kuchinski. He was all but 13 years old, 14 years old. After he shot Mr. Solomon, his math teacher, he somehow turned around to his own dog that he-- that came with him and shot the dog right there also just for the sake of shooting. 

On his way back, he came to our house asking for me, and my mother told him that she didn't know where I was. I must be someplace in town. When am I coming back? Well, I was behind the wall already. I was listening to everything that he was saying, but I was behind the wall hiding. 

When I was coming back? She didn't know. So on his way out, in the foyer, there was my bicycle. And he took the rifle butt and smashed the wheels of my bike completely, totally-- totally destroyed my bike and walked away-- walked away. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your mother-- did she say anything to you? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: No. No. Then this boy had become actually one of the executioners in our town. That's all he was doing. Then when the ordnance came out to start wearing-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Go ahead. I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did-- what did you feel about your mother being terrorized by a 13-year-old boy that she had fed and helped? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: I did not feel anything about my mother at that time. I just felt that we are in a squash, that our lives are hanging by a thread, that chances are we would never survive. And I personally would blame the local population for the executions and the destruction of the Jewish people in the surrounding town, surrounding areas. If they did not do it themselves before the ersatz (Einsatzgruppen) and the Nazi SS ersatz group (Einsatzgruppen) used to come in, they did not do it themselves, then they used to point out to those groups as to who should be eliminated. 

And then a garrison-- a German garrison was established in our town. The lieutenant of that garrison was the boss of the entire little town. He, in conjunction with the local police, the corroborators-- and there were so many of them it was unbelievable-- had given orders for them to-- for the entire non-Jewish population to come in and just take anything they wanted from the Jewish homes, Jewish establishments, Jewish, uh, uh, stores, and businesses, and everything else. Just-- just take it. Take it. Take it away. 

And then they organized the forced labor groups. The ordinances used to come out every single day something new. The Jewish star had to have a specific size, dimension, color. At first, there was only one star, which you were supposed to wear on the shoulder on your left front. Then they came out the following day with a new order. The star has to be worn on the back, also, so many centimeters in width, so many centimeters in the length, and it had to be sewn on-- not pinned on, but sewn on on every garment. 

I had seen one Nazi-- let me retract myself. The first thing they did with the Jewish people-- boys, girls, women, whoever they could get a hold of-- is round them up into a forced labor battalion. Since there really was not much to do physically, they made us clean the grass between the cobblestones in the street. It was not paved streets like we have here. There were cobblestones laid, and obviously grass used to grow in between them, OK? 

We had to take our own forks and knives from home, come in, and just clean out all the grass with the roots and everything else, and sit on the ground all the time, and do this. In order to get to that place, we had to march like a column in twos-- two people-- front march like a column towards the street where we were doing the grass rooting up in the road, actually. I have seen an SS Nazi take out his pistol and use one of the stars on the back of an old Jewish lady as a target area. And he fired. Obviously, he did not kill her instantly because it was in the shoulder area, but her shoulder was disrupted. 

She was killed later on because she was of no more use to them. She couldn't come into work. So they took her out, and they shot her in the back-- backyard. 

OK, 1942, Yom Kippur day-- oh, yes, retraction. Immediately, the German form of government had put on levees upon the people of our town-- taxes in the form of all possessions, and the first thing-- everyone had to bring in all their wedding bands, all their gold, all their jewelry, everything they had. Bring it into the police station and deposit it there. 

Secondly, they required boot-- boots, all kinds of boots. Any type of shoe-wear, footwear, anything at all had to be brought in. Thirdly, any type of warm blankets, and-- and pillows, and pillow cases, and linen. All of that had to be brought in and deposited at the police station. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All of it? Some of it? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: All of it. You had to bring in everything. Then they have selected a committee among the Jewish people in town. That committee was responsible for all actions, and reactions, and orders to the remaining population-- the Jewish population of the town was transmitted by-- the German in charge of the town at that time was transmitted all this information through the Jewish committee called the Judenrat. 

Now, this was a compulsory service. Whomever they had chosen had to serve on this committee, and you had absolutely no way of getting out of it or saying no. A very specific incident that I recall right now that I had witnessed-- during one of those meetings one time, the meetings of the Judenrat, the Jewish committee in town, where those demands from the German authorities was discussed-- how are we to meet those demands? Because those demands were placed in terms of numbers. We need so many numbers-- pairs of boots. We need so many numbers of blankets. We need so many numbers of cushions, and pillows, et cetera. We just didn't have it, which meant we had to go to the non-Jewish people, to the farmers and trade something else with them in order to get the numbers of blankets to fulfill, for example. 

During one of those discussions-- I don't know how-- I got into the same room where the meeting was, and nobody, of course, had paid attention to me at that time. And I was listening, and listening to the bickering that was going on. It was just an impossibility to achieve the goal set by the German authorities as to how much and how many items we were to obtain for them. At that time, there must have been about eight or nine policemen only in our town. 

Most of them were not experienced. Most of them were white Russians and Polacks-- Polish people, the policemen. And I subconsciously came over to the table where the committee was sitting, and I said in Yiddish, why can't we jump all those policemen, take away their eight rifles, and escape into the forest? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you say it again in Yiddish now? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Absolutely. [YIDDISH]. And the chairman of the committee, without saying one word, walked over to me and smashed my face. And my nose began to bleed. And he said, [YIDDISH]. You should never come out with this type of a statement or a comment ever, because I'll kill you. And that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Sunday, Yom Kippur day, 1942-- they began the round up of our town. They rounded up whoever was available. Whoever had a place to hide, hid. I was caught in the round up, and they took us to this public club, the one and only in town, and they locked all the doors and windows. And we were just sitting there not knowing what will happen to us. 

And then, of course, many people said, well, we're being transferred to a ghetto. The others said, no, we are being transferred to a labor battalion. The third one came out with an idea. Well, they're just holding us for some kind of a ransom. Maybe they want some of our goods. Maybe they want some of our hidden things that we have. Maybe they want our possessions, our diamonds, our jewelry, our wedding bands, whatever we might have. They're doing this just to frighten us. Now, these were men, women, children-- 160 altogether. I believe it's 160. Yes. 

Then they took us overnight-- we stayed overnight there. Then we were all horded out of the building and made to walk in the direction of a cemetery. I think it was either a Catholic or a Protestant-- I think it was a Catholic cemetery on the outskirts of town, which was about maybe a mile or so away from this clubhouse. 

When we came there, we saw a bunch of SS Nazis standing, joking, smoking, laughing, but they were there already. There was a bunch of shovels, and we were all-- especially the men and the boys-- were commanded to pick up the shovels. And one had outlined an area the size that he had chosen and commanded us to dig. The women and the children were left-- I would say perhaps maybe a block away from the area, and we were digging a pit. 

During the entire time of digging, I was absolutely deathly frightened, but at the same time, I did not lose my mental cool thinking and trying-- trying to figure out, how on earth can I get out of this? I could see it. I could see it very precisely as to what the result will be without any maybe [INAUDIBLE], without maybe God will help us somehow at the last moment. I was very realistic about it. 

When the pit was deep enough and large enough, we were commanded to get out. As I was crawling out of the pit, I picked up a shovel full of dirt-- sand, and I threw it right into the first Nazi's face. He was lighting a cigarette at that moment. His, uh, machine gun was hanging on his shoulder, and he was lighting up a cigarette. And I threw the sand right into his face, and it blinded him, and I started to run. And I ran in a zigzag so they couldn't take aim at me. They fired lots of rounds. 

There must have been someone else running behind me, because I heard a-- a shriek-- a deathly shriek like someone was hit by a fragment, or a bullet, or something like that. I did not dare turn around. I just kept on running. I got away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Into the-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Into what? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Into the-- into the forest for the time being, because the cemeteries in Europe in those days were very bushy. They were not kept up like we have them in here. The-- the-- the deeper the-- the-- the weeds, the taller the trees, the unruly the bushes are, the better it was. It was like a-- a frightening area. A cemetery was always considered a very scary frightening area in Europe, yes. 

Some areas were almost impenetrable to walk through there, to look for some graves or anything at all. And this is why it was perhaps much easier for me to escape, to run away. After walking maybe perhaps a mile or so-- perhaps less, I don't know-- I stopped to catch my breath. I realized that there was nobody running behind me. And I sat down, and I cried. And I cried, and I cried, and then I heard the firing-- continuous firing, firing automatic weapons mostly, and then individual shots-- individual shots. Uh, more like pistol shots. 

And this is the grave that I escaped from, and this is the grave that I have here, that I had taken the picture after the war had ended. And this is what the grave looks like with or without me in it. This is the only photograph in this world that I have or anyone else. There are no negatives. There are no duplicates. There are no nothing whatsoever. This is the one and only that I had taken with a borrowed camera. I had rounded up the remaining survivors. We came to the same grave, and I took this picture. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Right after the war-- 1945. Now, I was looking at it this morning. There's an inscription here. May I read that inscription? And it was written by my mother, may she rest in peace, and signed by me, by my father, and my mother. And I'd like to read this in Yiddish, if I may. 

Dem kever hom for flantz tunzere sonim. Oyf morgen, noch Yom Kippur, neinzehn-tzvey-un-ferzik (1942). Fun welchem s'iz gelongen zu antloyfen undz un andere fun oyfen bild. 

Signed Labe Yehudit and Raphael-- my father, my mother, and myself-- Friedman. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you hold it very still and-- get-- get him with it. 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Did you get it? In the center of the column, it says-- I'm sorry. I said 159 people in his grave. No, 151 people were executed in that grave-- that mass grave. 

Now, this came to me, and it was told to me by one of the white Russian witnesses. Since it was on a Sunday, and since the cemetery was not far from the church, right after the church, they all came to see the show of execution. And one of the women whom I had spoken to after the war had told me that there was a three week old little boy, which I know for a fact that the little boy was there because his mother, Mrs. Bloch, was a cousin of mine, and she just delivered a three-- three weeks before, she delivered a little boy. 

That little boy was left under a bush-- under a tree, and when the mother and the entire family plus all the other people who were in the clubhouse with us-- when everybody was executed, the little boy all of a sudden began to cry-- little infant. And there was a young Nazi that came over-- walked over to that little boy, took the tiny little infant by one of its legs, and walked over to a tree-- a large oak tree, and just smashed, and the little head just fell right off. Snapped right off. And threw it-- threw just the body without the head back into the pit. 

Now, one other thing, since it was Yom Kippur time and the weather begins to change in those parts of the world. At-- at night, it gets very cold, and the earth begins to freeze. The capacity of the grave was too large, or the grave was too small for the occupants, and therefore, after it was all finished and covered up, from what I understand, a farmer told me that from still the motions and the moving movements of the wounded bodies inside the grave, the top of the crust of the grave had opened up. There was like a crack, like an earthquake, like somebody was moving things under there, because the-- the-- the top-- the crust of the grave was not thick enough, being too small originally for the amount of people. 

OK. We did have several friendly farmers around our town and in our town who were very sympathetic, who disliked the Germans, who could see that first are the Jews, and then are the Polish people, and then are the natives, et cetera. And we had made arrangements with one of them that, in the event should we need a hiding place, we should be able to come to his place, to his farm. And he would hide us, and he would feed us for the time being. 

And for that, we gave him most of our valuables-- whatever we had. My mother owned a large size dry goods store before the war. She was the only one that ran that place. So most of the materials were salvaged and given to this farmer. 

My dad was-- besides being a Hebrew scholar, he was in the wholesale fruit business, but most of our possessions were in the form of dry goods-- all kinds of materials. And Poland being considered also one of the European textile production countries-- they produced a lot of textile, especially in the city of Lodz. It's a textile manufacturing city. We had given this man almost everything that we had with the idea that, should the time come where we will have to hide, that he would help us. And he did. 

And the hiding area was underneath a grain storage shed-- underneath the floor of that storage shed, which was approximately 22 inches high between the ground and the floor of the storage shed. They built those storage sheds-- the floors a little bit higher for the purpose of to prevent moisture attraction from the ground into the grain. 

My mother and I had crawled underneath the floor of that storage shed. We had to perform all of our physiological necessities in a lying down position. Lying down position only, because we couldn't-- 22 inches-- that high crawl space only. We were under that storage shed for five months. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: My father was taken away prior to that to a different town called Mejo to a labor battalion when we were separated. The war began going pretty well for the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like inside that 22 inch hiding-- high hiding place? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Everything in the dark. Everything was dark. There was only one tiny little-- uh, one or two bricks from the foundation that he used to remove and just shove us our food in there, and then come back later in the afternoon and pick up the empty utensils. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Also, the-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Once a day. Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did he pick up the waste? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: No. The waste had to be left in a portion-- in a different portion of the area that we were lying in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you get out during the-- any-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: No way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were there five months solid? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Five months lying down all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Never-- never-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Never out. Never see the light. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you manage? Do you remember it? What did you think? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: Prayed. I repeated Shema Yisrael thousands-- maybe 10,000 of times continually, continually, continually. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you ill? Was your mother ill? 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You lay there for five months. How did you keep your body from-- 

RALPH FRIEDMAN: It was numb. I do remember a numbness. I will go into it in a few moments. When the war began looking quite favorably, uh, to the Germans and to the outside world, because the German armies were about to approach Moscow-- Leningrad was surrounded. And we used to get some information-- a little news from this guy, this-- this young fellow. 

By the way, this was a father and son only. No other people in the farm. No other members of the family, and he undertook this without the knowledge of his father. His father did not know that he consented to hide us underneath the floor and to keep us there. OK? 

Since he did most of the cooking-- all of the cooking for him and his father, and since he did most of the cooking for the pigs that he had-- the hogs that he was raising-- 