CREW: OK, we're rolling. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Mrs. Cohn, give me your name and when you were born and where. 

BETTY COHN: Ha, well, my name is Betty Cohn. I was born December the 30th 1910 in Berlin. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And tell me a little bit about your life in Berlin. before-- 

BETTY COHN: It was-- that life was just beautiful. We had a wonderful, wonderful youth. And what am I going to tell you? The-- the things that we were brought up with, it-- Berlin is much, much more beautiful than New York ever will be, cultural, in any way. 

You had the philharmony. You had three opera houses. All kinds of theaters, movies, anything you wanted. And, um, I-- I st-- studied you know, music for six years. And my first opera was when I was 16. And I saw The Jewess by Halévy. And from that time on, I used to go to the opera twice a week. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You were a-- around, of course, during World War I. And do you have any memories of that time? 

BETTY COHN: No, very little. I was very young. My father uh, had to go into the war, you know. And, um, I couldn't say that we were suffering or anyth-- uh, uh, nothing. I, I, I was a little bit of a girl. And I started to go to school. The war almost was over, 1918, right? So it's nothing that I really, uh, could think back or concentrate on it. 

Because when you are this young, you have your food. We had a beautiful home. We were brought up with a maid in the house, a sleep-in. So I didn't know-- I didn't have to do any cleaning or any things like that. And um, my father has a-- had a factory for men's clothing. And we went to very fine schools. And-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: What happened, uh, when you-- in your adult life? 

BETTY COHN: In my adu-- that was bad, what happened then, you know. Because in the '20s already, in, I would say maybe, early '20s, you saw these Nazis like you see them in California. You know, you're moving your arm with swastikas. With the-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Before Hitler came? You mean-- 

BETTY COHN: Before Hitler came, yes. This was the-- they-- they called them the, um, Nazi youth group. And, you know, children, they don't know what all about Nazism or about what that that's bad or wrong or good. They went along. And they were very proud for their big flag. And you had to say hello to them. Well, a few years later, now let me go in-- when I started to work in a office, you know-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: You were not married at that time. 

BETTY COHN: I-- No. No, no, no, I wasn't married. This was a big company. They sold models, you know, uh, s-- uh, what do you call these? Uh, the coats and suits and they brought people and, you know, we had about four mannequins. 

LAUREL VLOCK: All right, well, I want to talk about, you were how old when you wor-- went to work in this, uh, office. 

BETTY COHN: Oh, I was 19, 20. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You were 20. So it was about 1930 you went to work in this office. 

BETTY COHN: I-- I-- no, it was-- this was much earlier. It was '27. '27? '26, something like this. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So you were only 16 years old? 

BETTY COHN: Because we had-- I was schooling. I was schooling, and-- when you-- at 16. 

LAUREL VLOCK: I see. 

BETTY COHN: Then I went into a business school after that to get, you know, uh, uh, typewriting and-- and stenography. And then I went into an office to work. Well, I started there, just like any other little office girl, you know, and worked my way up to be a manager of the office. And then I got married. 

[LAUGHING] 

That's where I met my husband. These people, like I told you before, had, um, they did show, you know, in the fall and the spring, the things that they had to sell. Like, you have these big houses here in-- in-- on Fifth Avenue. Or even in Paris, you could get this all over. 

And, um, but this started already, you know, when I think back, in the '20s that these people were moving outside. And we could see them moving by. Though, I didn't know-- we had a mannequin. I didn't know she was a Nazi. I don't know, how do you expect a young woman, beautiful figure, you know, to believe in something like that. 

LAUREL VLOCK: This manager was a young woman with a beautiful figure or are you-- 

BETTY COHN: She-- she was a mannequin. She was a model. 

LAUREL VLOCK: A model. 

BETTY COHN: Yes, she did show, you know, all these nice things. And I remember, this is what I was told, that after the World War, I think in 1923 or '24 or '25, whatever it was, that every company who-- who had 50 people, you know, that worked for them, they had to take in an invalid who was-- he's a, you know, a sha-- a leg taken off, you know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: A handicapped person. 

BETTY COHN: Handicapped person, that's right, in the first World War. So this company I was connected with took a, um, man in his 30s, you know, I guess so, I don't know how old he was. And he didn't really get a job. But he was on the-- on the, um-- on a door, you know, standing there. Whoever came in with a package for you, look, this package, nobody carries anything out, you know. And he was paid pretty good for that. Because he didn't do anything. The minute-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: So he was security guard. 

BETTY COHN: Security guard. The minute the Nazis started to walk into Berlin and showing themselves off with those big flags, you know, he had nothing to lose. He wasn't Jewish. So he belonged to this party because he figured maybe someday he will have a very nice job with those people. 

Well, this went on for about two, three years. And one day-- I never raised my arm. I said, I'm Jewish and I am not interested in a Nazi party. What they want is want to kill us all. So why should I say hello to a-- to a flag, you know, that doesn't belong to us? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why did you think they wanted to kill you all way back in the early-- 

BETTY COHN: They had that talking from the minute Hitler came to power, not to power really, but he started to make himself known. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And you knew? 

BETTY COHN: And we knew. Everybody, I mean, it wasn't-- he came right out. The Jews and the Jews and we have to get rid of the Jews. And he had a big mouth. And, you know, the one who really did believe in him were these young people. I mean, a man in his 40s or 50s who had a good job or had his own company, he didn't believe in something like that. He doesn't-- didn't have to. He had good income. And what could that offer to you? Nothing, right? 

Well, one day, I get a buzz on my telephone and my boss said to me, Ms. Fischer, I would like to talk to you. Now, he was Jewish. Oh, I though maybe he has some dictation or something. And I go into the office and he said, Ms. Fischer I'm terribly sorry to tell you that, I know how you feel about it, but they don't really mean you and us. 

I said, Mr. Lachmann, let me put you straight. You are a Jew and so am I. Don't tell me that they don't mean you or myself. Because they don't care that you were born here or you came from some other little place there, I don't-- they don't-- they don't ask you. You are a Jew. Well, he said, you know, I am calling you in because this particular man came into the office and he told them, if Ms. Fischer is not going to greet the flag, then I will have to report that. And you know where she's going to end up-- in a concentration camp. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You had heard about concentration camps in 1930? 

BETTY COHN: Oh, yes, of course. Of course, you have-- because they had this all prepared already. This does not happen overnight. That doesn't happen overnight, you know, those things. Those things are coming slowly, every day something new, every day something new. Well, I said to myself, either I stay there or I quit my job. 

But in the meantime, I had met my husband who worked for the same company. He was very ill at the time. He had a bursted appendix. And they gave him only 50-50 chance. So being in charge, you know, of the office, we felt that somebody should go and visit with him. So I came to the hospital. And he was really a mess. Didn't eat, didn't want to talk, didn't-- there was another friend, a man. 

My husband was in charge of the fur department, very expensive furs, like, in those days mink or broadtail or, um, eh, you name it. So anyhow, this man, this friend of his was there. And I was sick looking at him. Because he was a very handsome young man. He had lost his parents. His mother died of cancer. And he lost his father 10 days later on the broken heart. 

So there were two brothers. He and an older brother. And, um, to make a long story short, I said to him Mr. Cohn, if you promise me to eat-- I had never met him before. I mean, we didn't go out. We said hello and he looked at me, you know. And I said, i-- if-- if you behave now and you really get well again and you s-- promise that you are going to finish your food, I promise you, we make a date. 

And this other gentleman said, you think of me, I am in it. I said fine. We go out. And sure enough, in the meantime, I left for my vacation to Holland. My sister was already there. She was a-- a designer for very beautiful evening clothes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So I as-- you married Mr. Cohn. 

BETTY COHN: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And then, what happened uh, in 1939? I mean, what happened? 

BETTY COHN: Hah! Well, we married. And I quit the job because I didn't want to go into a concentration camp. But in '38, I delivered my baby daughter. And this was in September. I was very sick. Something happened to-- some-- some kind of an infection, you know. And I stayed in the hospital for four weeks. And after four weeks, I couldn't even stand on my legs. So I needed a nurse at home. We were not allowed to have a nurse under 45 years. 

LAUREL VLOCK: If you were under 45 years old, you couldn't have a nurse? 

BETTY COHN: No. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The Nazis-- 

BETTY COHN: I was under-- the Nazis said, if I hire a nurse, she has to be over 45. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Oh, the nurse has to be more than 45. 

BETTY COHN: I was young. 

LAUREL VLOCK: I see. 

BETTY COHN: So we found some nurse over 45, very nice. And she was-- I don't think she was a week there. Because in '38, November '38 was the Kristallnacht, I think the 9th of November. We lived in Schoneberg. This is now the American zone in Berlin. 

And in back of us, the street that run parrall-- parallel, you know, with Innsbrucker Strasse, where we live, there was a brand new synagogue Prinzregentenstrasse, very elegant, with beautiful, beautiful carpeting. You c-- like a palace. And the nurse called me, she said, ma'am, look at the dome. It was burning like hell. Well-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: This dome of the s-- 

BETTY COHN: The dome of the synagogue. 

LAUREL VLOCK: It was burning? 

BETTY COHN: They are turn-- burning. They had every synagogue, this was-- this was a, um, all over Berlin. Every synagogue was put in flames. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And the nurse wanted you to see this? 

BETTY COHN: And the nurse, she didn't want to see. But I-- I had only to come into the-- to the dining room to see that. You know, how flames from a dome, you could see that. Anybody could have seen it. An-- any person on the street could have seen it. It was only one street away. Well, at 7:00 on the cl-- this was early in the morning hour. She used to come at 6 o'clock in the morning. 

At 7 o'clock, I got the call from my brother-in-law. We had a office. By that time my husband was on his own. We opened, you know, our own. We had a office where we sold these expensive furs. And he said to me, Betty, darling, I am downtown and they destroyed completely Leo's office and threw all the furs-- now furs, you have to understand, if you sell them for coats, they have to be bundled, 30 or 35 or 40, by size. They threw everything out. And he said, there are thousands of peoples grabbing those things. 

Well, can you feel what I felt at that time? My husband took the car, he went downtown. There was nothing he can do. But what we built up for about three years after we got married, it was all gone. What are you going to do after that? Your bank account was confiscated. And they told you, well, if you find a booking, we give you the money for the booking. What do you mean you give me the money? This is my money here that they-- you had nothing to say. There was no say for you. Nothing. 

LAUREL VLOCK: There was no one to complain to. 

BETTY COHN: Nobody. Nobody. You were a Jew and this is what happened to the Jews. It didn't only happen to us. There were-- there were companies like, um on Fifth Avenue, let's say, Macy or Bonwit Teller or those who had no windows anymore. who was-- were burnt down. And they were stealing left and right. There was police around and-- and they are close their eyes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did they-- did they steal-- 

BETTY COHN: Every Jew-- stealing everything they wanted to take. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Only the Jewish stores? 

BETTY COHN: Only the Jewish stores. Only Jewish stores. They had put on every store the Magen David and said Jude. How would you feel if-- God forbid something happened like this. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You mean, they had already-- 

BETTY COHN: They had-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: --identified those-- 

BETTY COHN: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: --places that were owned by Jews. 

BETTY COHN: Every-- yes. Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And they plundered-- 

BETTY COHN: That wasn't too hard to-- to identify, you know. I mean, after all, I remember we had a police presidium, you know, where you had to pick up a-- a-- a-- um, a passport. Berlin isn't Bridgeport. Berlin is, in those days, 4 and 1/2 million, you know. This goes back 40 something years, you know. This what some city. 

And the order, this I have to give them credit for, everything that you wanted to know when you went to a police presidium, they had every name, every date, everything was there to find. Well, this was November. They said to you, if you want to send some things out, if you have any idea where you want to go, you could send things away. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did anybody regret, wasn't there someone who regretted having plundered your store? 

BETTY COHN: One person. I got a call that night, one lady. And she called us up and she said she has a bunch of beaver for a beaver coat and she wouldn't be able to live with it. Could she come and drop it off. I said, yes. Why not? Not that I can do anything with it, you know. So she came and she gave it to me. And that was all from-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you talk to her? 

BETTY COHN: No. No. I couldn't talk. What was there for me to say? If they want to punish you because you have a religion, you know, not because you didn't have one, but because you did have one. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So after Kristallnacht what happened? 

BETTY COHN: After Kristallnacht, I said to my husband, liebchen, there's no sense in waiting here. What are you waiting for? My parents left the following months to England to my sister to London. She was already there because the company she worked for, you know, and designed for left long before Kristallnacht. Because they knew what was going to come. I knew what was going-- they told you this. 

But do you ever have that feeling, it-- they couldn't do that. They couldn't do this. How stupid can-- can you get, you know, to say, they couldn't? Of course they could do that. They proved it to you. Well, I tell you what I did. We took-- we were young, married, and I had a beautiful trousseau, beautiful. I took all the things, I packed everything in two trunks that I still have today in my home. I put everything in I could. 

And I had, my husband had given me for my-- for my wedding gift a beautiful coat with a mink stole. Now, that was very elegant, you know, in those days. But I had jewelry. You cannot send this out. So I opened the cape. It was lin-- silk lined. I put everything of jewelry in there, every little piece that I could get, I sewed it up. And I said, liebchen, if this will get to London, at least we will have a few dollars to live on, you know. I don't know, I said, where we are going. 

Because as a-- as a Jew, you even needed an affidavit to go to the United States. I said, where do I get an affidavit from? So we have heard, my brother, this was in November, and my brother left about two weeks later. He left a beautiful, elegant home, took his little baby one-year-old, and left to Holland. He figured from Holland, you know, he could get out. 

At the time was a uncle of his wife who had no children who was a millionaire over again, you know. This uncle gave him enough money to go to Cuba. In order to get into Cuba, you had to buy a-- how do you call that here? Some kind of a paper in order to get in, a paper. That paper was $120 per person. Now, for the little one, I don't think they had to pay. So they paid $320 for the paper, another $320 for two papers for us and telegraphed get yourself together and come over here. 

So my husband is going to the American-Hamburg line Unter den Linden. And they said to him, Mr. Cohn, very sorry, the only booking we could give you would be for March the 29th. 29th of March. 

LAUREL VLOCK: This is 1939. 

BETTY COHN: '39. Well, there was nothing else but to sell whatever we had there. There was nothing much to sell because my furniture, you know, people wanted something for nothing. Because they knew you had to leave. You couldn't take anything along anyhow. So we sold whatever we could and to-- 

Can you imagine? We couldn't even get for our own money that was in a bank, first class or second class. They took the most dilapidated box that they had, you know, they called this, you know, a ocean liner and sold it to those people who wanted to get out of Germany. My husband calls up, he said, darling I only could get third class. I said, liebchen, how do you expect me to go with a baby six months old third class? He said, I'm terribly sorry. This is the only thing. He took it anyhow. This--- Orinoco was the name of that boat. I remember it vividly. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The what? 

BETTY COHN: Orinoco was the name of the boat. Filthy, filthy thing that I ever saw. And the captain was a Nazi. What else was he going to be? So there- I was supposed to go downstairs where they had those bunkers with a baby. I said, not me. I stationed myself. I figured what can they do? Throw me in the water? Well, I have nothing to lose anymore. There I stationed myself. You know, they had a room where you could sit down and write or read. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Mm-hm. 

BETTY COHN: The benches were like this here, built in about-- I don't think they were any wider than this here. And fortunately, I had taken along the beautiful carriage that I had for the baby. And I don't know why I took something along like a leather belt that I had a blanket in and carried it in my hand. It had a little handle. I was lucky I did this. 

So I came into this room, I said, I'm not going to move out here. I don't care what they are-- This is a room that I'm going to stay with this baby. I took this belt around the wheels of the carriage and tightened it to the table that was built in, you know? It did move, that table. And I said, well, she would be secure in that, was only six months old, a little baby. But the most beautiful baby you have ever seen with light blonde hair and dark brown big eyes. 

He comes in and he looks at her. I said, captain, I don't care whether you like this or not. But I'm going to stay here. I'm not going to move. What I didn't know was that the boat before us on this Orinoco had also a baby. And this baby died. That I hadn't known 'til we left the Orinoco in Havana. 

So he didn't put a big fight up because he knew what happened already. And maybe-- maybe he felt pity. I don't know. I couldn't tell you. But anyhow, we stayed on that boat for three weeks from Hamburg to Havana. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did the rest of your family leave in time? 

BETTY COHN: Yes, my parents left before us. You see, I didn't want to go 'til everybody is out. My brother who went to Holland. And I had-- [AUDIO OUT] 