[CREW TALKING IN BACKGROUND] CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. We wanted to pick up, really, from where we left off. Which is a little complicated, but this whole picture, if you can sort of put it together for us, of having been baptized and therefore a Christian by identification, yet Jewish by inheritance. This whole complexity in maintaining the Jewish-- the Christian identity later is confusing. And I gather there was a split in the family. 

SUBJECT: No, not a split, really. There was a divergence. But my father returned to Judaism. But remember, he didn't do so as a believer on the one hand, nor on the other hand, with any real cultural loyalty. 

It was only simply that in the face of Nazism, one did not even try to identify oneself with the Germany one had known before. That was all over. That was all there was. So that my parents really had no investment, I think, in any community other than on the one hand, an intellectual community, and on the other hand, the nation, the new nation to which they came. 

INTERVIEWER: Meaning the United States? 

SUBJECT: But for me there was a more difficult search involved. I had, pretty much to my parents' dismay, become rather religious. And as a result, I found myself gravitating very strongly towards the Quakers. Something they sympathized with, but could not adopt for their own ideology. 

INTERVIEWER: But their Jewishness was really one forced on them, in a way. Uh, I-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I think so. Though that's putting it too strongly. No, it was not forced on them. It was something that they took very casually. 

As something that-- there was a whole group of quite assimilated German Jewish immigrants who lived in New York, some of them in Flushing, some of them in Washington Heights in the Innbrook section of New York. We lived in the latter place. And I think a good many of those people were very much like we were, thoroughly secularized, quite relaxed about the fact that they were Jews, having a variety of outlooks towards Zionism, from strong sympathy to mild antipathy. But none of them really, in any sense, ardently members of the larger Jewish community. 

You may recall, may have heard about a German immigrant newspaper called Aufbau 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Are you familiar with that? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Well, it was that-- the community that was characterized by that newspaper, which was liberal, relatively secular, concerned largely with academic and intellectual matters, and having very little loyalty other than the cause of anti-Nazism on the one hand, the cause of liberalism on the other hand, taking their Judaism naturally, but not as an ardent ideology. 

INTERVIEWER: Perhaps I can approach this from a different perspective. The idea of their Germanness was pretty entrenched in these people, the Nazi period not withstanding. Are you indicating that they renounced all identification with their German nationalism? 

SUBJECT: Oh, clearly. As a matter of fact, I think the test of that was the fact that when the war was over, I doubt whether any of them, except perhaps the tiniest percentage, even thought vaguely of ever returning to Germany again. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, I guess what I'm trying to find out is that the cause of their disassociation from Germany was their Jewish heritage. And I'm trying to understand why they didn't-- why they remained casual about that in the face of that being the-- the cause of the disruption in their lives. 

SUBJECT: It was a cause that was imposed on them. It was a disruption that was clearly became, you're right, the cause of-- of-- of-- a complete collapse of an earlier-- earlier ideological commitment. But they did not learn from that. But they did not draw the inference that I think you are drawing. 

And therefore, their first ideological commitment would be to their Jewishness. No, I think not. Having once been assimilated in one place, they then became, relatively speaking, assimilated in another place which offered them a nationality without the-- well, at least as they saw it, without the enormous fear of having to go through a similar catastrophe, that is to say that it was a national-- that it would become a national religion which might then swing over into something like anti-Semitism again. 

For example, most of these people were awfully dismayed by the McCarthy period. It reminded them of Hitler. But again, it did not make them turn more towards their Jewishness. I think Henry Kissinger would be a fairly typical product of this group. Whose-- I think whose identification with his own Jewish background has been, shall we say, minimal rather than maximal. Even though he's never denied it. 

INTERVIEWER: No. I guess what I'm trying to understand is that assimilation in Germany had not been something which had helped these Jewish people when-- 

SUBJECT: The chips were down. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, when the chips were down, precisely. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: And so I find it a little perplexing as to why assimilation would again be the mode for people who it had not protected in the past. 

SUBJECT: I think a negative reason would be simply, um, that they did not conceive of Israel, which would have been the option. They did not conceive of that in the long run as a positive option. Most of them, though they had sympathy for it, very few of them after the war were tempted to leave America to go to Israel. 

And the positive reason is, I think-- it may sound cynical, it's not meant cynically-- that the reason assimilation had not worked for them was that they had been in the wrong country. That is to say, I think most of them felt had they been in Britain, had they been in the United States, it would have worked. 

INTERVIEWER: I wondered what their attitude was about a strong Jewish community, albeit not one that was headed toward Israel. But strengthening the-- you know, themselves in the context of their-- their own society, so that they would be reinforced from that aspect. 

SUBJECT: I think one would have to say that within bounds they would have been sympathetic. I'm trying to think back on what my parents' friends attitude became towards temple or synagogue. Those that we knew moved mildly back towards a religious organization, usually Reform Judaism, since some-- and usually some rabbis who had come back, who had emigrated from Germany were involved in founding new congregations. But it didn't go any further than that ever. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know or did you ever find that in this German Jewish community that there was a reluctance to believe the lengths to which the Nazi regime had gone? 

SUBJECT: No. It's not that they were unrealistic. Not that I can remember. On the contrary, I think we were agitated. 

My parents-- I remember my father in the last two years of his life finding out, I think it was through the Red Cross, that my aunt, his sister, had been deported. And he was agonized. Because he was quite sure that that meant death. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he ever discuss with you at home what it was in the German organization, mentality, if you will, condition-- that made all of this possible? Was that ever explored? 

SUBJECT: No. I did that. They didn't. My friends and I did that, um, rather than my parents. Who, when-- when it came to really searching historical inquiry, my father was too much of a natural scientist to believe in it. 

And my mother likewise. They just-- they weren't very searchingly inclined. But I think if one-- I haven't recently done that. It's something I like to do. 

If one goes through the files of that newspaper, The Aufbau I think you will find endless discussions of that. Some things sometimes from a Marxist point of view that it was really a-- the last vestige, or the last extremity of capitalism run wild in a military economy. Sometimes from a kind of point of view that I myself am inclined to adhere to. Namely, there was a re-- residual mixture of religious superstition on the one hand and the queer kind of racial romanticism which had begun to just fester in Germany early in the 19th century. 

INTERVIEWER: You yourself, you went to a Quaker school in England. You finally came to the United States. What was your-- what was your route? What was your pattern? And how did it all evolve? 

SUBJECT: Well, my pattern evolved purely religiously academically. That is to say, I became very much a member of a Protestant communion. And I really discovered my Jewish heritage, actually, through Christianity, rather than directly. 

INTERVIEWER: What does that mean? 

SUBJECT: That meant that eventually I discovered the Old Testament. And began to branch out from there into some fascinating study in rabbinic Judaism. And-- not that I'm an expert on that, but to some degree on rabbinic Judaism. 

And then interestingly enough, I began to read about the enormous arguments that have been engaged in on the nature of the study of Judaism, which involves, oh, a group of people as strong on the one hand as Gershom Scholem and on the other hand, a traditional group of Jewish scholars who thought of Judaism very much in assimilationist ways. Since they were themselves assimilated, they thought of it as a purely assimilated study, too. Whereas for Sholem it was a much more rich, complex study of the discovery of one's own roots, not only religiously, but culturally, which it did not do for the-- did not for these rather attenuated assimilationist folk. 

So I discovered that controversy-- it involved other people such as Hanna Arendt and some of the problematic issues she got into-- at the same time as I was beginning to get interested in rabbinic studies, things of that sort. But you see, I came to this only through my having become a Christian theologian, and then a student of the phenomenon of religion generally. 

INTERVIEWER: As-- well, from any vantage point, what would be your view of the continuation of Jewish peoplehood in the context of the world as we find it, a fragile situation at best? 

SUBJECT: Absolutely necessary on the one hand, the glory also. But for my I will have to be frank-- a great problem. Because I'm frightened of all religious nationalisms and all political narcissism. And I'm afraid I see the geopolitical outlook of Israel is about as broad as the borders of Israel. I-- I find that absolutely dismaying, at the same time as I think one must be absolutely committed to the continuation, the continued existence of thriving of the nation of Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, then let me take it from another tack. That was an interesting answer. But I-- Christianity still thrives as a religion. I mean, it exists. The likelihood of it continuing to exist is fairly strong. 

SUBJECT: Though perhaps no longer as the major religion of the West, as it once was. I think secularity, secularization is a very strong phenomenon. But anyway, you're right. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, there may be a, uh, an attrition to some degree. 

SUBJECT: But it will continue. You're right. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Let's talk about it from the perspective of Judaism. Where-- 

SUBJECT: It will continue also. It must continue and I think it will continue. But it will be-- it'll be a much more scary borderline phenomenon always. Jewish existence is a very precarious existence. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, that takes us back to you and your family and the relationship between you and your family, which must have been or must be or must have been strained as a result of this departure on your part, even though it was clear why it happened. 

SUBJECT: My departure from-- towards Christianity, you mean? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, yeah-- not really toward Christianity. But away from the condition that the family found itself in. 

SUBJECT: Actually not, no, that-- I think the problem was not-- is not there. The problem-- I mean, they-- they-- they saw what I was doing as a not-- as a continuation of their own pattern of assimilation on the one hand, and moving into an academic life, on the other hand. The problem, really, for me is that I am, far more than a good many other people, at once an outsider to Jewishness and an insider. 

And I find that a very difficult way, you see. I mean, for example, if this country were to go officially anti-Semitic, which I don't see coming, but nonetheless, you know, [? if it somehow ?] did, I would clearly identify myself with the Jewish community. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: That's because I think one should always identify oneself with those who are persecuted. I think that's-- that's only right. But I think I would do so as one whose persuasion is really one of considerable skepticism at the same time. 

Um, there's an author who's written a very deeply moving book, Saul Friedlander, When Memory Comes. So have you looked at it? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And he's become a very loyal, devoted Israeli, though he teaches half time in Geneva each year, half the year. And yet, I think you'll find-- in that book I found part of the same thing-- kind of an inability to get two halves of his personality together again, except in a very tenuous way. Well, that's true for me, too. 

But you see that my dominant personality became secular and Christian. Therefore, it would take a conscious move, rather than a natural emotive response, for me to identify myself with Judaism now. I'm too far gone. 

INTERVIEWER: Leaving that aside for the moment, if-- have you had an urge or have you visited Germany? Have you gone back to the places that you knew as a young man? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you interact with people? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that experience? 

SUBJECT: I was also a very-- also very much an outsider. What-- you see, in effect, what I'm left with is a minimal identity, except what I can gain from my own immediate family and my own search and inquiry through life. I found-- find myself-- and to some extent, the church. But I will have to confess that even there I find certain elements of remoteness. 

I find myself really one of that curious group of refugees who has been unable to establish any strong communal ties and rather mistrusts them, one and all. That may be the-- the social or political wound that I carry, inability, really, to attach myself strongly emotionally to any community. 

INTERVIEWER: But this is a time to persist a little bit. This is a time when people are constantly looking for roots. There's a-- there's almost a perennial search for the ties that you are saying you-- 

SUBJECT: Mhm. I recognize that as a very important thing for virtually everyone, but not for me. It is a matter on which I have-- I believe I'm very much of the opposite mentality. In the 18th century, there was-- there came to dominance a kind of rationalist in outlook, which suggests that the true community is not the community of emotional attachment. And I'm afraid I b-- I belong by-- I don't know whether by temper or by acquisition of acquired habit to that-- to that outlook. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever have an opportunity to discuss, to exchange any views with-- as remote as you may have found yourself from them-- from people in your community, people, young people that you knew as a young person? 

SUBJECT: Mhm. I have. And the curious thing that I found most distressing there was the continuation of the pattern of German Jews haughtiness towards Eastern Judaism and the ignoring of that extraordinarily powerful, strong tradition of the shtetl, the divesting of one's heritage of Eastern Europe, and then the curious half-way return to it, which Irving Howe describes in The World of Our Fathers. I find myself again in a curious position. I am, as an outsider, deeply sympathetic to that culture. 

And it makes me deeply chagrined by my fellow German Jews' continuing contempt for, intolerance of that culture. So I have-- I really find myself pretty much an outsider to virtually every group that you could mention. 

INTERVIEWER: It was a very full answer to a question I really wasn't asking. I guess, it was a mis-- 

SUBJECT: But it's a negative. 

INTERVIEWER: --but I'm glad that you answered it. No, the question I was answering-- asking, rather-- was did you have a chance to talk to any non-Jewish people? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I beg your pardon. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I was glad that you answered the way you did. I have a second chance. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And I found a gulf. I found very little candor. I found the thing-- if people had said to me, look, my role was not heroic. I'm a very ordinary person. I ran for cover, though I knew better. 

I would have probably said, well, God bless you. I don't know if I would have acted any better in your situation. I wonder if I would have. I would hope that I might have. But I'm not sure that I would have. I understand. 

But everybody that I met tried to make himself out a little more than that. And as someone who never capitulated inwardly-- well, I didn't doubt it. Lots of people didn't capitulate inwardly, although a lot of people did. But there was, for me, always a credibility gap for my former contemporary-- with my former contemporaries. 

They maximized even the slightest amount of resistance that they might have offered. They may have been danger-- in danger of having to go to jail one day. Maybe they may have been in danger, say, one day in 1934. They maximized it to the skies, and so on and so on. I-- I-- I left Germany after a year as a Fulbright scholar with the same skepticism that I had gone with. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you explain the denial of awareness? Awareness-- I mean, people lived around the concentration camps. They lived in towns, very often in towns-- and the camps would have the same name. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever discuss the fact that they claim they didn't know what was happening in-- inside those walls? 

SUBJECT: I did not actually know any people who lived close by. I did know people who were aware of concentration camps. And I-- [INAUDIBLE] many of them came pretty close to saying that indeed, they did not know. But it was because they did not want to know what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: And from your vantage point, and with as much candor as you, uh, present, last question. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: What is your view of people familiarizing themselves, knowing now and in future times, what happened? In other words, what is your view of remembering this era? 

SUBJECT: Well, I'll have to-- I'll answer it very candidly. And that is memory is a very curious thing. One has to come to terms with it. And barbarism has to be depicted. 

It is an overpowering necessity that we bear witness to that until we come to the point where it becomes the all consuming engrossment of our lives. Until the answer to every question about our own disposition, our own outlook on what's going on in the world today, becomes encapsulated in the word Auschwitz-- we can't do that. The world will keep going. 

We cannot get stuck there. Otherwise, I often think that the tragedy may be that by seeking to concentrate on Auschwitz, we may actually repeat it in another form. So yes, remembering and bearing witness to future generations up to a point. But with some hope, in my mind, of going on to other things from there. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think the very act of-- the fact that Auschwitz and all that that implies has perhaps not been as dealt with as it might have could also make it precedent? In other words, acceptance of it can also create precedent. 

SUBJECT: I didn't quite understand. Say it again. 

INTERVIEWER: In other words, if there is the danger as-- of overfocusing on, as you've just articulated it, on Auschwitz, there is also the danger of acceptance of that bestiality, of that brutality, which creates a circumstance of precedent. 

SUBJECT: Yes, in a very strange way, Richard Rubenstein, in a perverse but remarkable book called After Auschwitz suggests just that. But then, Jews will have to do something that they have not hitherto done, except for him. He thinks that Auschwitz is absolutely frightening because it may be the harbinger of a behavior pattern in the late 20th and early 21st century towards enormous numbers of human groups. Whereas to my best knowledge, the Jewish community has only inquired into it, searched it out, as a phenomenon of behavior toward Judaism. 

In other words, I would say, yes, there can be too easy an acceptance of it, of course, but just as there can be too much concentration on it. What I would like to see is Auschwitz become-- and the memory of it, become a warning memorial against the horror of ever doing anything of this sort to any minority or to any group of people, be it Cambodian, be it the Armenians, or be it the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: I-- I-- I'm just burning to ask one last-- just one last question. Identifying-- people say that we really don't learn from history, despite caveats to the contrary. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm wondering, whether you from your studies, from your position, your b-- your unusual vantage point feels that by bringing up all of this, we can learn to identify evil at its incipient stages, across-- across all ethnic lines. I'm not talking about Jews, particularly. If you were talking to some schoolchildren, if you were talking to young people, what would you say about that matter? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. And here I'd like to take a leaf out of the book of B'nai B'rith, much as I don't admire them in some ways. I think the sense that when-- when you find group emotions, especially those of hatred, being played upon, when you find that politicians begin to single out, political leaders in any country, democratic or otherwise, begin to single out individual groups in order to distract their fellow citizens' attention from real problems, you're on your way. You're on your way towards possible, possible brutality. 

INTERVIEWER: And what can the average citizen do about noticing that? 

SUBJECT: It's easy to say in a-- in what is still a democracy. The only thing the, uh, the average citizen can do to notice it and to help then is to stand by the people who are being brutalized, as some Americans stood by the indiscriminate-- indiscriminate, though under-- though perfectly understandable anger against Iranians after the hostages were taken, Iranians in this country, I mean. I think one simply has to stand by those who are potentially helpless victims as early as possible. And one simply has to say for oneself, well, I'm finally a responsible individual. And my stand must always be those with-- on the side of those who are being victimized. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. I respect your time. I really appreciate it. Wait a minute. I really appreciate your coming back. 

[RECORDING SNAPS] 

