SUBJECT: That there was always two grandmothers live with us. By the way, they died at the time of the ghetto in our house. And suddenly I was faced with a terrible reality. And my mother was no-- I had to protect her too. Because she was-- she was heart-- heart attack or whatever it was. I couldn't tell her what was going on. And I was all by myself and a-- my only consolation was in the evening when I came home and they-- they had very good herring, some kind of a herring I never found. It was some kind of black pepper. This was my consolation, good feeling to have bread and butter and herring. 

But-- so I was really like in a shock, in a state of shock all the time. I didn't care whether I live or die. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father died how long ago? 

SUBJECT: It seems that he was, first of all, he wrote us some letters. I still have them. Not-- the first letter that I got was in Czernowitz, during the Russians. I didn't know. We thought it was Benjamin still in jail. But what happened was that one day we got a letter on a piece of paperback in Russian. He didn't know how to write in Russian. But it was my dear wife, I'm all right. And so we thought-- we didn't know who was writing, who wrote this letter. It was a piece of slip, torn from a paperback. My dear wife, I'm well. And I'm-- don't worry about me. 

Until it dawned on us that it was my father writing. We found-- so we knew that he was there. Then after he had an acc-- he was working and this was actually in Asia, on the border of Asia, Sverdlovsk Oblast, way, way far away, you know, where the mountains there. He was working in the woods, cutting woods. And he had an accident and he went to the hospital. There was a nice woman, a doctor, a woman doctor, who took out his letters, Yiddish letters that he could finally write to us so we understood. 

And he told us that we could send him some packages. And we did send him packages through Poland. We had some relatives there. We couldn't through Romania. But in Poland we made some packages, and through her we send him. Then he wrote us not to send him such good packages because he was in jail. It's not fair. People can't stand it when other people have good packages. Just send me this and this, not much. And he wanted-- his glasses broke. He wore eyeglasses-- to go to the doctor and see the prescription. I don't know what happened with it. Because I see a couple of letters about his glasses that he couldn't see. 

And what happened, because of the glasses, he was really killed. We found out that when the war broke out, he was sent to-- to work behind the front for some-- some kind of-- called black work. Schwarze arbeit, you know? It seems-- any kind of hard work, hard labor. But you know, the Russians, if you're in jail for political or other reasons, you were very bad off. The-- the real murderers and thieves are the privileged class, in deportation and in jail. 

And at some point they let loose these underworld, on the-- on the others, on the political or other prisoners. And my father had to serve to one man, a murderer or some kind of-- and he wanted my father to-- to-- to his shoes-- to-- to shine his shoes or his boots. My father didn't see well without the glasses. He was short-sided. And he didn't do a good job. So this man hit him so-- so bad that he died. 

INTERVIEWER: Because he didn't polish his shoes right? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And this man who told us this story, said he came back to the camp and he died on my pillow. Oh, what's his name? He's-- he was in Israel lately. He told us. So that's the story. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, that's very painful. 

SUBJECT: This was a telephone-- my father's story was the most painful. Because he was such an innocent person. There was an innocent person, a beautiful person. And certainly he didn't deserve to die in a socialist country, the so-called socialist country, where they pretended to be the humane society. 

INTERVIEWER: Did-- did the dreams about him continue? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I had many dreams. Well, I had many dreams-- poetic dreams otherwise too. But this one, if-- if you want to know it. One day I dreamt that there was a marketplace, you know, and marketplaces in these, now country peasants and horses and wagons and the whole [INAUDIBLE], you know, many was going on. And I among horses and wagons. I suddenly see my father, and he seemed like he has lost his mind. He didn't know. He was wandering like-- and suddenly he stopped and he saw me, and like a consciousness came into his eyes. And the whole thing became so static. It was like the page of a book. And it was written down there. And only word-- it was written-- the only word he remembered was my name. He was out of his mind and the only word he remembered was my name. It was the page of a book, a strange story. 

Many times I dreamed of him. This is one of the dreams I remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you still now? 

SUBJECT: No. Then my mother died. I dreamed of her. No. He was very big. Maybe I sometimes I think I should. But it was a very painful memory and in the beginning I was trying not to forget him. And I was-- all the people who remembered him, I was trying to ask them what they remembered about him. And I enjoyed talking about him and thinking of him. It was not painful. The memory was dear to me. I didn't want to forget him. 

And some-- some moments being in this country, I heard that somebody by the name of Benjamin Schachter was in Paris. I thought maybe he's alive. But it turned out to be somebody else. And I always thought maybe he's survived and he's somewhere. And we left Czernowitz, by the way. We were let out in 1945. The Russians, after they-- they made this pact of Yalta, we were Americans. They let out the people from the occupied countries if they wanted to go. 

That is not from Czernowitz really, but from the other side, the part of-- see Bukovina our province, part of it belonged only-- was annexed by the Russians. The other part went to Romania. And my husband happened to be in a town bordering, Siret. So he said he was belonged to the other part, so we could leave legally. And so we, my mother and-- and my brother and my husband, we left legally Czernowitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: To Romania. And most of the people, my brother-- my brother ran over the border illegally, because he was drafted to-- to the army, pre-- pre-military army, pre-military. He was young. And so one day he ran away with some other people, and-- and he came to Bucharest, and stayed in Bucharest. 

INTERVIEWER: And how long did you stay in Romania? 

SUBJECT: So we came in 1945. We stayed in Bucharest-- my husband left in '46 with my mother, they went clandestine over the border. 

INTERVIEWER: To where? 

SUBJECT: To Vienna. And I stand back with my brother. Because he was studying at the University of Bucharest meanwhile. See, my brother was very exceptional intellectually. And although he was only 12 when the war broke out, now he-- in one year, he made all-- that he was in the second grade high school when the Russians-- when the war broke out. But now after the war, in 1945, he made his exams, all the classes that he missed. And his baccalaureate, that is-- he got-- and he came-- 

INTERVIEWER: Like a high school diploma? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: Something like high school diploma? 

SUBJECT: Yes. It was-- baccalaureate is like a master-- it's equal, I think, to something here. 

INTERVIEWER: I think it's-- 

SUBJECT: You come into university after that. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. That's high school diploma, more or less. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And then did you go to Vienna? 

SUBJECT: So he went in Bucharest. I stayed with him until he finished university. And then I looked for some connections. My husband was there in Vienna. He got a job at the DP camps and my mother. And I one day walking in Bucharest, I meet another Gatesman, a lawyer a family of ours. And he said, where is your family. I told him my husband is in Vienna. And-- and he said, where were you born? I was born in Vienna, I said. 

So he said, don't worry. I'll make you-- you can leave legally. And he gave-- he made me a certificate, kind of a passport for one way. It was called [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] It means I can leave legally without coming back. And so I took my package. First I found something for my brother, a connection to illegally go in the border. And he was caught, he was in jail-- put in jail. But then he's here, finally. I was there long when he came to Vienna, and we stayed there until he could come here. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what year did you come to the United States? 

SUBJECT: 1951, June. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were in Vienna for how many years then? 

SUBJECT: From-- my husband from '46-- I from '47 to '51. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like to be in Vienna after the war? 

SUBJECT: It was a, you know, a temporary thing. Well, I was-- I was familiar with Vienna. It was kind of a home of mine. But not after the war. I tell you, it was a different Vienna. It was not the Vienna I knew before that. And to live in the DP camps was not very pleasant. It was annoying. People were nervous, they wanted to leave. It was a long time. But my husband worked for the joint distribution committee, you know, DPs. He was the main doctor there, the chefarzt, for the DP camps, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you still feel anti-Semitism? 

SUBJECT: Yes, many times we heard why didn't Hitler kill you. We heard that many times. They didn't like us. 

INTERVIEWER: So people still talked as if they-- and this was after the war? 

SUBJECT: They were surprised to live-- to see Jews. And they were annoyed to see us stay there for such a long time. And some of the Jews did business. And you know, you have to live some way, somehow. And everybody wanted to go somewhere. Some went to Israel. Some went to other places. We had family in-- in America. And we got an affidavit finally, and as soon we got affidavit, we could leave. I gave birth to my daughter in Vienna. And so we were held up for a while. She became sick on the way. We had to stay. 

INTERVIEWER: You have one daughter, or-- 

SUBJECT: I have three children. But my daughter was born there. My two boys were born here. One of them is working here with you. He's working with the-- it's a Gatesman. What do you call that back in the video? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you call any of them after your father? 

SUBJECT: I had a boy in Vienna before my daughter, and he was named after my father. But he died. Then I had my daughter. But my brother has four children, so-- so he has a boy named after my father. So it's really good. Because he's the Schachter. He carries the name of the family. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother is in this country also? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. He's teaching at Colombia, Yiddish teacher, professor, lecturer, whatever. He's one of your girls was taking-- we were speaking back there. And she took his courses. 

INTERVIEWER: I think you brought some pictures. Maybe we can at least show them to the camera. 

SUBJECT: I don't know what kind of pictures do you-- do you want to see from Czernowitz? From-- well, this is the family, part of it. It was cut off. 

CREW: A little bit back. The top tilt back. 

INTERVIEWER: Back. All right? 

SUBJECT: A wedding. Do you want me to show you some of the people? 

INTERVIEWER: Show where you are. 

SUBJECT: Well, that's me here. This is my husband. That's my father, my mother, my husband's father. We are relatives. We're cousins, actually, first cousins. This is my little brother. Yeah, that's-- that's my husband's sister who's getting married, a my cousin of mine that is. Uncles, uncle, right after-- he wasn't with us in Austria, and his wife. See, this is aunt I was Vienna with. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: This must have been in 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have pictures of Czernowitz when you were there? 

SUBJECT: Czernowitz, yes. Well, this is it, maybe here. This a better picture of my father. 

INTERVIEWER: What was his first name? 

SUBJECT: Benjamin, Binyomen. 

INTERVIEWER: He looks very intelligent. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: Here was my father with his sister. This is-- my-- my uncle came from New York and took these pictures at the front of the store. This is myself, my mother. This is my uncle and my father. It's not a good picture, but-- This is my little brother in front of the music or the concert hall in Czernowitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Your little brother with whom? 

SUBJECT: My brother-in-law. He was-- he married my husband's sister. So again, in front of our store, my father and my mother and myself. it's not a good picture. But here, this is also in front of the store. Oh, the man who worked for us, Mr. Katz, and my cousin who was-- 

CREW: Can you hold the top of it towards you, please? You have to tilt it away from the light. 

INTERVIEWER: Forward or back? 

CREW: Forward. 

INTERVIEWER: Forward. 

SUBJECT: My mother here, myself, and my brother. We're on the streets of Czernowitz. I'm walking with a cousin of mine. All right? Here I'm walking with my husband. He was not my husband at that time, he was a cousin and a friend of mine in the streets of Czernowitz. 

The balcony, it was in Czernowitz. These are pictures from those years. OK? Here's my father, his mother, his sister, and myself. Schachter. We have similar faces, looking. This is the school, I was in the Lyzeum. There's myself, very small and pale. Now, this a newer picture. Somebody was-- we are having fun with horse and wagon. In the back yard of our house, they had some horses. And I was there on top of it. A cousin trying to-- we had fun. We were just having fun. I never drove a horse A big horse. 

And this is the family again in front of our house-- my father, my brother, my mother, my grandmother, my husband, his mother. 

INTERVIEWER: In some states your father had a beard? 

SUBJECT: No, no, he never had a beard, a mustache. He had at one time. 

INTERVIEWER: Mustache, but when did he have the mustache? 

SUBJECT: Well, at sometimes. Grandmother, our two grandmothers lived with us, and see, this is my other grandmother, my-- my father's mother. She too died at the time of the ghetto. You know these are pictures from today, if that interests you. 

I have a daughter who is retarded. This is my first born who was born in Vienna because of some circumstance. Now one picture from Czernowitz, as we're looking all in the mirror and taking some pictures of ourselves in the mirror. The maid who worked for us, Damka. 

This is my other son. He lives in New York, Manhattan, another one coming. Do you want to see? OK? 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. That's-- that's fine. We have to stop. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 