INTERVIEWER 1: Could I ask you first to tell me your name? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Eugene Newman. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where you were born and when you were born? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I was born June 28, 1923, in Zdanov Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And could you tell me what your home was like, the home you grew up in and the town that you were born and grew up in? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just, why don't you-- you imagine yourself in a living room with an old album of pictures, that you flip on the first page, and you look at the pictures, and visually you begin to see flashes of memory. And forget everything else in this room. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: When you say "home," my home or the entire area, the town and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Whatever-- whatever you see if you imagine a picture. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Where should I begin? My home was nice home, like many other homes. The neighbors were nice. School was nice. [INAUDIBLE] We-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many children in the family? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: We were-- we were-- and they all are alive-- three brothers and one sister. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were the? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I am the second son, yeah. My sister is third, and then my younger brother. I-- we had not far from us lived my mother's mother, and my mother's sister, who was married, later became a widow. My mother's brother. They were all in business. 

And the school was about 2 and 1/2 kilometers from my home. I walked twice a day. In the morning, we went in the morning, early in the morning to cheder. Got up 5:00 in the morning. And the other boys woke up so many times. 

We were always, always the early birds, my older brother and I. We woke up some other boys. We walked. For 6:00 we got at cheder. 7:30, we finished. We went home quick for a quick breakfast, and then back to for Czech school at 8:00. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: And at 12:00 we came home for lunch and back from 1:00 to 3:00. 3:00, we went back to cheder and studied till 8:00 in the evening. In the wintertime, we used to have a lot of fun, skiing, skating. 

Ice skating on the ice. Ice broke many times. We fell into the water. We came back, and we were not supposed to do it, according to our rabbi. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Zersholteck? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: It was between-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sholteck? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were a sholteck? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah. We took out the time when the older people used to [INAUDIBLE] if you know what I'm saying, minchen malev, It was-- and we went in the dark, and we didn't see the ice was weak. We broke many times. The ice broke, and we came back, and naturally, we got-- by the rabbi, we got clobbered for that. 

And my grandmother was also a very strict woman. I don't know if I should mention incidents or something. Is this what you want to hear? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, go on. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: My brother and I, we had boots, nice boots. And as we fell into that ice one particular evening, we came home, and we came back to this cheder. We didn't know in that dark that a-- a lady was sitting there near the stove. And she heard all our excuses. Because we were making up excuses. What will we tell the rabbi and the grandmother that we fell down? I mean, that our boots are wet. The ice broke, and this accident happened to us. 

So by the time we came home, my grandmother knew already about it. And we came home. We couldn't pull off our boots, because everything was wet. Naturally, we got a spanking from our grandmother. That particular night, we slept in our grandmother's house. Many times, we stayed during the week in my grandmother's house, because it was far for us in the wintertime to walk home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Her house was closer to the school. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yes, it was just across the street from the place where we went to school and so on. And also the cheder. But otherwise, it was a lovely home. And my grandmother was very good to us. Anytime she could push in a spoon of food into-- into us, she would really do it even 100 times a day. And she was known as a very strict woman in town. 

And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned-- 

EUGENE NEWMAN: We played-- pardon me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: In the school, we had-- we played volleyball games, soccer. We were quite active. Quite active. We had plays in our Czech school. At that time, I went to Czech school. Every occasion, there was a holiday, for instance, I believe in November. St. Nicholas, which was a big religious holiday in the Czech religion. Or Catholic religion, whatever it was. 

And we used to have a play. I used to play. I used to be the Nichol-- you know, St. Nicholas. And for Christmas, we used to have shows in the school. 

And now thinking back, living here in America and living, I live an orthodox life, I would say now. I'm surprised that our parents did not rebel or demonstrate against that at home in those days. Because we really, we used to sing even Christmas carols many times. 

We used to go to neighbors, wish them a merry Christmas on Christmas morning, because they believed if a Jew came and he was the first one entered their house, that a Jew brought them luck. So my parents were used to-- or our parents used to encourage us to go to good neighbors and wish them a happy holiday in the morning. 

Now where should I go from here? 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it seemed like things were very peaceful during that childhood time. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have brought some pictures with you. Do you happen to have pictures from that time or later on? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I have pictures from before, yes, which I found here in America, for instance. I only have a picture which I got after the war here from my-- I had an uncle in Elizabeth And my uncle, my other uncle, my mother's brothers wrote here "in memory," "in memory." "In remembrance" in 1925. 

Just really shows how they lived or something. I don't know if you wish to see it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you want to hold that up for the camera, so that we can all see it. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Oh, I mean, they are all pictures, of course, from 1925. I don't know if you can see them. These were peasants, for instance. Like, this was our neighbor. Kultan was his name. My uncle wrote down here to his brother here in America, this was Kultan. This was a little church in our town. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tilt it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tilt it. That's-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: No, don't hold it up. You can hold it down. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's right. That's good. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's exactly right. Now, what was this? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: This is just a typical picture of our neighbor over there. This was from another town. There used to be a market every every-- every month or every two weeks in a neighboring town. And the Jewish people-- Jiduchov, this was the name of this fellow, we called him. He looked at a cow's teeth-- how were the cow is, when he was purchasing it. Such things here. 

What is this? Here he writes about it. Here are the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] This is Hungarian here. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Merchants, Jewish merchants here, how they flip their hand. You know, this is the way they made a deal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A deal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: This is just a farm here. Chickens for some reason or other he sent it. This lady was here. Even I remember her. A delivery-- how do you call it? A delivery lady? Yeah, who delivers babies? A lady who-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, a midwife. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Midwife, yes. She was crossing here a little stream at home, and the pigs were also there. And they had wool jackets, which they made themselves. 

Here they were going Sunday. A wealthy family was going in a carriage to church Sunday morning. He describes it here. Here are two fellows, two peasants who were just debating, discussing something. 

This fellow, Sichik was his name. I remember him too. He was repairing a roof, putting on shingles on the roof. This was out of town, a cross. You know. I don't know why he sent it at that time. 

What is this here? Sheep, closed in at wintertime. The horses used to feed themselves, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: A father and son were cutting firewood with a handsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: And this was the market place in that Vereczka a town not far from us. All the-- is there anything more? Yeah, here the way they were loading hay. Neighbors. But he mentions the name of those neighbors. 

This was a wedding, a typical wedding of peasants when they get married. So he mentions here, this guy, this fellow is Kultan's son. His son is getting married. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And those pictures were taken approximately what year? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: They were mailed in 1925 to my uncle here, to America. 1925, to yes. So that means 57 years ago. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's proceed within the pictures. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you go on what the picture's about? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah. I have a few in mind. I can show you right here. This is what I found after the war. I mean, I got this from a teacher, a schoolteacher of mine. This was my school where I went to. Czech school. The two teachers, Strejc and Fejtek they were-- they copied it and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: And then someone gave me after the war, a picture, which in 1940 it was taken. When I was 17. Here on the left side, this is where I am here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tilt it more towards me. OK. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: These friends, none of-- only this girl is alive. The others did not survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The one in the middle? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: The middle, yes. She is married. She lives in Brussels. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you are alive and that girl. The others. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: And that girl, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. You are the most left. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. The others were purged in the war. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yes, I have a very good friend. They were from a different-- this girl was from my town. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: This was her brother-in-law, her sister, older sister's husband. These two were cousins. And this was a very good friend of mine. He was a year older than I. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was a small, rural town that you grew up in. You said your father had a business there? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yes, we were in the lumber business. So was his uncle. We had a saw mill in our town. And my father's two uncles were-- were the own-- I mean, the major, how shall I say, owners. And my father had also a percentage in it, in the business. And this is what his business was. 

And I, as a young boy, when I was off school or so on, I used to help out. I used to measure the logs, go out in the forest in the wintertime, and paint certain logs from certain sections. I helped out my father. 

Saturday night, we had, as I mentioned to you over the phone, besides the lumber business, we had a-- in German or in Jewish, you would say the Wirtshaus, so they called it. Like a bar. But the difference is, we didn't sit down around the bar. 

We had a liquor license and also a tobacco license. And my father had workers who all week, they lived and stayed for months in the forest. They came from far, from 200, 300 kilometers just to make a living. They used to cut down the trees in the for-- October, November. 

But every Saturday night, they used to come down into town. The music came into our place, and they used to get food for the entire week they come up with them. Cornflower, Speck. How do you say it now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bacon. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Bacon, yeah, they bought bacon. Potatoes. They-- they used to put down a big fire in the-- in the forest over there, and they used to roast-- bake the potatoes and roast the-- the bacon and drip on it on the potatoes, I remember, and make this polenta, it was called. It's like a Romanian dish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mamaliga? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Mamaliga, yes. But we called it-- in our area, we used to call it polenta. In Hungarian, they called it paliszka. 

And of course Saturday night, we had to mark down everything what they-- they purchased. And I, my brother, my older brother also, we used to help out Saturday nights. We were up till 11:00, 12:00 at night. 

Or when my father used to figure out each team-- there were teams, four or five people working when they were cutting down those trees. A father with three sons came, and they were a team. And there were maybe 100 teams like this here. And it took two or three months. 

When they finished the work, then their logs were measured in cubic meters. Here it would be square feet. And until then, they were just drawing a salary. A Konto, we used to call it. 

And I used to be very good. My father used to be very proud of me. I used to add up columns in no time without an adding machine. Because we didn't even have an adding machine. Only in the sawmill, in the office, but not at home. 

And my father used to put on [INAUDIBLE] to show his older uncles. You see, uncle? "My Yiddle, my Yiddle, my Yiddle." That's my name, Yehuda, in He-- in Yiddish. He says, "You see how nicely he writes? You see how nicely he adds up?" 

And we were all involved at home and everything. Everything at home. Firewood, taking care of other things, anything. Because we were heating in the wintertime firewood. So we boys had to bring in always from outside the firewood into the house. Water. 

Even though we had a maid. We had a maid, but these things, certain things we boys were supposed to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At some point, things began to change from the way they were at that time. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, already in 1939, already when the Czechs-- I mean, when Germany occupied part of the Sudetenland and so on, we were still Czechoslovakia. Am I too ahead of time on anything? Ahead of myself? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, how did they begin to change in terms of what you saw, from-- in your day to day life, without necessarily-- 

EUGENE NEWMAN: No, for instance, as a boy, and now I can understand better when they were talking in those days about the-- we had a depression. I remember that too. Here in the United States, it was in 1932. And by us, we got it later, only '34, '35, perhaps even "36. 

And as a 12, 13, 14 year old boy, because I was involved, I knew what was going down a little bit in the business, in my father's business. I remember that people already, we were very proud of Czechoslovakia, for instance, because they were a democratic country. 

They had already unemployment. People who couldn't work, they used to get, I remember, like today, seven crowns a week. It was a lot of money, Czech crowns. They used to get unemployment benefits. 

And but then came in 1938 already. We felt already, we knew already, because people used to write to us who lived in deeper-- I mean, in Moravia or in Czechoslovakia. 

Of course, there it was a poor area where we lived. There were a lot of poor people. The peasants were poor. Jewish families were poor. It was tough, with exception. With exception. A few families had it better than the others. But there were many Jewish, how shall I say, balagula. People who had-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Drivers. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: They drive the horses. They had horses and this is how they made a living they were carrying freight. Either they haul logs from the forest down to the sawmill, or they went to our neighboring-- to our town, to Munkacs, which was 52 kilometers from us. 

And they-- our area had a lot of wood. So they used to make wood shingles or wood lathe and such stuff. They loaded up Saturday night a load of shingles, even though they earned their owns See, my father was making on the side some shingles, wood shingles. 

So he used to hire one of those balagulas, and they used to load up a load of shingles and took them a night and a day-- a day and a night to arrive there to Munkacs, because Monday morning there was the market in Munkacs. In Munkacs there used to be a market every Monday and Thursday, yes. 

And this is how they made a living. You know, in bringing back, they used to bring groceries and flour to the grocery stores from Munkacs, because Munkacs was a city where people used to go shop and purchase stuff for their stores and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said thing-- letters be-- began arriving from Moravia. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah. So because I deviated only to-- because there were poor people. So the younger generation many times went to Moravia. Like we had Zlin was a town where the Bata Shoes employed 3,000 people. He built that town. And there were many young men who, from our area, went there as employee. Yeah, employees. 

And naturally, they married and so on. And later in 1938, '39, already, they used to write from their home only "Wir fahren nach dem Osten." In German, I remember like now. Our neighbors had a daughter and a son there and so on. And we just couldn't understand at that time what it meant. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The travel. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: They're going east. Going east. And later on, after the war, we learned that maybe during the war that they were gathering them from there because they considered our area-- many people in area lived who came from Poland illegally, apparently under-- before 1918, when it was Austria-Hungary, Austrian monarchy. 

And the Hungarians already-- no, this wasn't that. 1938. I'm confused a little bit. This was later, in 1939, approximately. They didn't consider many Jews as Hungarian citizens. One had to prove they was a landowner and paid taxes in 1876, I believe, or in 1888. Only those Jews were acceptable to remain in Hungary, after Hungary occupied us in 19-- early 1939. 

But we heard these stories in 1938 because Germany occupied every part of Czechoslovakia in September 1938, such as the Sudetenland and part of Silesia and other parts in the south. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The stories were that Jews were deported to Poland. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Right, so this is what I want to say. So those who couldn't prove, they gathered-- I remember we were on the borderline. There was a little bridge and a little stream. And one Saturday, it was before-- it was a Tisha B'av. In Hebrew, you say a nidche. If Tisha B'av comes out on Sabbath, you fast only Sunday. 

And we were walking home, my father and my two brothers and I. We're walking home, about, as I said, 2 and 1/2 kilometers after Sabbath services. You know, and half way we saw like a herd. You know, I mean, like animals. 

They gathered all the Jews from the other towns where-- we had about six or seven towns yet to the Polish border above us. It was 18 kilometers. The borderline was from us 18 kilometers, and there were five or six towns. And in every town were two or three Jews living. 

So they gathered on that particular Saturday all the Jews. And we just with some policemen, gendarmes, Hungarian already. Of course, you couldn't talk to them. You only said [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] and you couldn't say anything. 

And they brought them down into our town, to Zdanov in this Czech school which I showed. This is where they put them all. And Sunday, they just send them over, over to-- they just brought them over to the Polish borders, and they just send them over, let them go free in Poland. 

Naturally, in Poland, the Germans were there already. They occupied Germany. I mean, the Germans occupied Poland. And even if they did not occupy, the Polish could take care of the Jews themselves without the-- without the Germans. And including some of our family, they died there at that time. 

Many, two or three months later, tried to come back. And they smuggled over the Polish border, Polish and Hungarian border. They came even to us. We kept two families. 

Forgive me if I say, they had lice. They were dirty. And we put them up in one room. We called it the Dunkeslste Stube. The last Zimmer in the back, the last room. And they were there for two or three nights, waiting for-- for a contact just to take them over to Munkacs, to a train. Because we had no train in our town, only a freight train to putting-- bringing logs to the sawmills. 

And we were quite-- we were quite scared, because at the same time, because we had this-- we still had this bar and so on. There used to be border patrols. Finanze they called them. Finanzen. 

And also the gendarmes, the Hungarian gendarmes, they used to come and stop. And instead of going in on those rainy nights, cold nights, many of them trusted us, and we used to rent also another room, and they used to sleep or five hours. By us, they paid us for that. And they used to have tea, and rum, and so on. You know. 

And we were always afraid for some reason or another. The same people who were friendly with us, they shouldn't find out that in the last room there are those two families from the town of Cherbovitz the Weisses. Weisses and the Steinbergs. Yes. As a matter of fact, some of the boys live in Brooklyn here, and some in Canada. 

And then finally somebody came, a [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] What we called it those days. And he took them away at night to Munkacs. And from Munkacs, they went to Budapest. In Budapest, apparently for money, they-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's come back to you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: To me, OK. Good. Tell me when I should stop. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, we want to you. You-- you saw this, when the Jews in a herd, two families. What-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What continued to happen? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: What continued afterwards? Shortly afterwards, we were not allowed to have a maid. They took away our license. And everybody, every Jews-- there were several in the town, or in the other towns below us, further from us. And they took away the tobacco license. This was the first thing. 

Of course, in those days, they were-- all the youngsters became already, what they called it like in Slovakia, the Hlinkova Garda, or in [? NON-ENGLISH ?] there used to be [? NON-ENGLISH ?] party and Fen-- Fen-- Fenciks and [? NON-ENGLISH ?] Some were for self-- how shall I call it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Determination. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Determination, yes. Podkarpacie should be their own without Hungary. And the Fenciks were-- there was a Mr. Fencik who headed up his own party. Those were-- we should be together with Hungary. We should belong to Hungary. 

And they became part-- they were partisans. Many of these partisans used to come to our neighbors, Gentile neighbors. There were girls, of course, and they used to court them and get drunk and so on. 

They used to come over already. They permitted themself to come over to my father, my brothers, and pull him by the-- he had a short little beard, just a little bit. Pull him by his hair, pull him by-- by his necktie or something like this here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you used to see this happening? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Oh, yes, yes, yes. We also had a rich peasant, who used to also have horses. He used to carry logs for my father's sawmill and my uncle's sawmill. And when he was drunk, he used to try to speak Yiddish, a little Yiddish and so on. 

And he always used to say to my father, "Essen, ja. Fressen, nein." Do you understand what it means? You can eat but not fressen. How would you say fressen? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Feast. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: But not overeat. Yeah. How should I say, feed? Yeah. And then he-- this man, he used to-- this was his famous saying when he was drunk. 

And I remember like tonight, one Friday night, one Friday night, he came over to us. And he was drunk, and we couldn't get rid of him. We wanted to make kiddush. We had khales on the table, which we were not allowed to have anymore. We're not supposed to-- to bake, because it was wartime already. We aren't supposed to bake from white flour khales. 

And this fellow, for about an hour, an hour and a half, of bothering us, annoying us, finally I went through the back, through the veranda, and I loaded up a bunch of firewood in my hand, like this here. And my father asked him to leave the house. He wouldn't. 

And I went, and I just was throwing at him this firewood until I chased him out of the house. The next day, he didn't say anything. [INAUDIBLE] He came and apologized to my father. 

Because when they were normal, they still had that, some of these peasants, how shall I say it in English? di barbartishkeit a little. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Decency. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Decency. They still recognized my father or some other Jews in town. But when they were drunk, they really showed that they were not our friends. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And things continued to get worse. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yes. And later already, I believe in 1943, when we didn't have the-- we had to split the house. And my uncle's-- how shall I say? He drove my uncle's horses, this fellow, for many, many years. His son was already-- was already a partisan, and he took over the license, the bar and the tobacco license. And we had to split our house in half. Already, we were squeezed in our house already. 

And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the day that happened? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I would say around 1942 or-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened during that day? Were you at home when you had to move into half the house, had to give up half the house? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: No, it was done gradually. You know, it was done gradually. We just emptied-- the kitchen was ours in the back. The front big room, which was a bar and Wirtshaus, and next to it a little room, also with a tobacco license. There was some table where they played cards, these people, in the evening or Sundays. 

And we already couldn't use our front entrance. We used to go through the back, through our backyard to the street. And I'm not talking about it wasn't West End or Broadway. It was in a village. You know, there was one road, a main road, and so on. Just the peasants and all the Gentiles lived in the side streets and so on. While the Jews mostly lived on the main street. 

And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel as you saw these things happening? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I was-- I was young. How I felt? What do I remember? How I felt? I felt sorry for my father. I didn't want this to happen. I-- I was a boy. I didn't fear because I still mingled with the Gentiles. I mean, I shouldn't say-- maybe you have the impression that all we lived was with the Gentiles. That's not true. 

But still, we are from school and so on. Thank you. From school and so on, we were still kids, were friendly yet. Although perhaps I'm not telling the story right. We did fear in 1937 already. We had a German colony by us working. I mean, living also, near the sawmill, near my uncle's and father's sawmill. 

And they were Schwaben, we called them. A certain sect if the Germans. They were not real Germans. They came there 40 or 50 years before, and they settled there, just when they came to work in the forest, and they remained there. 

And my uncle had a book keeper. Falkovich was his name. And he already at that time started to organize German activities. There was in town was a Czech school, a Russian public school, and a German school, because of those Germans. This was under the Czech-- Czechoslovakia, under the Czechs. 

This Tony Falkovich the son, used to-- in the beginning, used to play with us. After school, we used to play soccer together. But already in 1937, which we probably were going to cheder and so on, we more-- we were ignorant about these things, the Jewish boys probably. And he must have heard it in the house and so on. 

So in the morning, the Jewish boys, we walked on one side of the street to Czech school. He walked with a briefcase. He used to have stones already in those days, and he used to throw at us, at the Jewish kids, this Falkovich's son, Tony Falkovich. It already started at that time, the anti-Semitism. 

So we used to complain to his father. His father used to beat him up, so it got worse yet because the father beat him up. So he used to take advantage of us more whenever he could. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I want to come back. You were hurting for father-- for the disrespect, for the humiliation. Can you say more how this was for you and what has happened? '43? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Just a minute. No, what I said is, I felt sorry for my father that he had to be humiliated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: My mother suffered from it. Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: But life was going on and so on. And later, when we saw that we couldn't stay here because this one particular partisan who was became a big shot. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A partisan on whose side? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: He was from those Cyziówkas, from the-- they were against the Hungarians. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was a-- a partisan on the anti-German? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: They were not anti-German either, but they were anti-Hungarian. They wanted to be self-determined, have self-determination under the Germans. Yeah, they were against the Czechs also. 

So when this fellow-- across the street from lived a forester. His name was [Czerny I remember like today. And he had a son also who was the same age as my older brother. We went together to Czech school. And he was friendly, but he had two sisters. And these partisans were courting these two sisters. 

And this guy was from out of town, of course, this partisan. He was already some kind of an officer in those days. And he used to come to court this daughter. And every Saturday night, he used to get drunk, and he used to take-- he'd start with my father. 

When we had yet the-- the permit to serve liquor and such stuff, he used to come and pull him here, pull him here, pull him by the necktie and other stuff. And after a while, we moved out from the house, and we moved into my grandmother's house. Which was about 2 kilometers, 2 and a 1/2 kilometers. 

And we stayed there till 1944, until they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You moved to your grandmother's house because you wanted to live with her, or because the house was taken away. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, we wanted to live with her in the house. It was really impossible. My father couldn't see to it that my uncle's driver, who drove horses for 40 or 30 years, with his premature wife and her son, had to take over. And he had to look at this and see this, you know. He didn't want to stay any longer over there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That your own home was now occupied by your ex-servant. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He spoke a beautiful Yiddish, this fellow, you know. Because he lives all-- all his life, this is where he lived. He served Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And they turned against you. Really? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Those two already, the youngsters And we lived in my grand-- but in my grandmother's house, I believe we lived only about a half a year or so. It must have been late in 1943. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did the real change begin? With the German takeover and-- 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Well, we didn't have the Germans yet. By us, it was Hungarian. No Germans. Hungarians. The Germans really came in into Hungary only in 1944, and we were not home anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: In our part. We came to Budapest a little bit earlier, part of German. But otherwise, we were occupied by the Hungarians. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You moved to Budapest because? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: No, we didn't move to Budapest. We moved to-- we moved to my grandmother in the same town further. In our section of course differently, but to Zdanov, we moved about 2 and 1/2 kilometers into my wife's-- my mother's-- grandmother's house, where my uncle live next to her, adjacent house, and other relatives. 

And we lived there, and my older brother, he was taken in 1943. His age group had to go into a Hungarian working camp, which was called munkaszolgalat. And he came home on Pesach, 1944. He had furlough. And this is the time when they gathered us also to a ghetto, to Munkacs. 

We couldn't make a decision whether he should come with us into the ghetto. It was a hard decision to make. Or should he go back and join his group in the working camp? It must have been my father who decided that he will be better off to go back. 

We didn't know where we were going, because they told us we were going to deep into Hungary to a Sahara- Puszta, they called it. Hortobagy was the name of this place where they told us this is where they are gathering us, because we are too dangerous to live near the-- near the borderlines, where we lived. And because we are-- not-- I mean, we are dangerous, in a sense, we are politically. 

We shouldn't-- we are dangerous to the Hungarian government and to the German government. So this-- this is why they're taking us away from here, to this so-called sahara. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like? How? How did you move to the ghetto? Did they come to tell you? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Why, the Gentiles took us. The peasants with a horse and wagon. To Munkacs. As a matter of fact, I happened to be-- my wife too, this is where I met her at that time, in my uncle's brick factory. There were two brick factories out of town from Munkacs. The entrance of the town. Kallus factory and Ostreicher brick factory. My uncle was Ostreicher. And this is where we were for about four weeks. 

And we had relatives in Munkacs. They used to send us in food. Every day, she had a chance to send us in with some trucks that used to come in bringing something. She was very good to us, before she was also taken into ghetto in Munkacs, within the city. The out of town people were gathered into these brick factories. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you lived in the factory? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, we were downstairs, in these ovens, living. My wife happened to live upstairs in the attic of this factory. And some people from our town also were there, so when I used to go with my father, sometimes visiting those people there, and she-- my wife's family was across from them. And this is how I, in those days, I got to know her family, there in the ghetto. Never thought about it, that after the war we'll meet and we'll get married. 

Of course, from home we knew from those people who came back in 1940, came back from Poland, and smuggled back into Hungary already, that-- because they had some valuables with them, such as diamonds, or gold, or sil-- earrings, rings, anything, that it saved many. It saved their lives. This is the way they were able to come back. 

So my mother, my grandmother, and everybody probably, every Jewish family did it. We baked cookies, and in each cookie put in an earring, or a ring, or a diamond, or something. In Europe, they were in small shoe polish boxes. It used to be like a can, a pint can of fruit here, you know, or salads you buy. 

So we-- they were shoe polish boxes. So we dug up the shoe polish, put in gold on the bottom of the box, and covered it up again with shoe polish. And when they came to check in the ghetto, they knew that the Jews had stuff. They used to search and look around. 

So they used to open up the shoe polish box. And they saw shoe polish. We used from it. We made believe that we're using it. And we did use it occasionally. Or here in a box, there were cookies. They didn't bother to look at the cookies. 

And I think I will tell you when I arrived at Auschwitz what happened to it, when I get to it. And-- and-- and my father didn't work in the ghetto. I was working, because I happened to know a-- from our area, an engineer who used to build railroad tracks. So and he used to stay in our house. He was out of town also many times, so he knew me. He liked me. 

So I was busy with him. So I was a big shot in -- in a way. Many people, many boys envied me, that I was occupied. I did some work in the ghetto, with this Mr. [INAUDIBLE], so-called. We built latrines. We built canals for the sewer and so on over there. 

And my mother's uncle, he was well known in town, and one would call protect you, if you know. He always used to like to use that. And even he was able, out of four transports going to Auschwitz, he was able to take care of that we should be the last transport from the-- from the ghetto to leave for Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know anything about Auschwitz? Did you hear anything about the camps? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: No. No, we didn't know at that time. But wherever-- in those days, Hortobagy whatever we believed, wherever we go, it's always time to go later. We shouldn't push ourselves. 

And he was able at that time to take care of those things, even there in the ghetto. He was a very smart businessman, my uncle, and got along with everybody well. I remember my wife's parents and her, they left the day before us. I said goodbye to her, and they took us with these cattle trains. 

And when we arrived to Auschwitz, of course, then the next day, we were taken to Auschwitz. We came to Auschwitz after three nights, yes, and four days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your whole family went together? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your whole family went together? 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Yeah, my grandmother, my uncle with his wife, his little children. My other aunt didn't live anymore at that time, but there were two children from-- my aunt's children. Her husband was-- didn't come back from the Hungarian working camp. 

So these two children were also with my grandmother, and they were there. And there were cousins and uncles. I mean, we consider now after the war, we find a third cousin, someone is a relative. At home, we didn't even bother with them, because there were plenty mishpokhe, plenty closer relatives. 

And we-- after we arrived to Auschwitz, we arrived-- I remember like today, 11:00 at night. The train pulled in, and here we see these tall, these high fences, wire fences. And we were told not to take anything with us. 

So naturally, we-- from home, we took the best clothes, whatever we had. So we started to put on two or three shirts, two or three jackets, one on top of another. The box of cookies, one had a bread under his arm. One child had a box of cookies. One had the shoe polish. Another-- 

We walked out from the-- these trains, and immediately they said, women go to the right, men to the left. Didn't even say-- neither did my father say goodbye to my mother or to the rest of the family. We thought, so naive, that perhaps it's only for the night. The next morning, we will see each other again. Maybe we were very naive. 

And "Linie, Linie," immediately in German. You know, line up. 5, per five, per five, per five. And we are in a-- in a long alley. Fences on the right side, the left side. And in German, already we saw it, "warning, the wires are electrocuted." 

And they lined us up. It took about a half hour. And made us walk. As we were walking, marching quite a distance, we saw far ahead of us a big fire. And we could see how a fellow was just pouring must have been gasoline or something. It was burning. You know, the smoke was coming from there. 

And my father said to us in Yiddish. He says to us, "Children, let's take off everything, because if they are taking--" We were heading straight towards that fire. He says, "Because by the time all these clothes will burn on us, we will suffer a lot. Let's discard everything." 

So naturally, we started on our way, already taking off all the clothes what we had, extra clothes. And, well, it helped. Thank God. I mean, we didn't go. They took us to the left, and we were safe from that fire. 

We came into a big, big hole. They told us to-- to disrobe, to undress. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was your father, you, and-- 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Oh no, it was my father? Yeah. It was my father. My father, my younger brother, and I. No more my uncle. My uncle, when we got off from the cars-- pardon me. I-- I jumped a little bit ahead of myself. 

When he got off from the cars, they were-- they lined us up, little children, my uncle, and everybody. And they asked everyone how old? Wie alt bist du? How old are you? 

But prior to that, there was on the left side a Yugo-- he came from Yugoslavia, also one of those Schwab Germans. He spoke Hungarian, and he only said this much to my father. He says, "Tell them you are young and strong." That's what he said in Hungarian. He was a German, an SS. 

So we already knew my father-- Said, how old are you? My father was 52. He was born in 1892. He said he's 45. Told him to go right. My brother and I, they didn't even ask how old we are, by the way. 

Yeah, "Bist du gesund?" They asked my father, "Are you healthy?" My father said. yes. He went to the right. Then was I, my younger brother. We just automatically followed our father. Didn't know what it was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw your mother in-- 

EUGENE NEWMAN: I didn't see my mother. My mother went left, to a different part. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right away. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: Immediately, stepping out from the boxcars. Which, by the way, we were escorted by two SS men in each boxcar. In my boxcar must have been over 100 people, probably. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

EUGENE NEWMAN: And we didn't see my mother anymore. Probably the same thing happened to her later. I found out, also separated them, because my sister told me that after the war, how it happened. 

And after-- we saw my uncle, because my uncle was only 47. He was born in '97 at that time, 1897. Because my-- he held on to his little boy, 12 year old little boy, he was sent already to the left side, to the opposite end and then straight into the gas chamber with his little boy. 

My mother was holding on to her niece, to my uncle's little girl, who was eight years old. Perhaps we are always blaming ourselves. Perhaps if she didn't hold on, hold to her, to this little girl, maybe she would have gone maybe with my sister and perhaps survived. We're blaming ourselves all the time. 

After-- then, after we were separated, this is when they lined us up per five. And we still had our clothes on. We were still walking, walking until we didn't-- they didn't take us where the big fire that we saw there. And they were-- we saw already, they were burning their children and so on. We saw this with our own eyes when we passed by. 

You could see even from afar, from a distance, how they were pouring from cans gasoline or something, some fluid. And we entered this big, big, big hole. And it was piled with clothing, with clothes this high. 

I remember I had a beautiful [INAUDIBLE] spring coat in those days. It was April, May. I took it off neatly. I wouldn't even throw it on the pile. I folded it over as if I would-- as I do it now. 

And we undressed completely. I had a silk scarf. And I had a little pocket knife, rust-free. This was a boy at home who had a rust-free pocket knife? It was something. A flat one, yet it shouldn't stick out in your pocket. 

And I had shaving cream. I had Nivea cream, cream aftershave. And pictures of my sister, my family, those which we took along with us. And I tied it up, all in that silk scarf, and I made a bundle from it. And even though I was completely undressed, I walked with it. Only our shoes we kept. 

Then we had to go into a bade. How shall I say? In a washroom. And before the washroom, there was water. You know what I mean? In this doorway, we had to dip our shoes, probably for disinfection and so on. We were told this was the reason for it. 

And we entered another room. Yeah, I remember like today, because we were very thirsty from the trip. I took a black hose, a water hose. And I perhaps am still drinking water. I couldn't finish drinking water. This is how thirsty I was. 

And after this, we went, and they were shaving our hair, all over the body, and so on. So it was a little Litvak I remember. Like a short fellow. I remember him, how he looked and everything. 

And he was talking Yiddish to us. And he says to me in Yiddish, "What do you have here?" I told him, "Oh, I just have here pictures of my family. I have some shaving cream, and I have a razor, razor blades, and a little knife." 

He took it from me, and just threw it like this, and smacked me in my eye, like this here. The kapos used to hit this way in camp later. You know, if you didn't stand straight in line, they used to come to you and just hit you in your eye. "Hey, go in. Come full forwards. You have to stand in line for Appell. Straight." 

And he says to me in Yiddish like this. He says to me. "Don't worry. We have here theaters." He used the expression. "Here we have movies. We have here barbers. We have here photographers." 

And I will say it first in Yiddish. Ich hob du mein tate-mamen ferbrent. He said, "I-- I burned here--" or gassed, whatever the translation would be here-- "my mother and father." So we could see already he spoke from bitterness. And he said, "You-- [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] why did you come here? You-- why, you dummies? Why did you come here?" 

And he was already so bitter that he took it out on us, on me. You know, I don't know what he did with others. Then from there, we continued into another big room, a very big room. In one corner, you found a pair of those striped pants. There were shirt. Over there was a cap, striped cap. Underwear. And a top. 

And what shall I tell you? The short guys got pants this long. The long-- the tall fellows got short pants. The shirts were not clean. Some were from boils and so on. I still had this from home, this-- I was-- I couldn't put it on. 

But we all looked like comedians. Not like comedians. Like clowns. Like clowns. So my father, from then on, my father said "Never, we should never separate." Let's-- wherever we go, because we couldn't recognize each other. We all looked alike. 

My father called-- I called my father for the first time by his first name, Naftali. He called Yiddle, Viktor. You know, this is the way we could identify ourselves. And they took us to a barrack. 

The barrack-- the barracks were Birkenau, I remember, in block seven, I believe. No mattresses. Only boards in the bed. There were three bunks. And it was raining in those bunks. I remember like today. 

And it was in May, when the weather was very bad in Auschwitz. Anyway, the weather was cloudy constantly. But it was probably the season, the rainy season. And it was raining on us. We got soup once a day. 

Otherwise, we were sitting on those beds for seven days doing nothing. However, we saw the girls march from those bunks of ours already. And my father recognized my sister. They were walking in white gowns only, like nightgowns. And their hair was cut, and they had kerchiefs. 

And my father says, you see Tessy walks there. So we used to watch for her to go, come back from work. They went to work immediately. But there was a group who was daring enough. And they told the Germans "You are killing our wives and children here. We want to see them." 

And apparently that particular evening, it happened the first time in the history of Auschwitz, where they brought us in, the men, on one side of this big hall and women on the other side. And sure enough, we didn't see our mother. We didn't know. We didn't-- we didn't know where she was, but we saw our sister. And we saw other people from our town, from that particular transport. 

And the German was telling us the following. He says, "Ihr Juden, you Jews, you are an intelligent people. You are intelligent people, cultured people. Would you believe that in the 1920s, in the 20th century, we would do such a thing, we would kill, exterminate people?" This is what he told us in German. 

Now, I don't know whether my father was satisfied at that time with the answer. I'm sure he wasn't. I don't know whether he was. But somehow or other, he felt that-- oh, so they also told us that the elderly people, they don't go to work, and that they have it good, and they just eat and drink, and they have it good there. 

So we were satisfied for a while. We saw our sister and one of my aunts, some other people. From there, after seven days, they-- for the first time, we were transferred-- yeah, also with a transport, they sent us to Mauthausen. 

We came to Mauthausen, and it was just happened to be the second day of a Shavuot holiday. And they gave-- after this poor food what we ate and dolgemize, used to be some dry cabbage, they called it. Dolgemize. Another watery soup. So we came to Auschwitz the first day-- I mean to Mauthausen, they served us noodles. My father interpreted it, because it is a custom to eat noodles and dairy food on Shavuot, this is why they served that, noodles. 

But over there, they didn't put us into cells, or blocks, as they called. We were also already just moved around in this backyard. For the night, 7:00 at night already, they brought us into a big room. Straw mattresses were piled up to the ceiling in one corner. The room had very large windows. 

The sun was baking. It's 7:00 at night, yet it was hot inside. We were taking down those mattresses, lined up the length of the room. One mattress, one row here, one row here. 

We slept on four people on a mattress. In one, in each corner a man, and then we had to lie down, four people on one mattress. On the left, the two from this side, to the right, the other side. Of course, a tall fellow, a short fellow, one guy's toes were sticking in the other guy's ears or nose. 

And the guy that brought our sister said "Ruhe, ich will Ruhe." How could it be Ruhe? How could it be quiet there? First of all, it was hot in there. So-- 

Oh yes. Many times, there was no room for the ones on the very end. They didn't have room on the mattresses. So he used to come with a rubber hose and just squeeze us, push up, start from the one end. He squeezed us and made to make room for the ones on the end. 

And he was in a little room in the back, and he wanted quiet, from 7:00 in the summertime in May. So you can imagine how much beating we used to get and so on. 

But after 8 days, we were in Mauthausen. We were told in the Zigeuner section, in the gypsy camp. 

