SUBJECT: --in a position as a rabbi before I was going to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let me ask little of what Laurel said. 

SUBJECT: I can't hear you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let me ask something, what Laurel said. 

SUBJECT: Sure, sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which is that we look for the very personal experience, of your person. 

SUBJECT: I understand. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what you have to offer is very unique. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You have 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Very personal, maybe through a certain religious uh-- uh-- perspective 

INTERVIEWER 2: Also, his role as an-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --as an advisor, as a-- as a solace giver. I mean, that's really your role. Everybody else was after their own well being. 

SUBJECT: I-- well, I have recorded some stories. I want you to know that I have selected, in my book, a group of stories that all have a personal message. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, right. 

SUBJECT: I have to tried to eliminate the review of the battles and the torture and the blood, and the thing, which I have experienced, which I was particularly exposed to more than any other of the Jews in my town-- in our town. Because I've been known as a rabbi-- rabbi's son. But um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You see, we would like to know to hear that. 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why a rabbi's son's singled out? And how are they going to-- a rabbi's son is singled out. 

SUBJECT: Well, well, I'll tell you. I'll tell you. That was-- actually, the reason for-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't tell us now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no. keep that for later. 

SUBJECT: Oh. The reason-- we can review, so that it's-- I wanted to-- I wanted to tell you something, which I hope you don't mind. Uh, [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] I speak English today. 

Now I'm a practicing rabbi from a pulpit that's had quite a-- 25 years in Hartford But when I arrived to United States I did not know any English. Not a word of English. I spoke 10 languages. 

And when I reflects back to Holocaust experiences, my language problem comes into the-- into-- into focus. So that I get difficulties with expressions. I could tell that-- I could tell the world in Polish and Russian and German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know Yiddish. 

SUBJECT: I understand. And it comes-- it becomes difficult for me. I get this-- the rebinding of the tefillen you know? And the winding of the-- of the-- the-- the motion. That brings me back to-- to blockage of language. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If it's a word, say it in whatever language. 

SUBJECT: Mhm, OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't stop because of the word. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And you I didn't makeup, no nothing. 

CREW: No makeup. 

SUBJECT: No makeup. 

CREW: No, you don't need makeup. 

SUBJECT: Ah. OK. I find it uh, much easier to talk about it now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh-- 

SUBJECT: Now, I'll discuss it with you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would you just-- just say your name and phone number, anything. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Phone number? 

[LAUGHS] 

Rabbi Isaac Avigdor. Avigdor, A-V-I-G-D-O-R is my original family name. Though it is a Hebrew name, but we have been originally-- when go back to my father's line, back to Sephardic Jewry my great-great grandfather was the Chacham Bashu in Istanbul. And he has the-- you're not filming now? Are you filming? Oh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Pause for a minute. Rabbi, I think for-- 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I want to talk first about the most perplexing role that you had to assume as a rabbi. You were a rabbi ordained before World War II, you said. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had to not only survive, but offer comfort and hope-- 

SUBJECT: Solace, hope. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Solace. 

SUBJECT: To others. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Explain how that you could have done this in the places that you were. 

SUBJECT: Let me put it this way. I was ordained at the very early age of 18, the beginning of-- of my 18th year. By the way, today, December 2nd, is my birthday, today. 

So uh, being ordained, I immediately stepped in, into service as a rabbi, assisting my father. There was a reason for it. Because uh, the Polish government did not um, exempt any rabbis from military service unless there was actually active, not as students. Here, in the United States, you're exempt, even as a-- a rabbi student. So I officially was immediately serving as a rabbi in this community almost a year before the beginning of the war, September 1st, 1939. Which is 40 years ago. 

[SIGHS] 

We, as rabbis, always felt that we are surrounded with antisemitism, especially our part of Poland, which was more populated by uh, 80% of Ukrainians. And uh, 20% of Polish people. That's Drohobych which was the-- which is the oil well center. That was the oil well center of Poland. 

We always felt antisemitism. We have been uh, um, feeling it. I, myself, immediately, upon being ordained, I-- I started to attend college at University of Lvov. I used to travel, commute, from Drohobych to-- to Lvov. 

And then naturally, you know, you-- you understand that in the university, it was certainly felt, the anti-Semitism. Why do I say that um, uh, we were-- uh-- we were not-- uh, this was-- the process was a-- a systematic, slow process. But we were prepared emotionally, spiritually, to any kind of acts of antisemitism, including slaughter, or murder and killing, which was taking place even before Herr Hitler marched in, into our community. 

The non-Jew did not like the Jew. Uh, and uh-- having been students of history, and having known what had happened to our people before, our part of Poland being the Ukraine and being still under the uh, influence of Khmelnytsky pogroms, which Khmelnytsky was a Ukrainian. And in the-- in-- in his time, in his-- in his-- 200 years earlier, has killed, slaughtered men, women, and children. But we did not expect it from the Germans, to come. 

And here was one of the basic faults or mistakes that we Jewish people-- and including leaders-- have made, uh, during this Holocaust period. And that we are, in a sense, responsible for what has happened, and how it has happened. We, for quite a long time, I would say, for the first 2 or 2 and 1/2 years, around 1939, '40, and '41, did not believe that this could ever happen. Most of our uh, Jewish population in our community consisted of intellig- the intellegentsia so to say. That has been educated, uh, by-- by German uh, universities and colleges. 

My father had a doctorate in Vienna-- from Vienna. My father spoke beautiful Sp-- uh, well, many languages, but German. All the physicians, the lawyers, all intelligent people, college graduates. Did not go to the Polish universities, but would go to Berlin, to Leipzig to Hamburg. 

They spoke perfect German. And they could not conceive that there's going to come a day where Germany-- which they loved and which they adored, its literature, its music, its-- its art, could turn in, overnight, to become uh, followers of a-- of-- of a madman like Hitler was. 

So we would say to ourselves, well, this is um-- there is a Hitler. We have one. And we had one in the Polish time. There was um, a-- 

And there is-- there were certain known antisemites in-- in Poland, that were, um, active, quite active. And they-- and they had pogroms, just like we have today, the Ku Klux Klan, whatever it is. But we did not conceive the-- none of us-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened when you saw the edicts for the Jewish Star? 

[COUGHS] 

In Poland- 

SUBJECT: We-- we had to wear-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The initial-- 

SUBJECT: We had to wear the Jewish Star. We didn't have the Jewish Star in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No? 

SUBJECT: No Not-- we had to, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no, after '39. 

SUBJECT: After '39. Yes. So from the first day-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And from then on-- 

SUBJECT: --the Germans marched in, we had to wear the star. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what happened? I mean, there were immediate slaughtering of Jews in Poland. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And Kiev? 

SUBJECT: Not immediately in town. Not immediately in town. They-- well, first, immediately, we had to put on the stars. 

Then a year later we were isolated into a ghetto, which was a-- which was part of-- of an aktion. So since they were there, they moved close to 5,000 Jews from town. But we were under the impression that they were-- they were telling us-- we were under the impression that they are going to work. There was a war. 

They're going to work on a battlefield. They're going to dig ditches, you know, for the army, et cetera. They work in factories, not that they will take them to slaughter. 

So even when we were told by some people who went out to jump the train-- I myself jumped the train later-- that uh, this and this is happening, you know, they're taking them to Belsen, taking them to Treblinka. Then now, uh, most of the people didn't believe it. Most of the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the name of the town you were in? 

SUBJECT: I-- I believe that it was- growing up- I was born in Nowy Sacz which is a famous Jewish town in Galicia. But then I was going up into Drohobych Boryslav. I was the rabbi of Boryslav 

These were twin cities under one community, a kehilla a Jewish community, and another one rabbi, whose father was the chief rabbi. And he had 30-some small towns and villages under him, of which I was um-- which I was serving, partly. In the beginning we had-- we had freedom to move the first uh, year or so. We were able to move around from Drohobych to Boryslav and to the smaller villages, without interruption at all. Except that we wore the-- the armband. 

Uh, we were active uh, in many ways as translators. We had to work. A lot-- lot of Jewish people worked for the Germans. 

Not for the German, for the SS, but for the Wehrmacht and for other institutions that had came in, had took over the uh, oil wells and the refineries. And they needed a lot of the Jewish professionals, engineers, topographic engineers that knew the-- the land, they had to have them. As a matter of fact, this is what saved, uh, quite a number of Jewish people from our section. 

Because the Germans expected to go to [INAUDIBLE] and take us along with them, they would have needed some professional oil men to do it. Now, well, I'm just um, basing it off from the subject that you told, that you s-- of the st-- that you questioned. As a rabbi, I, although a young man, and a my father, bless his memory, uh, who has, uh, experienced World War I, we knew Jewish history. 

And we knew the Jewish martyrdom. And we expected things to happen. We weren't taken as much by all the atrocities that he had until now, uh, before us in-- in-- before our own eyes, as badly as those that were, so to say, assimilated Jews. 

And we had them. Oh, that-- that hoped and that placed their hope in humanity and in-- in civilization and culture. And-- and they thought that the era has arrived that-- where things like Militsky pogroms-- pogroms, or a new inquisition are impossible. But we thought-- we knew that it is possible. 

Because in my town as I was a youngster, only 12, 13 years ago, there were pogroms in our town. The people would go out from the churches and priests would-- the Ukrainian priests especially, would-- would preach, in the road, at home, it's not a story. It's not a legend, even. It's just a-- a bible, what do you-- it's sub-planted. 

We were-- we were God killers, you know? They will go out and break all the windows in town, and we would hide through Christmas. No Jew would go out Christmastime, in the street. 

We were prepared, spiritually. What has happened was to us, particularly my own family, we-- we-- our family consisted of over 100 members within that Galicia section of Poland, of which about 30 lived in our own town, the town wh-- what I'm speaking of, Drohobych But my father was a-- bless his memory-- he was a major in the Polish army. And he was a chaplain in the Polish army. Our town had a-- a large uh, station of the Polish cavalry And my father was the official chaplain. 

And uh, he was told, immediately, on o first-- probably the first or second day, by the leaders of the town, and also by-- by some of his colleagues from the army, that he should hide immediately. He should hide immediately. And he did hide. 

And I was hiding with him for about a year and a half. Shaved off the beard and-- and changed his outfit. And he was hiding-- in not one place, not in two places, but in hundreds of places. But he couldn't stay in one place too long. 

And this fact, alone, has saved our lives. Because in most of the towns and cities in Poland I'm speaking of, the rabbis were the first ones that the Germans have arrested. And-- and the first one to be liq-- liquidated. 

In some instances, in some towns like Stanislawow, Przemysl, and other town, they took the rabbi and they-- they executed them in the-- all in the center of town, on [INAUDIBLE], you know? On the mark-- on the marketplace, all just to show-- to-- first of all, to remove their spiritual leadership. To uh, deny the-- the leaders of town to be encouraged, as you say, by a rabbi and to-- and be uh, guided, uh, by his leadership. 

So the-- the-- the-- the luck of the-- the fortunate situation was that we, had the father as an officer, did hide immediately. And that has saved his life. Because he's never gotten out of that hiding. Almost throughout the entire period of Holocaust, he remained incognito. Not as-- of course, there was many people that knew him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did Poles, Christians, allow these stories-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. The Jewish people used to know-- uh, he would come out for certain occasions. And people would know uh, that [INAUDIBLE], the [INAUDIBLE], it was [INAUDIBLE]. So we-- we met all, if there was a funeral, someone had passed away, that was a-- uh, a known personage in town, and they still wanted my father to be there, or myself, if I-- if I-- if not my father, if my father couldn't come, because let's say he could be in that hiding for a long time, so he went somewhere else. 

Uh, they would ask questions. The most common questions were the questions by girls. As we have seen here, for the girls, that asked the [INAUDIBLE]. And these were girls that were daughters of-- of shohet and of [INAUDIBLE] and of-- of teachers, and came from very strict orthodox homes. 

And the she'ela was simple. Can we get ourselves Aryan papers, non-Jewish papers? And these were quite available, quite easy. And can we go out into hiding as non-Jews? Going uh, to-- to church services. 

Because they would have to. Attending uh, whatever mass, whatever it is, is it allowed according to the law? Now, these were the questions that had come to us daily. 

We have uh, the Halakha when--when-- I don't know whether you're aware, that the three major restrictions that require a person's um-- um-- a-- a person's sanctification of life, Kiddush Hashem. In other words, putting life on-- putting your life down for the three basic uh, laws, which is "shfikhat damim", and that's murder. In other words, when someone comes to me and he orders me to kill somebody else, I shouldn't have him-- I can allow the other party to kill me. But I have no right to take somebody else's life. 

The other one is, you know, [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] which is the adulterer's life, which is similar. You are obligated to sacrifice your life and not to violate the law. And the third one is-- well, it's [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] It's the idol worship or any changing of religion, that the religion, that's what the inquisition-- the basic question of inquisition. 

During the period of the Inquisition the scholars have dealt with this matter. And they have allowed, in the inquisition, Jews to become marranos. And then they would join the synagogue. 

As you know, on Kol Nidre there will be the declaration, which we still repeat today. We are allowing these people to-- who have been marranos none of us wanted to be, on the outside lived as Christians, yet in their heart remain Jews to come and join our congregation, our [INAUDIBLE] lehitpalel im avaryanim. 

But our situation was yet a worse situation. The law is only binding when-- when there is a choice given. And I was-- they come to us and say, if you want to live, you got to accept this religion. Otherwise, you're going to be killed. Then you should let yourself be killed, but no-- uh, and rather than change your religion, give up your religion. 

And under marrano it was the choice given. Because the-- many, many of the marranos had really, um, reached a stage of-- of-- of um, leadership in-- in Spain, and they have really been given all opportunities. But with us, it was no choice. To us, it was just a life, regardless if it was-- if they was an observant Jew, a non-observant Jew, if his father and mother were-- were non-Jewish, did not matter, not even 10 generations 

Later. They went through. They studied the lineage of each and every person. And as long as there was a drop of Jewish blood within anyone, that person had-- that the person was considered a Jew, was thrown in a concentration camp. I just have some stories in my book about it. 

So the Halakha was distinct, in such instances, that it allows a person to-- not only allows, it urges a person even to accept another faith in order to save the body, to save the human body. Because this is not a matter of religion. Hitler didn't want any Jew to change religion and-- and grant them life as a-- as the result of it. Well, this question was very sensitive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think I want to repeat this. Because it's strong. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean in the midst of the first year of the wars, when Jews were uh, hanged in the public squares. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There are mass shootings, the deport-- the beginning of deportation too, extermination camps. 

SUBJECT: The [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] the [INAUDIBLE] too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And-- and at that time, Jewish daughters still went-- had to have the rabbi's permission whether to save their life? 

SUBJECT: They didn't have to have to have. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No no, but they thought-- 

SUBJECT: No one had to have. But they felt-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they-- 

SUBJECT: And they would like to know what the Halakha is. And there was some, I remember, who, in spite of the fact, some of them, they were my age, because they were young girls. Mostly it would-- would apply-- was-- would-- would apply to young people. 

That in spite of the fact that my father, or even another rabbi, there was still not-- some other two rabbis, some other rabbis alive in town-- there were nine rabbis in town. Because Drohobych was a big center, a large community. Close to 50,000 Jewish people. 

In spite of the fact that it was-- that my father was showing them-- encouraged them to do so which was according to the law, they did not want to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were ready to get killed? 

SUBJECT: They did not want to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And didn't want to live? 

SUBJECT: And in order to go get together with-- this is another point which I would like to bring out. I don't know how much time we have. . What we first felt was-- we-- we actually committed four basic mistakes. 

Now I'm able to think about it. I couldn't do so 10 years ago, because I was very emotional about it, very emotional. And I-- I had to recuperate physically, and uh, spiritually, mentally, too, as well. 

I didn't start writing, speaking about the Holocaust until 10 years ago. And it was basically because of our children. Our . children, and our oldest son was a rabbi. 

And the second son was also a rabbi. And they had been after me. Dad, you were there. what-- why-- why don't you tell us something? 

How did it happen, what had happen? My wife never wanted to hear about this. And now I can-- so I did describe, as uh, you saw, some instances, small essays. But nothing overall. 

Now I'm able to look upon from a wider perspective, and think about these mistakes, whatever happened-- whatever happened. Because it's very important for Israel. And as well, as for the younger generation here, out-- out of Israel, anywhere else, to prevent-- God forbid-- any other Holocaust for Jewish people, or for any other people. 

We did not believe that it will happen. That was the first mistake. We couldn't believe. 

Even up to the year, the last year, when they took us away from everything. A lot of people said, no. They said, they-- they are going to-- they are going to take us, and then Hitler says. So he says, they're going to take us to war. They're going to settle us, whatever it is. They didn't want to believe. 

Number two, they thought that the world will not sit down quietly, silently, without responding to su-- there were those who, let's say, who were aware of it, who were already convinced that Hitler meant it, and he did it. And they were already witnesses that ran away from-- from places of execution. Like I, myself, ran away from a place of execution when my mother was executed. And that's in the article on my mother. 

So when they came back and they-- they told us the details, and when the clothing were brought back already, from the places, you know? So that was a big mistake that we felt that we made, on all of us. Underestimated the free world, the United States, England, France, and-- and Russia. 

We underestimated them. And we thought that they would really react against the Holocaust of Jews. So-- it was some kind of an act, or something. They were-- [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] which were like the hand. 

They won't sit down quietly with hands folded. They will react. They will do something. Something will be done. They'll bomb Auschwitz, they'll do this, they'll do that. All 

That we have to do is two or three months four months, you know? We will survive it. This cannot go on for years. And we were disappointed, because no one did anything. 

Now, naturally, our neighbors didn't do anything. The Polish people, the Ukrainian people, there was a ghetto. They would have had a little bit help from the outside, from the Polish people, which were all around, and which-- and who were able to help. 

At least, they claim now that it did help. But nevertheless, even if they would have helped a little bit more, there was a ghetto where they would have been able to last longer, and to maybe even be victorious. Because no other-- no other ethnic group has fought as-- as we Jewish people have fought. 

And I'll talk about it later. The second-- this was the second mistake. We thought that the world is not-- is-- is going to react. And the world knows what's happening to us, it's going to react. 

And the third thing is, is that we thought that the Jewish people will react. The Jewish people in the world, in the free world, that are free will really raise hell. They won't sit, there, down. 

Some of them had children in the United States. Some had children in England. Some children in South Africa, and parents or something, what will they do for us? They'll send passports. 

They'll do something. That will turn-- they will not want to leave a-- a-- a stone unturned. But it wasn't so. It wasn't so. 

Even the Jewish people, who have-- who had relatives, real close relatives, I know, with my in-laws, they had a son that they left in-- in Oswiecim. There were twelve children in my-- in my mother's-- my wife's mother had 12 children. 

But the youngest son couldn't-- not the youngest son-- well, he was the youngest son before they came to the United States-- could not come to the United States because he had some kind of an eye sickness, eye disease. And-- and of course, they didn't want to grant him a visa. Then all the children went. And one was left. he grew up and got married. 

He was uh, about 18, 19 years old. And he got married and wen there. And-- and they couldn't-- they couldn't, or they didn't, or they-- well, I don't know. 

They didn't know what to do. There was nothing done. The fourth and final mistake, actually, I want to bring it out-- is not something that we did, but something that was rooted in the Jewish blood, in the Jewish spirit, of the unity and the strength of the family. 

I-- I want to tell you myself, about myself. I could have saved myself 100 times. I was young. I was a very strong boy, physically very strong. 

I had chances. Our town was on the border, not too far, not-- not more than 100 miles from-- from Hungary, or from-- 120 miles from Romania. You know, some of the friends, some of my friends went-- went to-- some of them were shot anyway. 

Some of them smuggled them self through the border. And they were able to get there. And they were able to get, later, to Israel. But I didn't go. 

Because we didn't want to leave our family. I had two sisters and a brother, and a father and mother and a grandmother. And we were going-- you know, all-- or-- or none. And how many times did I hear that, when we're going riding, that the mother would plead, and the boys saying, [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] child of mine, go, save yourselves. 

Go run away, because you're young. You can still live. You can't help me. And from the hiding, she would plead. 

And the child wouldn't go. We're not talking about children. We're talking about 16, 17-year-old boy. My mother pleaded with me, I should run away. 

They used to come with propositions. They want to proposition to take 12, 13 people in the shelter and they smuggle through. That was impossible. 

If we wouldn't have-- if we wouldn't have had this family tie, of one for all and all for one, as Jewish people had always-- and especially during these times-- we would have saved at least-- at least 1/3 of those that perished. If each and every one would have watched for himself, to save himself, at least 1/3, maybe even more, could have survived the Holocaust. 

I know my father-- bless his memory-- as I told you, he was an officer. And um, on the-- the second or the third month after the Germans came in, another officer with whom my father was very close, had a very close relation, uh, a Jewish officer, he was. And he was-- I don't remember the name, exactly. Polish officer. 

He came with a car. He came with a car, with an automobile himself. He stopped over to-- stopped over [? and ?] [? the ?] [INAUDIBLE]. 

And he said, and it probably was in the middle of the night. He came over. He says, Rabbi, let's go. I can-- but I have now, the contact. 

We're going to go to the Hungarian border. So my father said, no way I'm-- I'm going to leave my family. And had he gone, maybe he would have gone through-- maybe he would have come through. Maybe gone to these United States, maybe would have be able to help others. 

And then he also said, I can't leave the town. He was in hiding. But he felt like a captain, like he shouldn't leave the ship, that he should stay there until the last Jew is there. 

So this was a basic fault. But I should be thankful because three of us did save ourselves. And it was unique, because I don't know, from our town what we have today, but maybe 150 survivors. 

This is a-- which is a very high proportion. Because from Stanislawow which is, of course, the same size of ch-- was-- was the same size of Jewish population. There was no one left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many? 

SUBJECT: There was almost no one left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: From how many? 

SUBJECT: From Stanislawow, from Kolomyja, from-- from town of Poles, very few. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What size of population? 

SUBJECT: Sized 25,000 22,000, 25,000. Famous communities, because of their rabbis. The rabbis were liquidated immediately. 

The town was liquidated. Originally we didn't have any count. It was liquidated. They kept us because of the oil. 

This was the secret, why they kept us. They kept us in a concentration camp in our town. Liquidated the ghetto. Left the concentration camp. 

And I got my father-- bless his memory-- and my brother in. Took us [INAUDIBLE]. My mother already perished at the start, before. And um, we survived. We were brought to Plaszow from our town, which was the Polish largest concentration camp. And then we were divided, my sisters, two sisters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was what year? 

SUBJECT: That was in 19-- 1944, the beginning of 1945. I'll tell you, my dates are really mixed up, because of emotional things. But I have the list exactly um, in the-- in my book. 1944, April the 12th, we were taken to Plaszow. 

They didn't take us directly from me, our family right from the camp. Because three months before the liquidation of the ghetto, we knew that the liquidation will take place. Um, we had some contacts with some leading colonel. 

There were some leading Jews who were internationally famous in the oil-- in the oil chemistry world. And they were famous, internationally. Um, to mention the name, it's on the tip of my tongue now. 

You know, one of them, same as the [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] You know, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] Uh, and he was famous for the development of a certain combination. By now, this is already common knowledge. But we're talking about 40 years ago. 

So these were the last survivors. And they were on their posts always to the last day, while the Jews were all liquidated from-- from our towns. Well, Boryslav was the-- was the oil well town. Drohobych was the refinery town. Three basic refineries. 

So three months earlier, we built-- I, my brother, and three others, built a bunker. You know what that is. That just meant um, a hideout. Um, and I made the hideout under a German home of a German that has been a-- uh-- an officer. And he was-- well, not for the-- he was a member of the SS, [INAUDIBLE]. But uh, we-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was his name? 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: And he didn't know you? 

SUBJECT: He didn't know No. We uh, got in, into-- nothing-- this-- this was under the b-- un-- under his basement, below his-- below his basement. But the entrance to it was-- we had two entrances. And we built it for about six months. 

We had two entrance to it. One through the garden. There was a beautiful garden that we had. 

And one of them through the major canalization of the city. That We went through the canals. That was um, most of the time that we were-- how that we entered the bunker, was through the-- through the canal, not through the garden. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How would you-- how did you build it without his knowing that you were-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-huh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --doing something under his-- 

SUBJECT: That's a book in itself. We were uh, we were actually seven people that were building. From this, after working in the refinery for 12 hours, coming back to the-- through the [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] standing at the appell plots for the count. 

You to be counted, you know, every day. Counted in the evening and morning when they marched out and when we came in. We-- because that was about 3/4-of-a-mile walk to the-- 45-- 40-minutes' walk to the refinery. 

Then we ate supper. And then we had-- there was this period of movement, traffic. And then after which we used to run out from the concentration camp at night, to get to our bunker, and work all night, come back before the appell for the-- through the-- where they counts head, be counted there, then go out and work, in this, we did for six months. 

And we finally built it. And it was a cave. We started out with a cave, an underground cave, under the-- the city canalization. It was a town-- a river, that of which on the side was-- 