INTERVIEWER 1: A little bit, and then you can start. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, I can ask you, what-- what your life was like before the war came? Where did you live? Your full name? And what your life was like? Start with your name. 

SUBJECT: My name is Shifre Zamkov. I was born in Poland. I was a student when the war broke out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What city were you living in, or town? 

SUBJECT: Dolhinow, which is the vicinity of Vilnius, Vilna, rather. And, uh, I had a loving, good home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me about your father. 

SUBJECT: My father was working very hard to send us all to school. He always took us to all children fairs, like circuses, and children plays, and children concerts, wherever it was and whenever it was available. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: I had three brothers. And I was the only girl in the house, which they really could appreciate that. And I was a little bit spoiled at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What are some of your special memories of that time before the war in your family? 

SUBJECT: Happy. A happy family life. A happy home life-- loving, caring, sharing. Um, we found our happiness in simple things. We did not have toys that were bought in the store. We made our own if we wanted to. And they were beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you said you were-- went to school. You were going to university, or high school? 

SUBJECT: No, it was a, um, grade school. It was a special school. It was called Tabot School System, which is actually like parochial school or a day school-- equivalent to, where we had Hebrew spoken in modern times and secular, like Polish. It was a recognized credit school. 

I was fortunate enough to have excellent teachers. Dedicated, idealistic people, men and women. 

My first grade teacher, I can remember. My second-- which is Lisa Ringo. Second grade teacher was Mina Mazel. Third grade, Raskin. The famous film The Raskins, artists, poets. 

We were happy. My childhood, I can say, was really happy. And I loved my school. I loved my home. I loved everyone. I loved my neighbors. I loved everyone around me and everything. I loved the nature. I loved the changing of the seasons. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you-- when was it that you realized something was different in your life, that your world was changing? 

SUBJECT: It was on Sunday, June 22, 1941. I was awakened by my grandmother. And she said, this is war. And you better get up, which I did. And, um, I felt and I realized or recognized the fact that is-- this is my world is collapsing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? What-- what told you that? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. Well, I did hear previous experiences that refugees were telling stories about their experiences. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of refugees? And where did you hear them? 

SUBJECT: We used to go to the library for reading. We used to go to the social hall for dancing, folk dancing. I was too young to go into other social dances as is understood nowadays. And we heard them speaking. They came from central Poland, like Warsaw, Lodz. And they ran away earlier in the war. 

Do you understand that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I know you understand what I'm saying, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, yes. 

SUBJECT: And, um, they were telling us about what was happening to them and the loss of life and loss of property and loss of freedom and loss of almost themselves. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were about 10, 11 years old? 

SUBJECT: At that time, I was about 12 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 12. And uh, what did these story say to you? Did you understand? 

SUBJECT: I didn't-- at first, I did not understand. They spoke a different language than we did. Because we are from Mediterranean dialect. And therefore, we speak-- we thought we speak the correct language, not knowing the language is due difference. People speak the same language, but different dialects and accents at that time. And we looked at them differently. 

But we did-- I personally paid attention to what they had to say. But when war broke out-- after the peace treaty between Moscow and Berlin, between Molotov and Ribbentrop, which they have signed in 1940, I believe it was, if I'm-- or so. They have broken this treaty and they have attacked Soviet Union. Our territory was occupied by the Soviet Union at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what-- what happened? 

SUBJECT: When-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- what did you see? What did you witness? 

SUBJECT: OK. The first time in my life I heard shooting at all was on Sunday-- I believe it was the 29th of June. Or the 30th-- I'm not sure. I'll have to check that with the calendar-- of 1941. 

And for the first time, I disobeyed my mother's order, who always said when there is some shooting or problems-- fire, or whatever tragedy, stay home. Stay-- not to separate. We should stay together. Be all together. 

And I went to the marketplace where I have witnessed people-- I didn't know them, who they were. One man lying on the ground with an open wound in his abdomen. And a young boy was laying on a-- on his-- with his back. I saw the hole in his upper back. He was shot in the back. And he was so alive, very young. And he asked for help, for a doctor. But until the doctors came, I don't know. 

I watched him. And I said, he cannot die. That's the first time I have experienced-- I have seen people, I did not know that they would die because it looked to me inconceivable that these people should die. And there was no help for them. 

I don't know who they were. I did not know who they were up till this very day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: And I ran home and I told. And my mother said, why did you go there? And she told me the story that apparently, these people-- some people were looting some stores. And someone came in and shot them. No one knew. Because it was at the time when there was no government at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No government at all. 

SUBJECT: No government at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Explain that. 

SUBJECT: The, um, original Polish government had left, and we have, uh-- and the Germans have-- did not feel it necessary to come in yet because they have surrounded our town. 

They have gone further east to take, and then we were all sitting ducks like-- they have surrounded our communities. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And when you went home, what did you do? What did your parents do? 

SUBJECT: Well, we-- our tranquil house all of a sudden became panicky. We didn't know what to do. We were seeing soldiers retreating, throwing away their rifles. Like, I guess, when you are in retreat, people do those things. They were trying to change their clothing. We-- 

I heard my parents talking about running, but where to and how? How do you abandon a house that you have lived for centuries like in a home? How do you leave everyone? How do you leave a sister? How do you leave your brother? How do you leave your parents, which means my grandparents? I alone could not have survived. I was too young. This is why we were trapped, sort of. 

We did not realize the-- the whole tragedy at all. We could not have foreseen it. We know that war is war and people do die. But we did not want to believe in death on purpose like done from one individual, cold-blooded murder. 

I mean, this was not acceptable to us. We could not conceive it. We could not appreciate. I could not understand that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So what did you do? 

SUBJECT: That was in 1941. We stayed home. And the Germans entered town. They took away all com-- communication me-- Any apparatus, whichever it may be. Radios. We had no television at that time. They took away the radios. They gave orders. 

They had collaborators, whoever they may be. I don't know who they were. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who big a city or town was this that you lived in? 

SUBJECT: I really don't know the total population of it, but it's approximately-- I really don't know statistics because we did not care at this-- I would say about 10,000. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was a village then? It was a small town? 

SUBJECT: It was a town. I would not like to call it a village because then we would be called provincial, which I would not like to be identified as. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So it was a town? 

SUBJECT: It was a town because we did have schools. We did have churches. We did have synagogues. We had concert halls. So a village to me is like a small-- one, two street. This was with a large marketplace with nice sites and everything else around it. 

It was a small town. Of course in relation, everything is relative. And so in relation to American cities, it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I apologize. I didn't-- 

SUBJECT: No, do not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So there-- you stayed home and the Germans came in? And what happened? 

SUBJECT: And when they entered, they tried to organize a community to get the, um, people to work with them. Promising that nothing will happen. Everything will be fine as long as we cooperate with them. 

And if we do the work, and if we do everything they say, everything will be all right. And they'll-- for the men, there will be work. There will not be any luxuries or anything like this, which we did not expect. And they talked very civilized, in a civil manner. And people tried to believe that rather than anything else. 

I have, uh, watched-- because I was not old enough to take part in the labor force at that time. But I had watched my father go into work in the morning. And he was on the force, like on the labor list. And so was my brother. who was at that time about 17-- 16, 17. And my older brother. My younger brothers were too young. They were about 10 and 9-- 8. And, um, I could not see my father going away to work. And these goodbyes were horrible for us. 

Since I was in size-- I was big. I was almost the size and [INAUDIBLE]. I was thinner, of course, at the time. But I was big enough to get by as a working person. And I-- since they needed numbers, I was counted as a number. 

And I went for the first time to [INAUDIBLE] in the labor force. And what they did with the woman was-- with the girls. And I went with a neighbor of mine who was older than I. And we had to wash the floors where we used to get together to read and dance and social. But the soldiers were laying there, the Wehrmacht soldiers. 

And I did not know the first thing about washing floors, which was frightening to me suddenly, that I have to-- I don't take the rag the proper way to wring it out. And the soldiers were laying around harmonica and singing. And all of a sudden, this scene-- I realized that I am washing and they are playing tunes to harmonicas, which I loved music. I loved music. I still love music, all kinds of music-- vocal, instrumental, orchestra, classical, folk music. But harmonica, whenever I hear a harmonica play, I see the scene. 

And, um, the girl soon-- my neighbor realized that I should-- I don't-- she realized I cannot wash. I don't know how to wring. We didn't have any maps or anything to do it with, so we had to wring the rag. And it's not a room. It's not a house. It was a big social hall. 

And, um, she said to me, you better run and fetch some water because I don't think you know what you're doing. So hurry up and get some water from the well. There was no plumbing or anything like this. So bring clean water to rinse the floors and wash the floors, which I had done. That was my first experience. 

And since then, I started to go out to work for my father. So my father could stay home and take care of the family because he was very supportive in those trying days, my father. He was, uh, keeping us-- trying to get food. I really don't know. Maybe because it was a small town, it was easier to get food than in the big cities. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He wasn't working? 

SUBJECT: No. He was not working. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: Why? Because there was no place to work and no one cared. There was no work. It was war. It was 1941, summer of 1941. I'm still in 1941. Am I too slow? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. 

SUBJECT: And, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did he have money, though, to buy the food if he didn't work? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. You see, it was entirely different economic system we had. We did not go to the store to buy food, like in the United States here. We had to-- there always was a supply for the winter in the fall when they took the harvest of the fields. And you prepared in fall for the winter. And you planted in the spring. And in other words, you bought, like wholesale, sort of like. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your father was not a farmer? 

SUBJECT: No, he was not. But everyone prepared for the wintertime. Because of lack of stores. And my mother baked her own bread. We did have bakeries, but not during the war. And my mother baked, whatever it was. Where he-- we exchanged things. We did not have money. There was no value to money at all. But whatever we had in the house, we did change for food. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you went out to scrub the floor and your father was home. And then what happened? 

SUBJECT: My father was home. I mean, taking care of the house. And trying, I suppose, to figure out where to get the next day's bread into the house. Literally, bread. And potatoes was the main source of food, which up till this very day, I like. It's a very good source of vitamin C, they say. Because we didn't have any oranges. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: And we stayed in this order for 1941 through that winter. My father used to go out to work because he couldn't see me working for him. So 1942 came in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you afraid when you went out to work? Were you afraid of what-- of the people? 

SUBJECT: I was at an age where you are not afraid. I really was not afraid. I was afraid what-- how my parents may suffer if something happens to me. I did not want to die. I was not afraid. I wanted to live. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were the people like when you went out to work that you were meeting on the street? Were they friendly? Were they hostile? What was it like? 

SUBJECT: You mean the occupation forces? The occupation forces, we did not have too many of them because of the fact that there was not much opposition. We did not have any secrets hidden from them. We did not have any important industry in our city. And the people were only, uh, living from day to day. And the people were-- those-- the collaborators collaborated with the Germans. 

For example, my brother had walked once-- my older brother, Nahman. He came-- was walking home from work. And I don't know what-- for whatever reason, the Germans picked him to beat him up, to punish him. And the Germans and their collaborators. The Nazis, that is. 

And I remember that scene very well because my parents have put on a few pieces of clothing on him. So when they'll hit him, it shouldn't penetrate too deep, like-- they didn't know it, so it was in the summertime of '41. And, uh, my father called up for the chief of police, which was not German, but he collaborated with the Germans. And said, remember, I did a big favor once to your father. Could you do me a favor and not hit him too hard? So he said, look. I don't know you anymore. And whatever favors, I owe nothing to no one. Then, my brother left. 

But my mother-- I can imagine how she has felt, because we were all looking. And he went there. Because if he wouldn't go to the police station, they would have taken out-- we have heard they used to take out like 100 men or 100 people and shoot in case they did not do what they wanted them to do. The Germans did. 

And my brother-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Excuse me. Let me change the tape now. 