FEMALE SUBJECT: --1929. My name was Inga Maria Lautenbaugh I was born to Dr. Paul Lautenbaugh and his wife Annie Lautenbaugh, born Fauchs. Both were Catholics. My father came from a family in Czechoslovakia actually. It was called Hohenfurth. At the moment it's called Vyssi Brod. 

My grandmother came from more on my father's side, a more aristocratic type of background. My grandfather was an business administrator at an abbey in Vyssi Brod or Hohenfurth. We usually went there every summer for a month on vacation. My father studied in Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: Now you mentioned your father's family was of aristocratic origin. 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: They were of aristocratic origin? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: My grandmother. She was Veltrupsky from Veltrup. 

INTERVIEWER: What title was it? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: They were-- they got, I think the title several hundred years ago as knights. I can only say it German, Ritter. I don't know what this would be in English. Knight of something. Ritter from Veltrup. The knights of Veltrup. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was your father's side? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were born in what year? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: In 1929. In January 1929. My father had studied at University in Vienna. He got a doctorate, a law doctorate and he also studied philosophy and medicine. I think if I remember correctly, what he told me, he came to the city of Modling, which is a suburb of Vienna ins about 1922 or '21. 

I think at this time the family money ran out and he had to find a job. And he could not continue with his studies. And he became then an administrator at the city office in Modling. 

I brought here a book along. The book of the city of Modling during the early '30s or late '20s, also various cities in Austria collected the data. Collected around the cities and what to do for the social sort of betterment for the people. And there's also an article in it written by my father. My early-- 

INTERVIEWER: And this book was published in what year? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: In 1933. I brought it also along because I as a Catholic and as a Catholic child did not have too many contact with any conscious-- contact with any Jewish people. I went with Jewish kids to school, but it never registered really to me that they're different. Because Austria is a country where you have 95% Catholics and 5% Protestant. And Jews just belong to the other ones. 

They could have been Protestant. The earlier memories what I have about politics was I think in 1934 when-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you were born in 19-- 

FEMALE SUBJECT: --29. 

INTERVIEWER: '29. 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Yeah, with the milk bottle in the mouth, I could not remember. Just thought about food then, nothing else I guess. 

INTERVIEWER: Any other memories about your life, not politics? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: In the early childhood, yes, I went to a costume dance festival at the skating rink. And I must have been three or four. 

And they put me in special clothes with the polka-dotted as a washer girl. You know, something like that. Was it a costume ball for kids on the skating rink-- skating rink. That is one of the memories what I had. 

What other memories did I have? Of course, my father and my mother had friends. But when they came in the evenings, I was in bed, you know. So I would not know too much about them. Let's would say when I was permitted to be with them, then it would have been relatives, you know, which lived in Vienna that came to visit us on a Sunday afternoon. Or the whole Sunday or whole Saturday. 

Again, with people with childrens. And I would play with the children and would not be together with the adults too much. But I can only talk about my memories and also which we had in Czechoslovakia. Because each year, as the whole month of August we went up to the house of my grandmother and the other Lautenbaughs. There were many different lines, cousins and so on. 

They had also their estates up there. So we were usually 30 to 40 family members there in August. And we would go swimming and we'd go to some fox hunting. Fox being one human's the fox, and not a real fox. So these sort of things would did in summer time. 

And there were maybe under 30 or 40 adults and were maybe 10 youngsters. And I was actually from the younger generation, the youngest one. Because my father was the youngest one of eight, four of them died. So I think he was born in 1898, so he was the youngest one. 

My mother was born near Modling in Wiener Neudorf. She was born in 1900. Of course, she went not to the university, she went to the Handelsakademie [business academy]. And she was an administrator at the government, at the city hall too where she actually met my hus-- my-- my father. They got married in 1925. 

The head of course, according to the Austrian standards at to time one child only, because at this time also the bank crash was in 1929-- I think in October or September 1929. At these times people didn't have many children in Austria, even they were Catholics. And there were not I think taught about birth control, but that didn't know how to do it. 

The first-- if you want to know about the political memory, was I think 1934. And I know that something was going on, because we could hear shooting from an area of where the workers were living. I think I would say at this time, what my personal feeling was that the classes were really separated in living areas in Modling. Modling was a city of about 14,000 people at the time. 

So workers lived near the railroad, and on the other side of the railroad. And there the unrest and the shooting was going on over there. We lived in an area close to Vienna woods, maybe two blocks away from the Vienna woods where there was one village after another one, it was completely quiet. 

INTERVIEWER: Both parents were working city Hall? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Yeah, but then my mother, after she got married, she stopped of course, working. But at this time, before the [INAUDIBLE] just as a background house it did meet. In 1934, the funniest thing was my father had-- that looked like Dollfuss. And he was assassinated. And I would go the next Sunday after the assassination to the church with my father. 

And so many people would stop us and they would say "Ach, Herr Kanzler, ich hab' gedacht, dass Sie erschossen wurden." I thought it hilarious. It was just too funny for a five-year-old at the time, you know. I said why do some people think you are who you got shot? You know, it didn't occur to me that he looked like Dollfuss and that people would think about such a thing. 

In 1935 I started with my school. I went for three years to the public school, to the primary school. What would you call it here? 

INTERVIEWER: Grade school. 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Grade school. In 1938, this was [INAUDIBLE] after the Anschluss, I transferred to the vorbereitung class, it was gymnasium you had only to go for three years in Modling to the grade school. And then you could automatically go into the vorbereitung class. But I think I was in the last one of this. This was an afterwards changed. 

So life for my father and my family at this time in the '30s, I had the feeling was extremely peaceful. Before '38, as I said, we would have our summer vacations. My parents would go to the theater. My relatives would come on weekends. We would take sometimes a trip out to the Semmering or something like that. 

We wouldn't doing something every evening. You know, people were living, I think a much more quiet lives than what to do now that one would have to dash out every evening. 

Yes, my father was a member of the Schlaraffia. But I can't really describe what the Schlaraffia is. This was a men's club that they'd meet once a week. 

They had, in my opinion, a peculiar type of vest or shawl or something, what I cannot remember and peculiarly type of hat. And I think once a week, I think was it was a Tuesday evening, he went to this meeting. Or maybe it was only every other week. I can't remember that. 

In 1938-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were there any Nazis in town? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: There must have been. My parents would not talk about them in front of me I guess. As a child, at this time I was seven, eight, and nine years old, I did not consciously see them, you know. 

Or they did not approach me. OK? I know-- I can't maybe remember that somebody said, oh, this one, this one. But I wouldn't have known what it meant at this time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did any of your teachers wear a hakenkreuz as a pin or an armband? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: No, because my teacher in grade school, she was an old spinster and she so Catholic. She was holier than the Pope. You could see her only in church. She would not belong to anything like that. Her name was Dornick. 

And we had one teacher going with us from first grade to second to third grade. And in the vorbeitung classes, this was in '38 already, then I think the teacher homes that didn't-- the Nazis did not like. They were already weeded out. And at this time I had just switched school. So I would not know who was weeded out at this time because I came from the other school. 

It is in 1938. In the spring of 1938, when the Anschluss occurred, I remember that my parents were very upset. My father was arrested. My mother didn't tell me at that times that he was arrested, because to protect the child she wouldn't tell me he was gone for a few days. But later on I found out that he was arrested. 

Then I remember that he was at home for about three months. He lost his job with the city hall. Somebody else must have wanted his job. But of course, then also in '38, the whole city of Modling was disintegrated because it was then included in the city of Vienna as the 24th district. So there was not anymore city office. 

In summer of 1938 was the first years that we did not go on a vacation. In summer, I think, I'm not sure. I can't remember correctly when my father got his new job in-- with the city of Vienna. He was then working as a magistrate and doing some law type of defending for the city when they had lawsuits or something like that. Of course, again, being 10 years old, I would not really ask him in detail, or I would not have been able to understand at the time what he was doing. 

And I think what I have to say, I think my father was belonged aside it. I'm not sure if he did ever belong to a party. But sided with the Christian Democrats. I think what they calls themselves now People's Party. I think that were called at this time Christian Democrats. This was the-- again, the Catholic faction of the Democrats, not the socialistic ones. 

So father, remember in grade school, I had one girl, I think her name was Lucy Giebische, and she was Jewish. I went to birthday parties to her place and she came to birthdays parties to mine. But in March of '38 she suddenly disappeared with the family. But I'm not sure at this time I don't think that these people were put at this time in a concentration camp. I think that just moved out of the country in '38, you know. 

Because they were-- I think her father was a lawyer. They were very affluent sort of people. And I think they probably would have had the connections to be able to move out. In '38 I also remember that the synagogue was burned. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that? 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Yes. The most of the news in a small town you get to the woman who brings the rolls in the morning. And I know I usually did hide someplace in the entrance hall to get her gossip because it was really more fascinating than anything else that I could have heard. Because she would go from door to door with her fresh bread and rolls and this sort of thing, and would tell the people what is going on in town. Somehow. 

I know one day she came to the door, and she said today they're burning the synagogue. OK? My parents, as I mentioned before, would not let me go out if something like that occurred, because there might be some people or some violence or something like that. And also through this woman was bringing in the bread and thing, I also heard that-- if I remember now correctly-- must have been in March or April of this year they said that in certain Jewish stores in the town they would put owners in the window and expose them to the public with their star on it. They didn't know at this time that this was the star of David. 

And so I just got this thing a little bit through hearsay from the merchants coming to the door. Brings us the bread woman and the milkmen. Because also the milk was delivered every morning out of a milk can. A horse carriage came. 

Then in the summer of 1938, as I mentioned before, my father got a new job. And then he worked in Vienna. And he had to go every day to Vienna. And as also I mentioned before that he could not go on vacation. I think this was too in connection with his new job, or it could also have been that the borders are closed at this time. 

But I don't know. I would have to really do the research on that, what really was the cause that we couldn't go. But I think more his jobs than the borders. I think, was it October 1938 that Hitler annexed the Sudetenland. 

INTERVIEWER: No, [INAUDIBLE]. 

FEMALE SUBJECT: Yeah, I think it was in October 1938. I remember that my father said my gosh. That is really good. 

Then I can come go and see my mother again, who was at this time, still living there. And his brother who was living there, and his sister lived in Budejovice. I know he said now there won't be any difficulties to get there. 

And in the fall of 1938, I said I started with the new school. And the new school, I think I cannot remember any political-- in the first year any political sort of brainwashing going on through the school teachers at this time. Maybe because it was the transfer-- the in-between class, between gymnasium and grade school. I remember the teacher where there she was the Doctor Spannagel. And in the summer of 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the Kristallnacht? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: You see, I don't know. When to put the Jews in the window, I think the Kristallnacht came later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: November '38? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: At this time, it could have been at this time that the synagogue did burn. I know I mentioned that before I heard it through the other thing what I should mention about it is I think my mother got curious about it too. So the next day afterwards we walked in this direction and we could see it must have been cold. Because it must have been in November. Because I said it's snowing. 

And actually the ashes flew from the synagogue in the wind, you know? And we walked towards the main place into town. And then what this thing as this was still hot. At this time I have also to mention-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- do you remember seeing the ruins? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: These ashes were flying over the town, you know. It must have been November. Because I said look it's going to snow, but it was really ashes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you see off of the building? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yeah, the building I saw then. It was collapsed and it was already a heap of rubble and burnt down house, you know, burnt down synagogue. I think the neighboring house was burnt down too. I also remember that at this time there were held auctions of the positions of the Jewish people. These were public auctions. I also know-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe one? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I only walked by with my mother. You see, we would never participate in anything. You would just at this time-- you just tried to stay as neutral as somehow as neutral as possible. 

I walked by and I could see furnitures, which have been auctioned off. I have never seen an auction beforehand, you know. This was the first time that I saw something like that. It was held-- 

--and they said that this was the property of Jewish families which was sold. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what you sold furniture and what else? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Furniture, rugs, China, silver, books, paintings, household goods, you know. The whole thing, it was mixed up I think from different households. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Furniture and garden and-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Rugs, China, it was in a garden. I can't tell you in which house or in anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see the people? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Of course, the people who have been there I don't know it's a bot [bid], or something like that have been all Modlingers, you know, in a town of 14,000 you know everyone by face, you know. There wouldn't have been any other people there. I think my conclusion is that the-- obviously the people bought the stuff. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember a crowd, small group? What did you see? What was the scene? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: 200 to 300 people maybe? I saw-- I was more fascinating how one auctioned something off, you know. Because this was the first time that I saw something like that. And that the person that was "bieten sie fur diesen Schrank, und fur diesen Teppich, und irgendjemand wird -" 

They'd raise their hand and say the-- a price. You know, I must say at this time, I also was not really up to date with what everything did cost. And I think it must've been in German marks already. 

It was not any more in schillings because the shilling was converted to German mark. I think we got 66 or 67 Pfennige for one shilling. I know we lost about a third of our money at this time. I also remember-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember people offering prices and somebody-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: It was sold, the stuff but I could-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --make any comment about the prices or-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Oh this said that this is very cheap. But it also could have gone you know, what was not sold then to the Dorotheum. You know? Because the Dorotheum is one of these sort of things which take in everything what they would not have sold that they would have put into Dorotheum and then it's auctioned off or there, you know. 

So I cannot really say if they sold everything or if the population bought everything or not. I only can say for instance, with some people what I learned later that relatives or friends of Jewish people went to this auction and bought certain stuff back. The-- for instance, one of our friends, it's also Eva's friend, Doktor Morgenstern 

a friend bought his furnitures back from a public auction in Vienna. OK, this I heard later. So I must have seen one of these public auctions where Jewish property was sold. 

INTERVIEWER 1: As a little girl passing by a burnt synagogue, or an auction, do you remember-- do you remember any thoughts about it? Or responses that you had at that time? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yeah, I thought always in 1938 I thought that people are a bit crazy. That was all. Because I remember now said that there was a big rally for Hitler in Vienna in March of '38. And I know some of the friends of my parents went to that in Vienna. And I thought that these people are completely crazy, total verruckt. 

You know? Because there was this super crowds of thousands and thousands of people. And they were standing there all day long. What you could read or see a picture the next day in the newspaper. I couldn't understand it that people would go to such a thing to see mass rallies or anything like that. 

But I think probably six friends of my parents might have been more siding with the Nazis. I don't know, you know? They would not have-- I never heard like, the heated discussions between this-- this people. There was always more or less a neutral sort of pleasant talks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Like you would talk about music. You would talk about the theater. You would talk about the latest movie in the only movie house in town at this time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You wouldn't talk about Hitler and about the politics and about the war? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Oh, you know, you don't know the Viennese. I think what is really troubling them they will not have a heated discussion about it. Because at this time it was a rule not to discuss it, because first of all, it was a discussion you could only I think put yourself into trouble. Because it probably came out of self-defense. You didn't know whom to trust and who not to trust, you know? So you would not talk about these things at all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the schoolchildren, you were 10, 9, would they say anything to each other about changes in regime, political slogans, or speeches? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: You see, I know we had to learn a different hymn. But it was my third hymn. At this time I was nine years old, and I was already on my third hymn. Oh, forget about it. I couldn't sing anyhow. 

What a nuisance that is. Always a different hymn. I don't know why they changed the hymns in before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Anthem. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Anthem. Yes, anthem. So this I thought, already silly, you know. 

I don't know why. Must have-- must have been a change in 1936 in the anthem in Austria. And then of course in 1938, one had to-- to change again to Deutschland, Deutschland, uber alles. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was there any talk at home or among relatives that you heard comments about the political-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yeah, I can only say other things what were striking to me. This house in which we lived, I think it was owned by an American Jew. It was run by a realtor. His name was Fiala. We paid rent to this person. 

But then in '38, this person showed up and asked my father if he would like to buy the house. And I remembered my father saying he wouldn't like to buy any Jewish property. Because you could get it I think very cheaply at this time. I think my father didn't want to have any-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bargains. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: He wanted the participation in such a deal. So a guy from Czechoslovakia bought the house. He still owns this house at the moment. He very most unpleasant sort of person. I do not know for how much or anything, but I know it was sold in '38. 

So I assume that there was a Jewish owner who was already living here in this country. What can I tell you then? What else do I remember? 

Yes, that there was a synagogue that burned. That there was this auction of the property. That certain people I saw on the street do have to wear the yellow star. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your response? Inside, what did you imagine? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I said my gosh, I didn't realize that they were Jewish. That was the thing. I know they were Austrians. And I never had somebody classify them in Jewish or Protestant or things. They were just plain Austrians before, you know? 

I was never consciously raised in a ways that they are different people. Jewish people, I think that what I would say at the time considering we're Polish Jew, Hasidic Jews, they were sticking out of the crowds. They came around I think at this pre-Hitler time, bringing materials for suits and this sort of thing for mills in Czechoslovakia or Hungary. I know that these people did show up at our door. But this is all what I can remember. 

They might have come all the way from Vienna to the suburb to sell something. I do not know that. After '38, I know my parents would never talk in front of me what was going on with my father. He would always send me to bed around 7 and then they would talk later. 

I know that he was in '38 very upset and he was home, you know. In 1939, when he was working in Vienna, and he was looking for his first vacation again in-- in Czechoslovakia, I think we were there four days. And the fourth day there he had a fatal heart attack and died. 

But this was I think psychosomatic thing goes later on. I can't say now. I think a heart attack usually occurs a year and a half after a traumatic experience to your system, or in this area. He was then buried in Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which experience do you have in mind? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: That he lost a job. That there was this upheaval and his things that I think probably his beliefs were just disturbed, you know, or something. He didn't believe in anything at this time anymore. 

I hear sometimes he would do remark people that I wouldn't have thought that this person would be so mean or something. These things what I have heard, you know. I say again, that again, my parents protected me so much, you know, from everything though that they would never discuss anything in front of me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: His beliefs as what were? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I think his political beliefs. And the belief in the human race, I think too was shocked or traumatically, I don't know how to-- upset, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And as a richest person? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yeah, he went to-- he was a Catholic. He went to church. I would say it was Sunday or maybe every-- not-- not every other Sunday. Practically every Sunday. 

As I said, in 1939, then I would start with after my father died. We buried him in Czechoslovakia. It was difficult to-- to transfer him back to Modling. And since he was born in Czechoslovakia, we decided to do-- my mother decided to leave him there. We came back. 

I know day-- the evening of the death of my father, there was a big crowd of about 15 family members sitting around a big table. They were discussing if there would be coming a war or not. And I know that my father at this time would read on the newspaper I think available, das war der Volkische Beobachter. 

He looked at something in the newspaper. I know if he took the newspaper out to see when the news would be coming on. And the news-- he said I have-- we have still three or four minutes before the news are coming on. And he folded the newspaper, put his head down, and had the heart attack. 

So the news was never heard. This was August 6, 1939. My mother and I came then back-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old was he? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: He was 46. My mother and I, we came then back-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the discussion around the table was about-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: War-- if that the war coming on or not. Therefore they wanted to hear the news. So there must have been already rumours around or probably military movements accordingly that would lead probably to the possibility of a war. 

At this time, I must say I was extremely concerned not with the political situation. If I could go skiing the following winter or not. And my father would not allow me to go skiing, would not allow me to buy ski equipment, because he thought I was too young. 

And I know that this occupied my mind tremendously. Horrible, but this was probably selfish little child. Like thinking I was actually a bit angry with my father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's that way child responds to a parents death. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's also way a child would respond to parents that-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes, maybe that too. Of course, one reacting because one probably is left alone or something like that. The next type of memory what I have in 1939 was it was almost the summer when I learned how to swim. I was floating in a big sort of floating device in the swimming pool at 9 or 9:30 in the morning. It was a beautiful day. 

And I think it was September 1st or September 3rd, whatever it was, and suddenly it turned into public swimming pool. We had three of them in-- in town. The loud speaker on and I heard Hitler talk and declare war on Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the words? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: [SIGH] I remember only the sound. OK, I cannot remember the words. But he had a special way of giving a speech. And oh, it always started with Volksgenosse and then Volkesgenosse. 

And the sound floated over the swimming pool. And then I thought, aha, there's now the war. But you know, piecing it together probably my memory is not so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did that sound do to people listening to it? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I was the only person in the swimming pool at this morning. If I'm not sure it was a work day, I think. A Tuesday or Wednesday? I don't know. 

There was maybe a bademeister there, and he didn't have anybody to talk to. I know I came then-- I wouldn't go home. I would stay till-- I would swim up to about noon time, and I would go home at noontime. And then I would say to my mother now Hitler declared war. And she said yes, he overtook Poland, or he went into Poland. 

And of course, from this moment on, I would guess we watched more the news and what was going on. I think at this time before that, I did not regularly watch news or read a newspaper. But I did not regularly read the newspaper after that either. Because as I said, there was only one newspaper available. This was the Volkischer Beobachter. 

| know it was the Volkischer Beobachter. I didn't think so much about the content, but I even didn't like to hold it. It was such a big newspaper. It was-- I remember the regular newspaper in before was a small one what we had. And then we got this huge sort of thing. 

This was a strange sort of thing. At this time, we also did not have to read the Volkischer Beobachter. Later on we had to read it. We were forced to, because we were asked in school question if you keep up with the latest news reports and this sort of thing. 

And as I said, in 1939, I started then with the gymnasium. And I know the director of the gymnasium. I think his name was Atlinger. He was a Nazi. At least he was a party member. 

Hakenkreuze, swastika. But I know that there are some signs with that gold flame and the silver flame that I think he had the regular one. I think the other ones were members since 1933 or 1935. I know at this time I think everyone every woman had to belong to Bund der Deutschen Frau. 

I know my mother paid her dues. Every month somebody came around to collect. I think it was a mark or something like that. 

The woman who came around, she was-- they didn't do anything together, but she just collected the money. And this woman who came around, she was a member. I think with a silver circle around. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The principal of the school, the late comer. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were a late member of the Nazi party. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: With the silver circle? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, the school principal. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I think my school principal was probably a late member. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could he have been forced to maintain his position to join? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: I don't know if he the director in before or if he just came in. I cannot remember that. I would have to write home to find out if he was a director before or afterwards. But I know a lot of the professors had to resign in 1938 in the school. 

And this professors-- we got back in 1945 again. There was one doctor, Klothilde Hofmann. If I could be better with names, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You're doing quite well with names. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: But these were people-- I think were not Jewish teachers. These were super Catholic, super ultra-Schwarze, wie man - as the people called them, which had to resign at this time. And I have also heard in discussions at the-- at homes that-- and with my cousins who went at this time already to the university, a lot of university professors had to resign or were thrown out. They were forced to resign. 

And a new group of teachers came in. And my class, at this time, I think we had one girl who was half Jewish and one girl who was a quarter Jewish. And they went with me to school during Civil War. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know that actively? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Because this was discussed among our kids. There were officially belong to-- the quarter Jewish girl belong-- was actually a Catholic. But according to the new rassenkunde, what-- what was taught then, I think then she was Jewish because her grandfather was Jewish. I think he was actually a moneylender to the emperor of Austria. And he was even got a special title for that. 

I know that her father then was not working. I know that she was brought up-- she was-- I envied her because she had an English nanny. And her English was beautiful already at the age of 10. I guess very affluent sort of people. And the other one was-- from the other girl, the father was an officer in the Austrian army. 

And I think his wife was Jewish. And he protected his wife. She's survived also with him because he was not Jewish. So this girl was half Jewish, and went with me through the years during the era. And we had also one girl born here in the United States in my class. 

I think there were some house-trained at this time in Europe. Or how they came to Europe, I don't know. They were not married here in this country. There were actually three kids, two girls and one daughter. Two girls and one son. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now it was discussed and the Rassenkunde 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yeah, the Rassenkunde in the ersten Klasse Gymnasium, we had something like Rassenkunde. So we were told by I think probably this was a newly designed book which was given to the biology teacher or the Naturwissenschaft, Naturkunde, Naturwissensch- 

Something like that, it was the subject. And we had to do something like we had to get all the information fur ein ahnenpass. I do not know what an Ahnenpass is in English. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Genealogy? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Genealogy, but it was a book. I wanted to bring it actually today. I have it somewhere here, but I couldn't find it. And you were-- you had to describe yourself from the point of view of the rassenkunde taught in school. 

And you had to classify yourself which group you did belong if you were blond and blue eyed or if you were the black hair then dark eyes. Or the-- I remember there was I think the groups of the Spanish, the French, the Italians were put together in the romantic groups. And there was the Dinarische race group. I think this was the people who lived in the Alps in Yugoslavia and Romania. And this thing-- and then of course, there was this beautiful Nordic race. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the one before that was what? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The one that you mentioned-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Dinarische 

INTERVIEWER 1: Narisch? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Di-narisch 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dinarisch 

FEMALE SPEAKER: There were, I remember there always tried to explain everything with bone structure, volume, skull volume, skull lengths, skull width, size of the people, neck size, neck length. I know they always classified all the Slavic people with short necks, full neck. I remember that, huh? And we had to make a Ahnenpass, which had your own picture on one side and a description of yourself. Then the picture of your mother, the picture of your father, the first place-- the occupations, the educational levels, and this sort of things. 

And then the parents of your father's side and mother's side had to be included. This was the minimum what you could get them. I know that this was done I think in 1939, 1940, and maybe '41 and '42. And then you had to making and I know in drawing, the drawing class you had to draw a einen Stammbaum. What is the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's the genealogical tree. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes, the genealogical tree. I know we had to do that in the drawing class. I know through the Anschluss I missed out on a certain part of history completely. I never studied Greek history. This was just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You came to the Nordic race was the first was the-- 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Nordic race, the romantic race, the Dinarisch. I don't know-- I don't know an English word for this race. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It doesn't exist. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: It doesn't probably exist here, this type of thing. The Nordic race and the Slavic race. Of course, the emphasis was on the Nordic race that there was a super race. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was clearly taught. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes, clearly taught. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So the polarized children in the class? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes, I would say so. And I think all schools probably would have had to have that same type of teaching plan or level. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The children in the class belong to different races? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Oh, no, no. Not all of us that belong to the same type of race. We were mixed. Good Austrian mixtures. They told us that too said that we are neither really pure from this race, but point of view enough from this one. Just this dirty Austrians a little bit, you know, the mixture. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All of you were in one group then, or were there several races in the class? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: There were several, but we were all Austrians because Austrians were not as-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

Well, we did not really belong to the super race. We were the sloppy ones, you know. The people who were interested just in only in food and how to live well or something like that. I think this was really then pointed out. 

And of course, during this years, the striking thing was also that practically all the men disappeared. And as I can-- as I remember, there were only the very old men there. The very young men and in between-- the men between the ages of 18 and 50 were all gone. So it was I think I did grow up in a complete society of women. 

But the only person who was not drafted was this director in my school. And I know he was such a - unsporty. Not in the race fitting sort of creatures. I called him one time Mr. Chamberlain because he came with a high top hat and an umbrella to school. The children of course, laughed when I called him that, but he heard it. 

And he was at the same time our math teacher. And this must have been 1944, something like that. And he said I'm not going to be called this sort of-- it's like calling me names when you call me Mr. Chamberlain. And I said no. I'm sorry, but he looks like him. 

Well, this must have-- he pretended. I don't know or it did really hurt him. I don't know. He said I would have to stay after school and do some punishments and work. 

I said look, if you want to punish me, it's punishment for you too because you would have to write out all the problems for me. And then you would have to check them if I did it correctly. And I was always very good in math at this time. 

And then he said, oh, you are really impossible. And then furthermore at this time, I said to him it wouldn't be wise to do such a thing to me. Because maybe I could use it when the war is over. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did say that? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes. At this time he said go, go, just go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now what was going on? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Yes, but it was already at 1944 going wrong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did children respond when it did go well? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: First of all, we started to listen to the news. Then I think I don't know was it 1942 that BBC started sending at 10:00 at night? So we listened to the news at 10:00 at night. This was a five minute newscast so far as I remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where did you listen? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: In my home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: She didn't listen to it. With me, she would not. I had the radio in my room. Do remember something else. 

Because the German organized something to be alarmed through the telephone with the radio. I don't know what that was. There was a whole-- somehow a telephone system functioned as an antenna. Any little Volksempfanger that could really get BBC. Not very strongly, but you could understand it and to hear it. 

And I at this time had a Volksempfanger. Because our bigger radio, you couldn't get the tubes for it during Civil War because they were not produced. I think it was a Grundig or something. And we couldn't get the-- so we had at this time a Volksemfanger. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Volksemfanger is a small German radio. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Mhm. There were two-- two sizes, but I think I had the smallest one as a child. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me about listening to both news earlier and perhaps about the school discussions 

--between children. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: OK. Our class somehow started to drift in two groups so far as I can remember. One was a group which was pro-Hitler. And there was a-- a stronger Catholic group which was anti-Hitler. We all had to be in the bunde Deutchemaedschen. 

So we-- they gave us a choice, really. If we wanted to be really in the regular sort of things. And I know our group went to the Sing- und Spielschar, this is sing and play group. And because there you would learn how to sing certain songs and produces some plays. Not necessarily political plays, but you did not have to participate on this Ausmarsche, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Marches. 

FEMALE SPEAKER: --marches which were there on special holidays. I remember of course, every one of us got uniforms, the white blouse and the dark blue skirt. And officially, you had to wear a black handkerchief with this beige leather-- what you call sliding sort of a device. 

I know that this group, which were the not pro-Hitler side of our kids, we would not wear this thing. We would wear a-- I still have that here-- an Austrian eagle, and we would wear either green or red knee socks. It was-- I think this group of children considered the other group of children who were pro-Hitler as proletarians. 

Because, if I remember correctly, these other kids who were in the gymnasium with us, they're were the children of workers, most of them. We didn't-- we didn't fit together somehow. They would belong not as a single Spielschar. They would belong to the regular sort of group. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Hitler-Jugend? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: The Hitler-Jugend. It's not Hitler-Jugend. Hitler-Jugend it was only when it was for boys. OK? I think. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But they would wear different color socks and different ties? 

FEMALE SPEAKER: Only we would because this was our private signal. OK? Of course at this time we were pre-teenagers. And certain things for instance, I remember that Stalingrad was discussed amongst the children. And of course one thing I have to say, the news, which we got from the regular radio stations were extremely distorted. So it took a long time-- 