SUBJECT: Well, my parents, they came-- 

INTERVIEWER: Not yet. She's explaining to you. Your own memories. 

SUBJECT: Beginning with my parents, or what? No? Or my own? 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents to everything. 

You begin giving your name, where you were born, when you were born. And after that, tell us what happened after you were born. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, my name is Kathe Preschel, my maiden name, Kathe Kohn. I lived in Germany, Dortmund, Westphalia. My parents-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were born-- 

SUBJECT: I was born in Poland. My parents came from Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

SUBJECT: December, 1909. I was never in Poland, so I had my education 100% in Germany. I went to school-- first to Jewish elementary school, and then from high school, non-Jewish. 

I had many friends in Germany, but all these friends, they were superficial friends. Because I saw very early in my early years that there were always antisemitism in Germany. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you give examples of incidents? 

SUBJECT: Well, in school, for instance, there were always girls-- they said, oh, that Jews, that they grab. They like to grab money. They like to make money. And then they asked me to forget it. They didn't say it. 

Well, this was friendship-- very superficial friendship. But this, I think it's not so important. 

INTERVIEWER: And we are talking now Germany around the First World War, 1916, 1918 when you were in school? 

SUBJECT: No. I was very little. This I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER: What years are you talking about when you mention this anti-Semitism? 

SUBJECT: Well, this was in 1925 or so-- '24, '25. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your father doing? 

SUBJECT: My parents-- my father was in the war, World War I. And he came to Germany. My mother was already with four children in Germany. And my father came as an invalid from the war, World War I. 

And so they established a business in Dortmund. They had it until the thing. I got married in 1933. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm stopping you because I would like to know more. Can I ask a little bit about home, what kind of person your father and mother was, your sister? 

SUBJECT: My parents, they had a very strictly kosher home. My father was very Orthodox, and my mother, naturally, too. And they lived a very Jewish, highly Jewish life. 

My parents, they lived in the Jewish section in Germany in Dortmund because of the schul or synagogue. My father would never go by bus to the synagogue. He wouldn't do that. 

What do you want me to say? 

INTERVIEWER: He was invalid in what way? Flashes of memory with your early family-- day and evening, Shabbos, any memories that you think of that come back to you. 

SUBJECT: For instance, the Friday nights, my father always came home from school with somebody-- a poor man to eat or so. I remember my father-- every day, he put on talit and tefilin. And he didn't even shave, only with a little-- little stick with powder. In that time, we didn't have an electric shaver. He had a little beard, very little, like Weissman, Professor Weissman, that style. 

We had a very nice and Jewish life in home. We had to be every Friday evening home, because my father, he has to the kiddush, and so we had to be there. It was impossible to stay out. This was not allowed for us. 

And so even I am not religious today, but I am a very traditional Jew, very. And I wouldn't give it up for nothing in the world. And so I grew up with all my other sisters. We were four sisters. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you in the family? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: You were what in the family? The second, the third? 

SUBJECT: I am the third. The last-- she died in Auschwitz, the youngest. So until now, I have-- thanks God-- one sister lives in Buenos Aires, one in Israel. I am here. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of memories do you have of that early life? You've mentioned the Friday evening. What other memories? Not at home, but with other children in school. 

SUBJECT: I went to several organizations. First, in my youngest years, I was very religious. So I belong to the Agudat Yisrael. And then I was older, so I didn't want it anymore. 

I liked more freedom. But always, I never forgot that I am coming from a very Jewish home. And this I will never forget. And I'm very grateful to my parents that I have that education. 

I was a little bit older. And I remember also, I was looking for a job after school. And my father didn't let me take a job where I had to work Saturday, Shabbat. So I didn't. 

I went to an organization as a secretary, the Ostjudische Verband. There I worked as a secretary. So I met my husband there. He was practically my boss, the president of the organization, vice president of the organization. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of organization was it? 

SUBJECT: The Ostjudische Verband, this is an organization from the Jewish people that came from Eastern Europe-- Poland, Russia, and so. We were many. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it a social, political? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: Social? 

SUBJECT: Not political. Not political, social-- and Jewish. So I met there my husband. And I got married in 1933. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. A little bit before that still, you were living in Dortmund. 

SUBJECT: Dortmund. 

INTERVIEWER: It's a German town. What is it like? What is Jewish life like? What was your father's occupation? A little bit more about your life. 

SUBJECT: My father-- well, I told you we had a store for brights, linen, furniture. And everything what was necessary for a family, they sold. And, well, I think this was enough to do. My father, he belonged also to a few organizations. 

INTERVIEWER: Those were Jewish brides and non-Jewish brides? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, non-Jewish people, mostly non-Jewish, not Jewish. Not only brides, people. 

INTERVIEWER: I think we are-- you probably have things that you think of, flashes of memory. If you have nothing to do, you may go back to Dortmund and remember a day. Let's forget the cameras. Let's forget the interviewers. Let's start looking at a photograph. What do you see in Dortmund as a girl that grows up? 

SUBJECT: Dortmund. Dortmund was a city-- an industrial city. I went to the schools, to a non-Jewish school-- first four years-- the first four years in a Jewish school, then the non-Jewish school. And I met there all my friends. But coming home, I had my Jewish life. 

In my parents' house, I couldn't invite so easily non-Jewish people, friends. My father wouldn't allow it. I had a friend, a girlfriend, non-Jewish. But this was the one. But generally, speaking in general, I couldn't go out with non-Jewish people. My father would not allow this. 

He was always afraid that I will meet somebody-- a non-Jewish-- yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Don't let this-- 

SUBJECT: Ah, I'm sorry. And you know how it is when you have girls. You are always afraid of something. Yeah. And what shall I tell you more? With a few words, I lived-- 

INTERVIEWER: Things that you would remember if nobody would ask you. When you have a Saturday afternoon or a Friday afternoon with a Maariv, and you are sitting down. You have nothing to do. And things will come back about the years that you were growing up. Any memory that's of importance for you? 

SUBJECT: Friday night, for instance, we were sitting on the table. And my parents, they had already a son-in-law, two sons-in-law. One was very strictly Orthodox and the other less. 

But when they came home to us, to my parents, they never, ever would sit without the yarmulke or smoke Saturday. They never would do it. This I remember very much, because we respected very highly, highly our parents. 

Well, this is what I can tell you about my-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember talking to parents, or to maybe your older sisters, about the antisemitism, what it was about, how they understood it? 

SUBJECT: No, because I was very young. And it was not so terrible to talk about in the beginning. It was not so terrible. Then later on, it was. But in the beginning, it wasn't, because my parents lived there many years. They made the business with them. They had also good friends. I don't say no between the non-Jewish people. 

But it was already antisemitism, but we didn't take it so serious. This was our fault. We should have think about it. It was really our fault. And I remember when somebody came to me, my father was very unhappy when he saw non-Jewish. He said, well, I'm sure he's an anti-Semite or she's an anti-Semite because she said this and this word, what I didn't like. 

It was always something against the Jews. Even they didn't talk about, because it was-- we could feel it. We could see it in their faces, something they had against Jews, all. I had a very nice dress on as a girl. She said, well, you can buy a nice dress. I don't have the money. But you have the money. You can buy it. You can afford it. 

Or for instance, I gave away a dress, a nice dress to a girlfriend, a non-Jewish girlfriend. She was my friend. When I didn't give away a dress, she was not my friend anymore. So I have practically-- I had to buy the friendship, all with a dress or with a chocolate or something, or a ticket for the cine. 

It was not the real friendship, what we had. They had their interests to be friendly with us, with me. This was my impression when I was young. 

Well, this is practically my life, my young life in my parents' home. And I am very grateful that they educated me in that way. 

INTERVIEWER: You said your sister, your older sisters, they got married before you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, sure. My father would never allow to give me the permission to get married before my older sister. This was not allowed. But they got married very young. 

The oldest sister, she lives now in Buenos Aires. She went through the hell. She lost her first husband in Auschwitz also. My second sister lives in Israel. She left Germany in 1933 with her husband. And I fled Germany at the end of 1938. And my youngest sister, she was caught in Belgium and sent to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Germany in 1929, 1930-- what was it like before they arrived? To you, what was daily life like? 

SUBJECT: The daily life? Well, the Jewish people, they lived-- 

INTERVIEWER: For you, your own memories. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I was working in the Jewish organization at that time. And I was very happy there. I liked it very much. It was a Jewish life. I had to do something with Jews, something with a Jewish life. 

Even it was only socially. But it wasn't only social, really. Because when somebody had something, two persons, one against the other, we-- our organization, we had the power to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Settle? 

SUBJECT: To settle it, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How was that done? 

SUBJECT: Well, it went to the court. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe an instance where it happened? 

SUBJECT: No, I cannot. I cannot. But like arbitrators. And my husband, he was the one who settled it. At that time, he wasn't my husband. I was the secretary. 

And it went to court. And then it was-- they record-- the court recognized it. 

INTERVIEWER: The German court would recognize it? 

SUBJECT: The German court, they recognized our Urteil. 

INTERVIEWER: Verdict. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was very interesting. So that the Jewish people, not only socially, we had-- and then we had the fundraising for poor people, poor Jewish people for camps, Jewish camps. And so we did a lot for sick people, for old people. This was our obligation to work for them. 

INTERVIEWER: How did things began? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: How did things begin, the first signs? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the year what I told you before-- you know, there was a Putsch. In German, it says a Putsch, a coup. I think it was 1923 when Hitler had his meeting in Munich in the Bier Brauhaus. I saw this Bier Brauhaus a few years ago in Munich. 

And there he met a few men, three or four. It began with three or four men. And he was the founder of the little party, Nazi Party, the Nationalsozialistiche Partei. 

Then he went to prison. They took him to prison to Landshut. There he wrote the book Mein Kampf. You know it. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. And we would like to hear your experience. 

SUBJECT: Ah, my experience. Well, it started in 1933. 

INTERVIEWER: Before that time, you didn't know about Hitler? 

SUBJECT: Before that time, no. It was antisemitic. We know it. But it started really in 1933, the real-- in Spanish, it says acontecimientos. The-- what can I say? What happened? It happened, really, 1933 with a boycott against the Jewish stores, the Jewish department stores. 

And I remember where I lived. There was a Jewish department store. The name was Meier und Gunther, a very big store. And in one day-- I don't remember the date, but it was 1933-- they was standing there, SR men. And they didn't let come in nobody. And when somebody wanted to come in, even non-Jewish people, they didn't let them. 

And we were on the other side looking through the window. We saw all this. I was very young, married. And so it started. And little by little, more and more, we never could think that something like that what happened will happen. 

INTERVIEWER: When you saw this in '33, what went through your mind? 

SUBJECT: We thought-- my husband said, I give him half a year, no more. Then after half a year, he will go. This is what we said, what we thought. But it wasn't so. Hitler made the most impossible thing possible. 

And every time, more and more and more. Once he made the boycott. Then he didn't let, for instance, work-- a non-Jewish maid in a Jewish home. 

INTERVIEWER: We are interested in your-- the way you found out about all this and what you thought. 

SUBJECT: Well, this I saw. I saw with my own eyes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: There were men standing, and they didn't let go in nobody. But nobody. This-- so it started. Then it started also-- non-Jewish girl couldn't go out with a Jewish man. So they took the man, which I saw also, and put them here a sign-- I am Jewish pick, or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe what you saw? 

SUBJECT: This I saw. 

INTERVIEWER: You had friends that this happened to? 

SUBJECT: Not friends, but the people I knew. Yeah. They were not directly friends, but I knew them, because Dortmund was not such a big city. With a sign-- I am a Jew pig, for instance. 

INTERVIEWER: What if they wouldn't wear it? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: What if they didn't-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, they had to. They had to because they were also-- they went together with the SR men. The SR men were on their side. And they had to go through the city with that sign-- not only in our city. In Essen, for instance, there were men. I knew him. Mr. Rosenbeck, I think, was his name. I'm not sure. He had to go through the whole city was the sign. And even the non-Jewish girl, she had to go from time to time also with a sign-- I am a whore. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did people do around them? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. The people were standing, and they didn't do anything. I don't know why. Or they were afraid, or they thought the same. I don't know what happened. Nobody said a word is what happened. 

For instance, they took me personally as a non-Jewish person because I looked Arisch, non-Jewish. My husband looked Jewish. So they thought I am going out with a Jew. And many times, they said to me, you are a Jewish-- you are a whore. They said it to me. 

INTERVIEWER: They? 

SUBJECT: You are a whore. 

INTERVIEWER: Who said it? 

SUBJECT: The SR. I remember one thing. I was engaged, not married yet. I was engaged. And we had a store for men's suits, fabrics. 

INTERVIEWER: Material? 

SUBJECT: Material, yeah, en gros. It was a wholesale. My husband, one day, he went to buy-- at that time, he wasn't my husband. He was my fiance. He went to buy merchandise to another city. 

And while he was away, six SS men came to my store. I never will forget this in my life. And he asked for my husband. Now, my husband, he was very exposed. He was very much working in Jewish organizations. He was the representative in the Jewish community, the whole Jewish community, the German Jews, the German Jewish community. 

Then he was in the Ostjuden Verband. This is for the Eastern Europe Jews. Then he worked in the Jewish welfare organization. He worked in the Jewish berufsberatungstelle. What is it in English? 

INTERVIEWER: Job call center, professional call center. 

SUBJECT: Right. So he worked in many organizations. So six men came in SS uniform. I thought I will faint when I saw the black uniforms with the boots. And he asked for Mr. Preschel. I said, Mr. Preschel is not here. Who is Mr. Preschel to you? Now I was afraid to say he is my fiance. I said, he is my friend. 

So you have a boyfriend? Yes. He's my friend. You know you are a whore? I didn't answer. I was afraid to answer. So they said, all right, we will come back tomorrow. 

I went to the post office-- not from home, to the post office to make a telephone call to my husband not to come back until I call him. He stayed away eight days, and they always came. Is Mr. Preschel back? No. Is Mr. Preschel back? No. 

Then my husband said, I am eight days away. I go home. He came home. And the result was the next day, one of the six men came, and he was-- before I was engaged to my husband, he was my husband's client. So when he saw my husband, he said, oh, Efram, what are you doing? I am looking for you. And like a friend. 

And he proposed my husband to tell them if he knows-- when he knows if somebody is leaving Germany, but somebody with money, to tell them, the Gestapo. My husband said, what/ What do you want me to do? To tell you-- I don't know who is leaving Germany. Because if somebody will leave Germany, he does it in secret. They don't tell me. Well, you must know, because you belong to so many organizations. 

My husband said, Fritz-- his name was Fritz-- you want me to be a spy. I never will do it. I prefer to die. I will never do it. If you are my friend-- how could he be friend in a black uniform? But if you are my friend, you shouldn't come to me-- not to come with this proposition. You can come as a friend, but not with this proposition. 

This I'll never forget, because I was shaking. It was not so easy to have visitors like this. This is one incident I can cannot forget. Another incident-- I was married very young I married in '33. It was '35. It was on a Sunday. 

My husband was sleeping a little bit between 1:00 or 3:00 or so, and I was waiting for a girlfriend. And I didn't want her to knock on the door or something because my husband was sleeping. So I went out, waiting for her to open the door. 

So a man in SR uniform came. He was standing before me. And he said, you whore, you Jewish whore. And I was calling my husband. I was-- but I couldn't anymore. He grabbed me, and he hit me, and I fell, and I broke my arm. The arm is not straight. You know? This happened to me. 

On the other side was a building. This was the police. They were a precinct or something like this. They saw it. But they knew me-- the policemen, they knew me as a child. So one of the men came out of the police. And he said, what happened to you? I said, didn't you see what happened? 

And they took the man inside to the building. A few days later, this policeman came to my husband. He lost his job. They fired him immediately. And he offered my husband cigars, to buy cigars from him. He didn't have a job anymore. This happened to me. 

Another incident-- my husband, he was very exposed, I told you, in the organizations. So they had him-- they didn't forget him. They were always looking at him. 

So one day, they came and took him to the same precinct with other people, with maybe two dozens of people. Under them was the [GERMAN], two [GERMAN]-- the Eastern Europe [GERMAN] and the German Jewish [GERMAN]. And I saw it with my eyes. I saw how they hit them in the back. And I was standing, and he said to me, go inside. If not, we will do with you the same. I couldn't even-- they didn't even let me look. 

So they took my husband to the building, and they put all the people on the wall-- this is what my husband told me-- and the hands on the wall. And they made so as they will shoot them. But they didn't. You know? This is what happened also. 

Then I had a Jewish maid. It was forbidden to have a non-Jewish. First I had a non-Jewish maid. Then I had to let her go because it was forbidden. I took-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did she-- was she sad about that? What was the goodbye to the maid? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: What was the farewell to the maid? The s was working for you, and she had to go. What was it like for her, for you? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing. She left. She didn't say this came from Hitler. And this was right, what he did. So she left. 

So I took another maid, a Jewish maid. I had a little baby. My daughter was born in March, '36. So I forgot what I want to tell because I'm very nervous. 

INTERVIEWER: That maid, you were saying. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I forgot what I have to say. It's difficult for me to live again all this. And then suddenly, this maid, this young girl, got a letter. She was a very poor girl, Jewish. And she got a little bit money from the welfare. She had very poor parents, also. 

And from the welfare, they want-- they sent her to clean windows. And she couldn't do that. So she said, I'm sorry. I can not do it. Why can't you do it? I am suffering with headache. 

So you have headache. Tell me, your father passed away? Yes. With what? What did he have? And she said, he was epileptic. Oh, epileptic. All right. 

So they took her. They sent her a letter first to come to a hospital. They have to make an operation on her to sterilize her. Now I got a letter-- for instance, a few weeks ago, I got a letter from a cousin of hers to describe all this. She needs it for the restitution. 

And my husband went from A to Z, from one to the other, to ask not to do this operation on that girl. She was 18 years old. It didn't help. My husband-- this girl was a Polish citizen. My husband went to the Polish consulate to Essen to tell them what happened. They couldn't do anything. 

And they took her, and it was forbidden for my husband for me to talk about this. We couldn't tell to nobody what happened. This was strictly confidential. And they performed the operation on this girl. 

She cried. The mother cried. It didn't help anything. She had to undergo this operation. Now she lives in New York. And I got a letter from her cousin, because the cousin is working on this, asking me to describe all this to her lawyer in Germany, what happened. Because she doesn't have, until now, the restitution. This also is in my mind. I never can forget it. 

Then one day, my child was 1 and 1/2 years old. I had another Jewish girl before this. And it was, I think, 1 o'clock or 12 o'clock. She wanted to go out with my child to a park. Suddenly, we had a door, a glass door, and I could see three men came up the stores. We had our store on the floor. 

Three men came up the stores. And I recognized them immediately on the head. This must be the Gestapo. My husband was taking a nap. He was sleeping. 

I was afraid to say something. I opened the door. And they came in, and they asked me-- you are Mrs. Preschel? Yes, I am. I opened the door from the store. He said, he want to see merchandise. All right. 

Then my husband came. And they asked me-- and I saw in the mirror-- I let fall-- a glove from the child fell down. So I saw in the mirror that they are looking at me what I am doing. I saw this in the mirror. 

I picked up the glove and put it on my child's hand. And my husband came the same moment. I couldn't tell him, be careful. But I saw it already in the mirror. Something is wrong with that three men. I saw it. 

And they asked me, what is your name? Kathe Kohn. My maiden name is Kohn. Oh, he said. Well, I had a very good friend, Alfredo Kohn. Is this a relative of yours? I said, yes, he's my cousin. 

He said, oh. We were many times together with a beer. We were drinking a beer. He's a very nice man. So I thought to myself, well, it's something good. They wanted to see if we have the merchandise, if we are not going-- if we are not leaving. If we are selling the merchandise for nothing. This is what I felt. And it was true. 

So they asked me how much this cost and how much this cost, and I told them the real price. That means not the price to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Liquidate. 

SUBJECT: To liquidate, yes. And then he said-- he asked me and asked me-- not my husband. He asked me. And I answered what I could. Well, they left. 

A few days later, two other men came. First, they wanted my husband to open the Eisenkasse, the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Safe. 

SUBJECT: The safe. My husband at that time, before he left, he was a member of the Democratic Party. Now, the safe had inside another little safe. But my husband didn't have the key. He lost the key. And my husband was afraid that this document from the Democratic Party is inside. He was afraid of this. 

And they called a technician to open this safe. Can you imagine what went through me and my husband? We were so afraid because-- nobody can understand it when he didn't live then. So finally, they opened the safe. Nothing was there. 

But they wanted to know and to know and to know. And first-- and I prepared already a few drinks, because I knew that many people they did it. So I did the same. I prepared, in a little drawer, a few drinks. So one of the two men left, and the other stayed. 

So I said to him-- and I said to my husband, please let me talk. Don't talk. Me, as a woman, it's not so-- maybe not so dangerous. And I said, please take a seat. May I invite you for a drink? He said, yes. And I gave you another drink and another drink. 

And he started to tell us stories about Goring and his child. Look, he said. They are taking away from the Jewish people money to buy a golden little bat for Goring's child. These two men, they came-- every Jewish businessman had to-- they had to give to every Jewish businessman to pay money to-- they said you have done this wrong. You have done this wrong, something. Never did wrong something. But they have-- we had to give them money. 

So he said to us, well, you have to pay. I don't remember the amount. If it was 20,000 mark or 50,000 mark, I don't remember, but a lot of money. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER: This would be, in dollars, what? 

SUBJECT: No, in mark. 

INTERVIEWER: But what would it be in dollars? 

SUBJECT: Oh, in dollars at that time-- $20,000-- $10,000-- 20,000 mark, $10,000, approximately. So I said to myself, well, he's sitting here. He's telling stories about his Mr. Goring. I try. And I said to him, look. And he said to me, and I cannot even afford to go on vacation. 

And they buy for his child a golden little bat. I said, look, Mr.-- I don't remember his name. I have it in my papers written. Would you allow me to pay your vacation? It was very dangerous to say that. But nobody was there. He was alone. 

Ah, he said. How can you tell this? I said, forget it. I want to invite you to take your vacation. Please do me the favor and allow this. And he did. And he did. 

So we had another friend. He was more friend to him that we were. I gave the other friend-- also a Jewish man-- 150 marks. I'll never forget it. And this other friend gave him the 150 marks so that we came out without penalty. You know? This is also an incident very interesting. 

But my husband, he-- 

INTERVIEWER: How frightened were you? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: How frightened were you? 

SUBJECT: Very frightened. We were very frightened. And what I did-- I think a second time, I couldn't do it. For instance, when this happened, they came always, and we knew they want to ruin us. And I knew they are looking for my husband. They are looking for something to take him, but he didn't have-- 

INTERVIEWER: Evidence. 

SUBJECT: Yes, evidence. So I knew we have to leave Germany. We didn't know when, because nobody was talking about gas chambers at that time. How could we think about gas chambers? And we had a good business in that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know people who had been killed or disappeared or anything yet? Had that happened yet? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, yes. There disappeared many people. Until now, I don't know where and when and so-- 

INTERVIEWER: Friends of yours would-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: Friends of yours? 

SUBJECT: No, not directly friends. But I know people. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were getting very scared? 

SUBJECT: Sure. Sure. Our whole life was with fear, our whole life. So one day, we had Polish passports. And we had to go every year or-- every year, I think-- to make it valid for another year. So my husband didn't go out anymore on the street because he looked Jewish. So I went. 

And as I worked in the Ostjuden Verband, Ostjudische organization so that I knew all these people from the police and from the-- who had to re-validate my passport. So I went to him. It was in high position. Mr. Wolff was his name. And he said to me, Mrs. Preschel, give your husband my best regards. Tell him to leave Germany at once. 

First, he went to the door and opened the door if somebody is standing there outside. Then he came in and talked to me. He said, give my husband my best regards, and tell him to leave at once Germany. Something will happen. 

This was a few days before October 25, I think, when they sent away all the Eastern Europe Jews to Zbaszyn. This was nobody's land between Germany and Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: October 25, what year? 

SUBJECT: '38. We didn't-- I didn't understand what will happen. So I said, Mr. Wolff, what can happen? It cannot be worse. It's worse enough. It can not be worse. Mrs. Preschel, please leave Germany. This he said to me because he knew us. He knew my husband very well, and he knew me. 

I went home, and I told this to my husband. And I don't know how-- we didn't believe everything, but this we believed. And so I said to my husband, we have to do something. We have to leave Germany. We couldn't leave before because there was many things that we couldn't. 

My mother-in-law was alive. She was very, very sick. We couldn't leave her alone. So we had many things that we couldn't go before. But now it was really dangerous to stay more time in Germany. So I said to my husband, now we have to do-- we have to take this serious. 

I heard that the police in Mannheim, another city far away from Dortmund, there are a few policemen-- for money, they give the stamp in the passport and everything you need to go out to Germany and to come back to Germany. Because I couldn't say, I go out from-- I leave Germany. I had to say I leave Germany for a few weeks, and I come back. 

So I went to Mannheim with another friend from childhood, a boyfriend. We two, we went. And we slept on the floor in a Jewish apartment from-- it was an old man. He gave us to sleep there. We went there a few days until we met the policeman. Because every day, when we went to him, he was drunk. 

So one day, we met him not drunk. And so he gave us the stamp in the passport. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you begin talking to him and telling him about the deal? 

SUBJECT: Well, he already to other people the same, and we knew it. We knew that with him, we can talk. 

INTERVIEWER: So what did you say to him? 

SUBJECT: We want this and this. We want the stamp in our passport. And so he gave us the stamp and the little stamps, also. I have the passport until now, I think. The little stamps, he put it in the passport. What I had to-- and we gave him a lot of money. 

INTERVIEWER: How much did you pay him? 

SUBJECT: $1,000, one passport. And we had two, so $2,000. And I paid for the other boy, for the other young man, also $1,000, because he told to me this. Through him it was. 

So now I had all this in my passport. But how could I go home with a passport in my pocket? This was very dangerous. They could make assault in the station, or they could-- something could happen, and they could find the passports with the false stamp. 

But we were lucky. We came home. And I was sitting and writing out with my hand this stamp. I took-- I don't know, any date-- and I wrote it in. And I was looking for an ink who looked a little bit older, not very new, something like that. And I put it in the passport. I wrote it in the passport. 

And with this stamp, I went with another person to Dusseldorf to the French consulate. Because the French consulate gave us the visa only when we had the stamp. The stamp said we are allowed to-- we go out from Germany and come back to Germany. 

Only with a stamp to come back, he gave us the visa to France. Because it was a visa to visit family, not to stay there. So finally, I got the visa to France. It was not so easy. And I came home with all this. This was the-- it was, I think, October 25th. 

We went to Paris. But don't ask me how I was faking. I was horrified with something false in your pocket. We took one little suitcase for my husband and me and one little suitcase for my child. First, we went to my parents to say goodbye, and to my sisters. We didn't know that something-- what will happen. We didn't know. 

And we went like nothing with a little baby, with the baby car to the station. And we were sitting there, and my baby was lying on the-- she was two years old, I think. And suddenly, near the frontier, I heard it already outside-- the boots, the boots, the boots. One, two, one, two. And they came in. 

And I asked also my husband-- please, let me talk. Because you know. In case-- when you are in danger, a man cannot lie. A woman can-- does it a little bit better. And my husband couldn't lie at all. 

And he came in, and he said, where are you going? To Paris. Forever? No. For a visit. How long time you want to stay there? Well, three or four weeks. What are you doing in Paris? We want to visit family. 

So you are coming back to Germany? Yes, we are coming back to Germany. Do you have something new? No, we don't. Do you have cigarettes? Yes, I said, we have three boxes of cigarettes. But it's only allowed two boxes for each one, one box. I didn't smoke at that time. At that time, no. 

So he said, he's only allowed two boxes. But I took-- I knew it is not allowed three boxes, but I took it. I wanted to give them the opportunity to find a little thing, not to go further. So I said, all right. If it's not allowed, I go to the office and give the one box back. He said, no. Keep it. How much money do you have? 

I said, 30 marks. But you know it's only allowed each one 10 marks, 20 marks. So I said, well, for my baby, I thought I can have also for her 10 marks. He said, no, it's not allowed, but keep it. We kept it. 

I opened the suitcase, and he found a smock, an old smock. But it was very nice, like new. He said, this is new. I said, I'm sorry, this is not new. It is already used. So he believed it. And he took the passport. And he took the passport. 

And I tell you, I felt one cheek was hot, and the other cheek was cold. And I said-- I was sitting this. I didn't say a word. He was looking at the passport. And once in a life, you must have mazel. And this was our mazel, our luck. 

He didn't see that the passport was-- was given to me in Essen, because the Polish consulate was in Essen in that time. The visa, the stamp, was given to me in Mannheim, and the French visa in Dusseldorf. And I lived in Dortmund. This he didn't see. And this was my mazel. 

Can you believe-- can you think what would have happened to me when they would have seen it? So I don't know how I went through this. I really don't know until now. Then-- yeah, when he came, I said to my husband to give me a cigarette. This was the moment when I started to smoke. And I smoked 150 cigarettes a day. Now I don't smoke anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your husband doing when this was going? 

SUBJECT: My husband was smoking. 

INTERVIEWER: He was just sitting there? 

SUBJECT: Smoking and smoking. I don't know what he thought about my husband. But I was afraid when he would open his mouth, everything would come out. So I thought to myself, better they take him as a sick person. Better that way. But then I slept-- when this happened, they left, I slept 24 hours. 

We came to Paris. And we had friends there. We went to the same hotel. 

INTERVIEWER: Can we back up for a second? When you left your parents, you didn't think that they were in danger at the time? 

SUBJECT: We didn't think nothing. We didn't think that something will happen. We knew something is going on, but we didn't think-- we didn't know what. We thought-- because my husband, he's in so many organizations, they always came to him, ask him questions. And so they think only my husband, something will happen to my husband. But we didn't think that something will happen to all the Jewish people. 

And then how could I-- let me say if I would have known, how could I take my parents, my sisters? I didn't know my destiny. So I thought when I come to Paris, then I will take my parents through the same way, and my sisters. But it was late. 

We left October 25th. October 28th, we were already in Paris. We read the newspaper in the morning. And we read all the Eastern Europe Jewish people were sent to Zbaszyn, to the nobody's land. 

INTERVIEWER: No man's land. 

SUBJECT: No man's land. No man's land. 

I went to the post office in Paris, and I made a telephone call-- not to my parents. My parents didn't have a telephone. So I called to the landlord. The landlord was half Jewish, but he lived as a non-Jew. Nobody knew that he was a half Jew. We knew it, but nobody knew. 

So I called his daughter to come to the telephone. How was it? Yeah. No, I called her, and she went to the telephone. And in that time, my mother had a broken leg. This is why they couldn't send her away, my mother. She was lying in bed. And one of my brothers-in-law, he could hide himself, and they didn't send him away, either. 

And the other brother-in-law, he fled the same minute to Belgium. Because in other cities, they sent away only the men, not the women. But in our city, they sent away the men and the women. So the men, they were in a hiding place. And my sister-- my sisters, they were-- they sent them away with my father. My mother was in bed. 

So the girl from the landlord said to me, Kathe, don't cry. Your mother is-- they didn't send her away because of her leg. But she is lying in bed, and she's crying. 

I can't. I can not talk. But don't be afraid. Nothing will happen to her. 

Then came the Crystal Night. I was in Paris. And I heard that my mother and the one brother-in-law-- he came, and he took my mother on his shoulders, and went upstairs to the last floor, to the-- it wasn't the floor. It was where the depositors-- where they put things in-- 

INTERVIEWER: The magazine store? 

SUBJECT: Where the roof is. 

INTERVIEWER: Attic? 

SUBJECT: To the roof. And now I don't think it's necessary to talk about-- you know what happened in the Crystal Night. They threw down on the street, to the street, the people from the roofs, from the floors, from everything. 

My mother, she was-- she was on the roof, under the roof. Yes. The landlord, he gave her the keys to go. And I couldn't do anything for my parents anymore. 

My father was sent to Belsen with my sisters, with my two sisters. And then my mother had to leave Germany. They forced her to leave. And she went to Belsen to take out my father. And it was allowed only to go where my father was born, in Gorlitz. My father was born in Gorlitz. 

So they went to Gorlitz. After so many years living in Germany, my mother was not used to this life in Gorlitz, in a little town-- without money, without anything. And there, they stayed until they came to the ghetto in Gorlitz. 

I was already in Bolivia. In Paris, we bought the visa to Bolivia, also with a lot of money. 

INTERVIEWER: You tried to get into the United States? 

SUBJECT: We couldn't get the visa. I went before in Germany to the consulate, to the United States consulate. He said, you have to wait at least 10 years. I couldn't get the visa. 

So I went-- in Germany, I went to Hamburg. And I went there with another girlfriend from one consulate to the other, even to Honduras. I don't know where. We couldn't get the visa. No visa. 

Then when we've been-- I was in Hamburg one night. I couldn't get a hotel, a room in a hotel. Always was written here a sign-- not allowed for Jews. So we didn't know where to sleep. 

Finally, we found a hospice. You know what it is a hospice? It's like a-- it's not a hotel, from the religious people. 

INTERVIEWER: Hold on for a minute while we change the tape. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 