CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. You'll begin by telling us your name, and just start talking. When we have a question, we'll ask it. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: OK. My name is Dr. Siegfried J. Craw. I was born on September 13, 1930 in the city of Gdansk, formerly called the Free State of Danzig, or the Freie Stadt Danzig. 

Danzig was a very unique place in the history of Jews. It had a population of almost 10,000 Jews, dating back to approximately to the 12th century, when the city was populated by migrant Lithuanian Jews. And the Jews in Danzig had a long traditional history of strict conservatism coupled with devotion. 

And some of the most beautiful synagogues and Torahs dating back from that time were contained within the city. And Danzig was forever being transferred back and forth through the various generations, from the Hanseatic hands, Germans, Polish, and finally, unfortunately, in present Russian hands. 

I was born in this magnificent, beautiful, ancient city, an area called Langfuhr. Langfuhr was the area where the Hanseatic prince lived. We had a huge estate of approximately 14 to 18 rooms facing Steffenspark. I had a mother and a father, and a brother. Each of us, my brother and I, had a fraulein kinder, which was a maid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you older-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We had a cook-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --or younger? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: That's an older brother who is four years older than I am. We were raised in a complete luxury. My brother had his own maid. I had my own maid. We had a full-time cook, and butlers. And two chauffeurs, three Duesenberg cars. 

My father's business was coal, and the name of his company was called Baltic Coaling. His, uh, the business was from several generations. 

Uh, primarily, Danzig had two-- had a continual influx of Polish Jews from Warsaw, especially in the 1920s, when the Russians were about to invade Warsaw. So many of the Polish Jews had hoped to come to the United States, and they stopped off in a, at Gdan-- at Danzig, by HIAS, before being shipped to the United States. And many of them, however, stayed in Danzig. 

So Danzig really had two types of Jews. There was the Polish Jews, the early migrated Jews, and the old Hanseatic Jews. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'd like to ask you, before-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you continue with the Jewish story, about your own life, your interaction with the non-Jewish community. If your father was this wealthy, had this big coal company, what was your exposure to the non-Jews? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, the-- my earliest recollection was that, uh, the, Danzig was really pretty much unaffected by the Nazis until pretty late in the game, until around 1936, when the Nazification of Danzig was complete. Prior to that time, the Jews lived in pretty good harmony with the Danzigers. 

There was, of course, they had their synagogues. There was no programs. When the programs we're beginning in Berlin in '32, they weren't quite beginning. Rallies were starting in Danzig around '33 and '34, but things went along rather well. There was sort of-- like how Frau Echt-- E-C-H-T-- had once said, who was a famous-- and she's still alive-- once said that there was a acceptable discrimination. We lived in harmony. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you go to non-Jewish schools? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, I was too young. But I had, we had most of our schooling at home. We had a rabbi come to our house who would give us instructions. Uh, this, I did start school. And it-- but when the Nazification was started, the first thing that happened in Nazi was that the schools were taken over by the Nazis, and the Jewish children were no longer allowed to attend the schools. 

So, therefore, there were private schools formed by people like Rosenbaum and Echt, E-C-H-T. And private Jewish schools were in operation. Some of us had to go to school at night. It was no longer possible to go to school during the day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That would be since when? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: It started probably in 1937, '38. '37, '38. The, uh, the earliest signs that, specifically of my relationship with Nazism, really came when I was very sick once, and I had to go to Berlin to a, to see a doctor, a very famous surgeon called Sauerbruch. 

And, in Berlin, we stayed at the Kaiserhof Hotel. At that time. the Kaiserhof Hotel, unfortunately, was also the place where Adolph Hitler had his headquarters. It was convenient at the time. So I did see Hitler at that time for the first time, and had even, was in the parade standing next to him and, unfortunately, shook hands with him, which, as he was going by. 

We left Danzig-- after I was in the hospital for about three weeks, I left Berlin and returned to Danzig. This must have been when I was, um, three or four years old. I remember it distinctly. It's just one of those things you don't forget. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why would he be shaking hands with a-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --Jewish child? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, they didn't know who was Jewish. That was early, in the early along the time, when Hitler was just coming into power, when he was still, uh, where it's before the election when he was campaigning. And it was way, way before that time, and he was-- everybody was interested in seeing him, and crowds by the dozens. 

But the next episodes where I had, where I came in contact with the Nazis, the most unpleasant ones, was when the Brownshirts began to get organized Nazi. Uh, these were your Hitler Youths. 

And we had a summer home in a place called Gdynia, which is a beautiful resort 20 minutes outside of Danzig. One of the most beautiful places in Europe, which had the longest boardwalks in the world, and one of the most luxurious casinos. And it also had a beautiful open orchestra. And Kurt Furtwangler would come and give concerts. 

And I remember this distinctly, because during one of the concerts, Kurt von, Kurt von Furtwangler was giving a concert, a Siegfried opera. And we were at the opera, and we had excellent seats outside. And the Brownshirts began to cause a riot, throwing bottles at the audience, and causing disturbances, because at that time there was a faction trying to unify Danzig with Germany. 

Hitler wanted Danzig. He felt that Danzig belonged to Germany. The Danzigers had divided, the peons. There were some who wanted to remain Danzigers, and others who wanted to unify with Hitler. So the Brownshirts were instigating this unification with Danzig. So this was really the first time that I had seen any violence. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: At that time, I must have been already, I was six, I guess, it was beginning. Five, six, somewhere along that line. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your parents say when-- what did your father say to you, your mother say to you when you experienced bottle throwing in the midst of a concert? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We were well-- well, we thought these were just another political kind of rallies. We weren't-- we really didn't believe that there was a direct confrontation yet. We, the Jews living in Europe were used to being discriminated for hundreds, for thousands of years, and hundreds of years. 

And when this new wave of anti-Semitism came on, it wasn't really new because the Poles had been doing it for such a glorious way for years during the '20s and early '30s. So it wasn't really, it wasn't yet that obvious. 

And the Jews in Danzig were very secure, at least the German Jews, extremely secure. They ran the businesses. They were doing as-- my father owned a football field, et cetera, et cetera. And there was a lot of security, and there was a lot of working together. Uh, but then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Working together with who? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, the businessmen worked together with the non-Jews. There was a tremendous working together. Uh, the, there were Jewish sections which were frequented only by the Jews, and the freuden market, and so on. But businesses downtown were really functioning very well. 

Danzig was primarily a enormous shipping industry, and transport of corn, and wood, and coal. So there was a lot of-- the bank, for example, of Duesenberg, the German branch was run by our friend Ansbach, and he was a Jew. They kept him on, right on, even when Nazification was completed, and then they finally made him retire. 

Danzig was unique that we had a newspaper called the Judenblatter, which was, at first, a sort of the voice of the Jews. And the Nazis let the Judenblatter newspaper being printed right up to 1939. It is amazing. It was an outcry of the Jews asking for help. 

They would list the boats, where to leave, how to escape, who was arrested, was all in the news, and yet the Nazis let this newspaper continue to print. A lot of these document-- or a lot of these things I'm telling you, it can be found in the Leon Baeck Institute, with the actual newspapers. A lot of the information I'm telling you is from my own recollections, from my father's papers, from the Leon Baeck Institute, and from my own various historical research on it. 

The children, the schools, the biggest problem, the dangers, that we encountered as time went on, when after, as these things became quite obvious that the Jews were going to have to leave, was that you could not walk on the streets. All walking on the streets was always dangerous because of the Brownshirts. The kids would invariably attack us and would beat us up. 

We had been well protected. We had several German shepherds. So I would walk with my fraulein and the German shepherd and they wouldn't usually bother us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was the fraulein Jewish? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. No. This is where-- no, she wasn't. This was interesting, that you'd bring that up. Both frauleins weren't Jewish. Uh, they, uh-- but we felt that then, walking on the streets. We felt that on the beaches and in our beautiful home in Gdynia and Sopot, to be more specifically. We would go on the beaches and the German youth would be there too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said Brownshirts. Were the Brownshirts youth? Or were they soldiers? Or who were the Brown-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, these were children, the German youth. These were the Hitler Youth, the young children from the ages of maybe my age, five at that time, to 16. And they wore brown uniforms, and belts, and knives. And they were very, they were organized to terrorize the non-Nazi party members. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They were sort of a German equivalent or Hitler's equivalent of Boy Scouts, weren't they? I think that's what-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, they were considered Boy Scouts. I would say that's quite right. They were, it was an honor to become a member, and so on. They, they were the biggest problem, as far as I was concerned in my own personal life. 

They were responsible for beatings. They were responsible for the burning of the shops when things got hotter in 1937 and 1938. They org-- they were responsible for the burning of the synagogues. They were responsible for any of the terrorism that went on. They were young, young children mostly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there a difference between the Hitler Youth and the Brownshirts, or is it one and the same? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: They're the same. The Brown-- the Hitler Youth were the Brownshirts. They were-- I may be wrong now, but I, I think they were the same. I think that's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: To me they were the same. They, uh-- but we were well guarded. My father took care of that. He had, uh, he had plenty of help. And we had lots of friends who were non-German, who were non-Jewish Germans, who were sympathetic, who weren't with the Nazis, but who were sympathetic to the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they show their sympathy? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, they tried to, uh, to help us out, and protect us, and warn us. They would tell us of arrests which we're going on. You see, the Jews numbered 10,000, but they began to leave by '36 and '37. And those who didn't leave, some were deported, arrested. Uh, where they went at that time were, were, some of them went to work camps, labor camps, the majority of them. 

And one of the labor camps that they went to, where one of my nephew, one of my cousins went to, was to Peenemunde. Now, this was near the island of Usedom, which is about approximately 300 miles outside of Danzig. The labor force was used to, to, uh, build the factories for the V-2 under the care of Dr. Dornberger. Usedom, or Peenemunde, as you know, is the place where Karl von Braun supervised the V-2 rockets. 

Some of the labor force has-- a lot of the Danzigers, you see, had disappeared progressively. Nobody knew what happened to 'em. A lot of them were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did it affect your family? With no knowledge that these people disappeared? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, my father had anticipated everything, and we had hoped to leave. Uh, we urged our friends to leave. We told 'em we better get out while we can. A lot of them couldn't get out because they couldn't get the visas. That was their biggest problem. 

One of member of our family that did leave, my cousin, she went to Trinidad. And she's the only one that survived. She's now living in San Diego. She left. She got married and left. Her brother, my cousin-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sieg, may I go back? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You lived in a big house. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Um-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had a lot of servants. Most of them, and probably all of them, were not Jewish. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was like having, you know, people inside your home who could, you know, be a, a threat-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: They were very loyal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were loyal. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Very loyal. We thought they were very loyal. Uh, we had planned to escape, literally escape, to leave. The problem was that, number one, we couldn't take any money with you, because there was a continuously strict control on all Jewish funds. 

For example, all Jewish businessmen had to pay 80% tax, uh, on all their earnings. There was a continual inspection of books, uh, continual control of the Jewish businessmen. He couldn't take out any money. It was impossible, practically. Transference of money was impossible. 

However, my father had anticipated some, something would happen. So, uh, we, uh, we had planned to eventually escape, uh, either go to Switzerland or England, uh, possibly the United States. And I had, we had a, a very well-to-do cousin by the name of Irving Geist-- who just recently died-- uh, provide us with necessary visas in case we had to leave. 

Uh, we had to leave, uh, prematurely, and I thank the Lord, uh, because my father had, uh, uh, accidentally killed a Nazi. And, uh, uh, it was an accident. And we were-- it was during the summer, on his way to visit, to see us in Sopot. 

So we, uh, were arrested, but somehow, I don't know, we managed to get, to get free. And we were able to escape by boat to Southampton. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How, how did your father kill a Nazi? How did he happen to do it? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Oh, I don't know or remember the details of that. I think it was an automobile accident or something. And, of course, being Jewish, that would have been absolutely the end of us. There wouldn't have been a chance to survive it. 

As a matter of fact, the Gestapo headquarters in Danzig was across from the central synagogue, which was ironical, which was the oldest synagogue in Danzig, and which has just been recently restored. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you then? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Then I was about seven, I guess. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you don't remember the details? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I remember the details, some of them. I, we were, we were, we knew that we were going to be leaving. And, and, unfortunately, one of the, Ana, one of our frauleins, let the Germans know about it. 

Uh, so, uh, we were going by train, and my father was going by, by car to-- we were going to go to Danzig and take the boat from Gdynia, from Sopot, and then go around, and to England. So we were arrested on the way, on the train. Uh, it's about a 20-minute ride. 

I'll never forget that part, because I remember the Nazis coming on. In those days, you, you were always asked to show your papers. Where are you going? We're going to, to our home for the summer. Uh, just a minute. We have to check your taxes. 

This is the way they controlled you completely, to see that your taxes were paid. And they would check it back with the central office. And anyway. But I guess with enough money and enough payoffs, I suppose that's how we got out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was that? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: This was 1938. An then 1939, September 1, of course the war had started. The rest of my family didn't, didn't get out. Uh, they didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who's they? Your mother and father? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah, my father, my mother and father, but our, my uncles, uh, uh, aunts, the old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father had this thing that he was responsible, or at least they said he was responsible, for the death of a Nazi. He must have come home and told you something. I mean, he must have explained, because you were in terrible trouble, and-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We were in big trouble. We had, uh-- he said that, that he had an accident, a car accident, and was arrested. And he told us about it, and that we had better leave very quickly. Which we did. We left the next day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's go back and talk about the frauleins-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --who eventually did-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, that's right. They told. You see, we, we didn't-- we left. What we did, we left with, with, uh, one suitcase. We left a magnificent home, uh, with, uh-- and we had some money, which my mother sewed into our underwear, uh, as well. And each one of us had the money sewed into our underclothes. 

And that's it. Because we were just going on a vacation. Where are you going? We're going on a vacation. I had a-- my German shepherd that I loved so much-- his name was Astor-- sensed somehow that we're leaving. That was a strange thing. 

He, he was, uh-- I mentioned his name because he was one of the reasons we felt so comfortable. He was very protective of my brother and I. And he sensed that we were leaving, and three or four days before, he moaned and groaned around. And, of course, that was probably the saddest moment for me was, as we walked out of the house with a, with a little tiny suitcase, and, uh, and I kissed goodbye to the German shepherd. 

And my father said, take a good look at this house because you probably will never see it again. So I ran through the house again. And we had a huge house. We had a library, which housed some awfully wonderful great books. Which was, uh, scholars from the University of Danzig used to come to, just to see some of our collected books that my father had through the years. 

It was one of my favorite rooms, with-- we had big Flemish tapestries covering the windows in order to, to protect the books. So that was one of the places I ran to. And one of the things I grabbed from the desk, which I should have brought with me, uh, it was a little statue with our crest, called Baltic Coaling, which was my father's company. And I grabbed that, and that was the only thing that we took out of Danzig. And that's about all I can tell you-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, you-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: --and I have time for. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you said that the non-Jewish people helped you. I'd like to ask-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: They did help us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, they, they promised to take care of-- for example, we confided in them and told 'em we're going to leave. And they said they would help to-- as a matter of fact, they, they-- one of my prized possession, my mother's prized possessions, were, was the silver. And, uh, and, uh, uh, her Persian rugs. And they promised to take care of the dog, and take care of everything. 

And, uh, and one guy, who was I think a German captain-- I'm not even sure now-- sent us some of the Persian rugs, amazing it may sound. After we came to the United States, the Persian rugs came six to eight months later. They were magnificent things. 

Uh, they had a sorry fate, unfortunately. Uh, we picked them up at the pier and had no place to put them because they were so big. So we put them in storage. And, uh, there was a fire and they all burned, which is kind of ironic. 

It's the same kind of irony that happened to the Torahs. In 1938, the Jews, the Danziger Jews, decided they'd better get, 1937, better get the precious Torahs out. Uh, from hundreds of years, 500, 700-year-old Torahs. So they sent them out by ways I still don't know. But they got them out and they sent them to the Jewish seminary, uh, Theological Seminary in New York. 

And they made an agreement with the United States-- uh, Rabbi Weiss, I guess-- that if the Jewish community is not established in 35 years, the Torahs become the property of the United States Jewish community. And the irony of it, they were supposed to be moved to the Jewish Museum, but they had a fire there, and many of the Torahs were destroyed-- I don't exactly how many-- which is ironical. 

So I, I remember, and the reason I'm mentioning this is because that's what happened to our rugs. Not that you can compare a rug, Persian rugs, precious Persian rugs to precious Torahs. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How, how were-- why did your father retain these frauleins and these other-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --people, when they were such jeopardy to you and your family with having those-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: But they were loyal people. They were loyal. They were actually loyal. They was, uh, as employees, were loyal to him. 

Uh, they, uh, uh, they were loyal. I mean, for example, the, uh, they, they weren't all against us. And they, uh-- we knew we were going to leave. We knew we had to leave. 

In 1938, at the time that we left, there was only 2,000 Jews left, uh, from the 10,000. Most of the Jews who, who, who remained were the ones, one, they couldn't afford to leave. They were old. They were, uh, uh, poor. You know, there were plenty of poor, poor Polish Jews, living in Danzig. Plenty of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why hadn't you left earlier, beside the fact that you couldn't take care of your resource? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: It's a question that I, uh, I am confused up to this date. Uh, my father has died. My mother's dead. Uh, I have no one to re-- this is a question I asked, why he didn't leave. He could have gotten out gracefully in '34, '35, '36. And maybe not '36, but '35 he could have gotten out gracefully. 

I suppose it would be almost, uh, the realism of leaving, uh, something that you have that is so huge, it's hard to imagine. Most of the Jews, uh, didn't leave. It's very hard to just pick yourself up and leave, pick yourself up literally. That's about what it is. Uh, you know. 

Unless-- he had planned it. He had, he had planned it to some extent. He had money put away. He had tickets for the Queen Mary. Uh, it was the last-- I think it was the last trip. I'm not sure. 

He had a lot of anticipation, and he told everybody to leave. But we thought he would-- you know, we thought-- frankly, that was always in back of our minds that, uh, that America would never allow anything to happen to, to the Jews. There were thoughts like that, that the United States wouldn't let anything happen. 

Uh, we didn't think that, uh, invasion would occur. Uh, it was suspected. Uh, there was a lot of faith in the United States at that time. I don't know what, what you felt there, but there was-- we, we felt, I-- as I recall, there was, there was some feeling that hope, there was hope around the corner. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your brother, is he still alive? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, he's a lawyer in New York, um-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you ever discuss this with him? He was older four years. He must have had other memories. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, we haven't discussed it, no. Not now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No? How come? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We don't talk about it. We, you know, we don't really. We talked a lot about it when my father died a few years ago. Uh, we talked a great deal about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did he tell you? What were his memories? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we talked about how we used to, uh, hide in the big house, and play games. And, uh, we would be, uh-- the biggest one of the memories. Right before we left, we, we heard that we were going to the United States. And, of course, the, we were very excited about it. 

Uh, we were getting English lessons secretly at home, and we had an English teacher come to us. And, uh, we used to sit on the-- Danzig had beautiful balconies, the most beautiful balconies in the world, the famous balconies of the estates. They were adorned by magnificent, uh, frescoes and lionheads. And especially from the, uh, medieval kind of homes that were surrounded with parks and estates. It's incredibly beautiful 

So we would sit on the balcony, surrounded by these icons and, uh, adorned with these friezes, and the English professor would talk to us and try to teach us English. And on the first word he taught was OK. You have to learn OK. So when we would, uh, go around the house yelling OK, OK, OK. 

Uh, and, uh, we, at that time, we were thinking that when we come to New York, it's going to be covered with gold. The streets are covered with gold, covered with silver. And we had images of gold and silver being covered on the streets. We had a lot of-- really had no idea what the United States of America would be about. I had not the foggiest idea. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are your first memories of, of this country? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Of this country? Oh, that's an awful long story. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: That's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --some of it. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: That's brutal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, you're-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: That's brutal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, your impressions as you-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: The-- well, the, uh-- I'd like to really talk about, uh, a little bit back to the Holocaust. Uh, you know, the, back-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I would like to ask you one more-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --question, going back-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah, I like to really talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And this is the fraulein. You kept saying that people were so loyal, and the, and yet one of your frauleins-- was it your or your brother's-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I don't know. We don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, betrayed you. How did it feel? Do you remember anything about that? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I can't remember that. All I know is that we took, we took off awfully fast. Uh, we really didn't talk much about these things, uh, afterwards. Uh, uh, I, uh, I-- you know, it was, it's just one of these things that you just wanted to get rid of, I suppose, not discuss it. 

The, uh-- you were talking about the Hitler Youth, and I want to just tell you one very interesting thing. From my balcony, we, I had a play room which was as big as my house now. Literally. It was just a huge playroom. 

We, because we had, we used to have these little cars. But they used to call 'em little Duesenbergs. We had the big Duesenbergs, and these was the little Duesenbergs. You could go from one end to the other. And we had a huge, you know, with big sliding doors. 

So I had a beautiful balcony, which was, uh-- and, and I would sit on this balcony, and you could see Steffenspark, which was just a beautiful park, adorned with the most beautiful flowers. But my first exposure to the Brownshirts-- this is what I wanted to tell you-- was to see them marching from my balcony. 

And I would see them, uh, marching and, uh, with their brown uniforms with the Nazi flags, you know, and with the heil Hitler. And I must've been awfully young, because I liked the idea, and I began to imitate 'em. 

And I'll never forget how I got a little drum and I began to beat it when they were, you know, and my trying. And, and got myself a brown shirt, and got myself a belt, and put on my boots. And I couldn't wait till they would come because it was exciting to see this. And, uh, and I would, uh, go through the house, until one day my father caught me, and grabbed me by the neck and almost broke me in half. 

And he says, you don't know what you're doing. He says, that was the Nazis out there. And he said, they're, you know. And I said, oh, I'm sorry. I said I didn't, you know, I didn't understand. I didn't know it. There was really no understanding that they were against me until, uh, this was brought out and explained to me. 

But that was my first exposure. I must have been about three years old then and something. I don't remember. But I remember imitating 'em, and I used to imitate, uh, them and say heil Hitler, and, uh, it was very, very-- it was amusing at the time. Until my parents whacked it out of me, and never permitted me to do that again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said you were beaten up by Brownshirts. Do you remember-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We were beaten up, yeah, a couple of times. When it was, it was, uh-- we went-- I don't remember now whether I was going to the Bar Kochba or the Makkabis, because the Jews of Danzig belonged to these Jewish clubs, athletic clubs. And we-- they let us go to these things. This was not stopped in any way. 

Or was I going to school? I just can't remember. But I know, coming home one day, I would-- and we had the German shepherd always would accompany. And I was stopped, and I was launched upon and really beat up. But, and the German shepherd, uh, uh, nearly killed one of the kids. 

And, uh, my father-- we had a lot of trouble 'cause they wanted to put the dog away, because the Nazis came, you know, complaining that the dog had bitten brutally one of the German boys and you have to get rid of him. But, uh, with money, you know, somehow you take care of everything. But I remember that was bad. I was really, I was all bloody nosed and faced. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was the fraulein? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, the fraulein was home because it was a short walk. I recall it wasn't a very long walk. It was like going from, uh, from this part of Church Street to, uh, to Macy's. It was a very short straight walk, so. And the dog went with me, I recall, that one time. 

My mother was hurt many times on the street. They used to throw pepper in the women's faces. All the German youth would do this. They did this in Warsaw to her when she went to visit her family. Uh, was it in Warsaw? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before the war in Warsaw? Throw pepper? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Was it in Warsaw? No, I guess in Danzig. I'm confused. I'm sorry. In Danzig. 

She would, uh, she-- there were several times that she came home. Once, she came home after they threw pepper in her eyes. They would forever, would molest the Jewish people walking on the streets. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they know she was Jewish? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I don't know. I don't know. We didn't wear bands or anything like that. We didn't have any, you know. This was '37 or '38. I don't know. 

Because, I guess, it was the Jewish section. That's the only thing I can say. 'Cause Langfhur was the-- could be that was the-- I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you remember these children, these Brownshirts, roaming all around? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, they were roaming like, literally, like wild dogs. You would see them everywhere. All over the place. They would usually be accompanied by an older one. There would be young boys-- 8, 10-- and there would be an older one with them, usually 14 and 16, a leader. 

And they would be everywhere. They would be in the park. They would be on the streets, and you couldn't go into the park anymore. It was finished. Steffenspark was a, a beautiful place for taking walks and promenades. You couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember your brother, or did you ever have a chance to talk to any one of these boys? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: To, to the boys? No, we never talked to them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were no girls in the Brownshirts. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. No. No. We never talked to the boys. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the Nazis coming to the house after the dog attacked? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes. Oh yes. That I remember distinctly. That I remember distinctly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, they-- I remember so, I remember also when, uh, they wanted to take the dog away. Uh, they were, uh, must've been-- I don't remember-- four or five of 'em. The fraulein let 'em in and said, you better come to the door. There's some Nazis here. They want to take Astor away, you know. 

And, uh, uh, I remember my father invited them to the library, and they sat, and they talked, and had some schnapps. And somehow they left, and that was the end of that. Uh, there seems to have been no problem at that time. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there any non-Jewish youngsters that you-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Were friendly with? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I don't remember, really. I may have. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't say goodbye to anyone. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, no. Uh-uh. Uh-uh. No, I can't remember. I don't think I had any. I didn't have any friends. 

It was a very, kind of a in the house kind of a life. The teachers came. Uh, we didn't leave the house that much. It was either the house or I-- early on, I, the fraulein would take me into town, to Da, to, to Danzig by trolley car, to the beautiful, uh, different places. 

She would take me, for example, to the Lange Brucke, which is, there was a magnificent street. And there was this beautiful, by the water, by the [INAUDIBLE]. Uh, she would watch-- uh, she would take me to the wharf, and the fishermen would bring in the fish. And it was just startling. 

It was gorgeous, by the old crane gate, and the Juden, Judenstrasse, and the Marienkirche. And they have one of the oldest, beautiful churches. Uh, it was right in the heart of Danzig. And she would take me to all these places. And I would never, uh, have, uh-- I wouldn't have social contacts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you mean the Judenstrasse? There was a Jew-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: It's called the Judengasse. The Judengasse, you see, is a street called the Judengasse. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Meaning? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: But that goes back to old Hanseatic days, the Jewish street. Because, or because that was the street that the Jews were only allowed to live on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: An old ghetto? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, an old ghetto, that's right. You see, the Jews could not, uh, join the guilds, the crafts, et cetera, et cetera. But they had this one street. And there were beautiful streets, just magnificent, which of course were totally demolished. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know, for Americans, the idea of a Judenstrasse, it would be like saying the Puerto Rican street, or the black street. I mean, it's jarring to hear that, and yet apparently it was accepted. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, it was not, there was-- yes, it was accepted. It wasn't anything-- I don't, I don't-- and if it wasn't accepted, I don't remember it. But it was a very-- uh, it was right-- the whole section of old downtown was where Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer, as you know, was a philosopher who was born in Danzig. 

And it was all around that whole section, Judenstrasse, and Schopenhauer's statue was down, and, and the, uh, around the Marienkirche. And, uh, it was a beautiful section. It was startling. I still have pictures of Danzig. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The lane was probably 300 years old-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: At least. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --if you can hear it-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: At least. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --that way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One didn't hear it that way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of course not. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, you didn't hear it that way, exactly. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your parents, their friends. Did they have friends at that time? Did they come to your home? Do you remember? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Oh yes. Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they talk about? Were they always Jewish? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Oh yes, all Jewish. Most of them were Jewish. 90% were Jewish. Their friends were, uh-- they had, uh, very good friends. And we were kind of regarded, you know, pretty up there in, in, in, in, in the Jewish society. So they had some very nice, very nice people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your parents later talk to you about the reaction of their friends in any conversations? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. We didn't really discuss it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Fear? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: You mean when we came to this country? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, recalling, yes, later. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we talked about it a little, but we didn't really. We really, the first time this whole Pandora's box was opened, after my father died I decided to look into it. It was a, it was a research on my part to look into the whole thing, the whole story. 

And, uh, I didn't, we never really discussed it. We never-- we, once in a while, we talked about it. Uh, we didn't, uh-- we did discuss it a little bit when we got some reparations from the Germans. 

My father had, for 20 years, 25, until he died, trying to get reparation. But we couldn't get any, I think because the Russians were there, and the Germans. Because, you know, Danzig is all owned by the Russ, run by the Russians. So we couldn't get any reparations. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's Polish. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: What's that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's Polish. Um-hm. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Polish-Russian, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Looking back now-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: But, I mean, it's communist. Full of communists. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your perspective now. I mean, there was what you called as someone's phrase the, uh, acceptable discrimination. What does that mean in, in your terms now, acceptable discrimination? How do you-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, you knew you're being hated. And you knew that nobody likes you because you're Jewish, but it's sort of lived, it lived, it fit-- it was not comfortable but people lived, lived with it. I mean, it was, there's nothing you could do about it. There's absolutely nothing you could do about it. Not a thing. So it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No organization? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: There was no recourse. Sure there were organizations. There were outcries. There was, uh, through the Judenblatter, through this newspaper. Uh, tremendous vehicle. But, uh, there was nothing-- what could you do about it? 

There was no-- what are you going to? You couldn't go to government. The government was the Nazis. The Nazis took over, by popular vote, the Danzig parliament in 1935. They won the majority of the vote. 

So there was no way that you could. They'd-- you couldn't go to the Gauleiter Burckhardt, who was the appointed, uh, the guy who ran Danzig officially through the League of Nations. You couldn't go to him because he was a Nazi. There was no place you could go to cry out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: As a child, you knew that, as a Jew, you were hated. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you deal with that? What did-- how did you handle that? What did it mean to-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Fear. Constant fear. Fear of being beat up, primarily. The same kind of fear that I had when I came to this country. Which is interesting. I felt no different in 1939 when I arrived in the United States than when I left Germany. 

When I lived on Riverside Drive in New York when we first came here, uh, there was a tremendous amount of anti-Semitism going on at that time, at least on Western Avenue, where I lived. I don't know if it was anywhere else. From the, uh, Holy Cross, Holy Name Church, the guys would come down and beat the hell out of us. 

We couldn't go down Riverside Drive. We had to form, organize, uh, groups. And so it was the same kind of fear. That's what I'm trying to say. We're always in fear, afraid to go out the house. 

So this is the fear I felt in Danzig. Afraid, uh, once we were afraid of being shot or killed. This is the fear I felt personally. I don't know what anybody else felt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean the big house, and the dogs, and the frauleins-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I still was scared to death. Scared to death. We were left alone a lot, my brother and I. Because my parents would spend the winters in Marienbaden. Uh, or they would, uh-- so they would go away on these trips, and we were left alone. We were absolutely terrified. 

Uh, we would never-- I don't recall going with them. Or they would go to Switzerland and Ma-- we-- Marienbaden. We would never go, and we would be left with the frauleins in the house, and the dogs, and the cook. And we were absolutely fearful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you tell your parents you were afraid when they went? When they left you? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I don't know. I don't remember. I don't remember that. But, but the fear. If you-- to summarize my feelings as, at being brought up, was fear, absolute fear. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So all the wealth, and all the protection, uh, all the physical comforts, didn't dispel. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. Definitely not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But what were you afraid of? I mean, the fear-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We're afraid of being beat up always. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, but-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Being attacked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --how would your parents protect you? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we had-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I mean, how did it change when your parents left? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, well, when my parents left, we had the frauleins. We had, uh, you know, the people around. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, what I was wondering if, if it sounded like you were more afraid when your parents were gone. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Oh yes, of course. Why not? Why not? That would be only understandable. Without your parents, you're more fearful. Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you leave the house more often when your parents-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we went, uh-- yes, I would always go with the fraulein for a walk. Or we would go down to the park. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You weren't confident in the fraulein being able to protect you? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, I felt comfortable with her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um-hm. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: She couldn't always be with me. You have to understand. The problem was that I couldn't always be with her. There would be times where I'd be left alone. I mean, I would be-- there would be brief periods of time. She couldn't be continuously with. 

And my brother somehow was older, so we went on different tracks. Uh, he was four years older, so he had his own little world. Uh, uh, but when we were together at night, we would be talking always about what can happen. Supposing they tried to rush into the house and burned down the house. 

Suppose-- after all it was, there were, uh-- I think it was Kristallnacht when they burned the synagogue. So we were afraid that they're going to come and burn the house down. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember Kristallnacht? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Um, it was in 1935, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, '38. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: '38. '37 or '38. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '38. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: The, the-- I, I can't remember distinctly, I must tell you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you knew they burned the synagogue-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: But I knew they were-- that's right. And we knew there was, uh, a great deal of fires going on. And at that time, they had, uh, they demolished all the Jewish stores at that time in 1938. Downtown Danzig was all demolished. They smeared the Nazi swastikas on all the stores. 

All our friends who had businesses were completely demolished and burnt along with the, uh-- uh, our place wasn't touched for some reason, now that we-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see it? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes. I saw the stores burnt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: The Nazi flags were-- well, what they did, they would first paint the red swastika on the, uh, windows, with the sign called Juden. And then they would follow 'em by, and come back later with a whole hoard and break down the windows. 

They used to have, you see, rallies. By '38, they had these enormous rallies, Hitler rallies. Because Goebbels would come. Hess would come, and Himmler would come, uh, to try to talk to Danzigers into joining up at, uh, this is your homeland. Uh, you are real Germans. You're not Polacks. You have to become one of us. 

And they had these incredible rallies, with flags hanging. There must be, at one time there must've been at least 25, 35,000 people in the square, uh, shouting and screaming, uh, you know, sieg heil, sieg heil, uh, with the, with the speeches. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you go? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, Well, uh, I was out, you know, on the periphery, you know. We would, we would clear, stay clear of that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um-hm. 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, but I, we would. I saw one or two rallies. But we would hear Hitler always on the radio. Always. They would, uh, uh, especially in Gdynia and Sopot during the summer, they would have trucks going by with loudspeakers, uh, with, uh, Hitler talking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Saying? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, that we're a great people, and Danzigers unite. Uh, we have to, uh, free us, and, uh, one country. And, uh, uh, the enemies of our countries are the communists and the Jews, et cetera, et cetera. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think when you heard that, that coming over the loudspeakers? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we were scared to death. We, we knew that, you know, you know. Obviously, we're scared to death. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You went downtown and saw the results of Kristallnacht. What did-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I don't recall seeing the synagogues burning, burn. In fact, I don't remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We, primarily, all the big stores. Uh, one of the famous stores downtown was Springer's, which was a big department store. That was all burned down, I remember. I think it was, it must have been a Jewish owner. Stores would be burned down. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did you go? Who did you go with? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, uh, well, I think I went with my uncle. I had an Uncle Hermann, who was, uh, a wonderful man that I loved a great deal, who would always take us to the movies, uh, on Saturday afternoons. And then he would stop, we would stop downtown in the middle of Danzig in the marketplatz, where we'd sit and have lemon ice, which was a luxury in Europe, lemon ice for a child. 

And, uh, and then, uh, so he would take me downtown and around to different places. He would take me to the museum. There's a famous maritime museum. So I guess it must be on one Saturday that he took me down that I must have seen all that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think when you saw the burned stores? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: I didn't really understand it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ask him? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Of course. But I don't think-- I really had no idea what it was all about. Except that, that they didn't like Jews, and they think that, that the Jews had, had to be destroyed. I understood that. That I, that was clear. I don't think any Jew-- there was no Jew who didn't understand that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened with Uncle Hermann? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Well, we wanted to take Uncle Hermann with us, and he just couldn't leave. He just didn't want to leave. He had a German fraulein girlfriend. He didn't want to leave. Uh, he, uh, uh, he, uh, he was a, uh, he was, uh, he was a wheeler and dealer, and with money, as you know. And, uh, the gold then was falling and was rising, and was going back and forth. And he was involved in a lot of money deals, and he just didn't want to leave. 

And he finally, uh, like, uh, was deported. And, uh, with the rest of 'em, uh, the rest of them who left for one of the concentration camps. I don't know which one, I'm embarrassed to say. I just never had the heart to find out. 

But they were all-- we know, we heard that he escaped through several concentration camps. We know that. And he helped to organize food, and he helped to organize. He was very active. 

And, uh, we heard from different-- we would get occasional letters that somehow would come out of Europe, uh, that he died at the end. Uh, at the, uh, just at the end. He had survived everything until, until the end. Apparently, he got killed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your cousin that went to a labor camp, do you know anything about-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No, we never heard. All gone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember when he was taken? Or what-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: It's very confused, because his sister, uh, Helen, left for Trinidad. And, uh, I can't remember the whole circumstances. That whole thing is all confused. I just can't remember it. I was too young. I just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You went to, uh, England with your parents? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, Southampton. We caught the boat there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: The Queen Mary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember leaving Danzig and what happened on the way to Southampton? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you on a train? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: We were on a train and boat, mostly boat. We went from Danzig to, by boat, to, uh, I think we were-- I don't remember. We went, we went along the northern part. I know that. 

I don't remember. I know we were on, we were on a boat a long time. And then we, uh, landed up in Southampton. I remember it was the Queen Mary. That part I remember tremendously. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anybody take the money that was in the underwear? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were all able to-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yeah, we had nothing else. I mean, we had, we had a couple of suitcases. And, uh, the Queen Mary I remember. That part was wonderful. That was a wonderful experience. Because we-- I, I don't remember what class. I think we were in first class, I guess. And the first movie I saw was Robin Hood. 

And I'll never forget the thrill of it. My brother and I sitting, watching an American movie, and the only word we could understand was OK. We were so proud that we could understand the word OK. That was a delightful, uh, voyage. It was beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were there other refugees at that time? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Yes, there were. Not that many. They were mostly Americans returning. As I recall, there weren't many. There was a handful of refugees. Uh, they weren't-- I mean, we had one, uh, one of our friends did go with us. 

Uh, his name was Metchnick. Uh, I mentioned his name because he disappeared on the boat. We could never find out what happened. I guess he probably jumped off or something. it was a, it's a terrible story. 

But, uh, there were many, uh, there were, there were, the first, uh, there was a handful of. Uh, most, as I recall, they were Americans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He jumped off the boat? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Nobody knows what happened, so I don't know. But I remember that we had a wonderful time on the boat. And, uh, it was really fun. And seeing the Statue of Liberty, it was, I remember that first moment. That was very nice too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you still afraid? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: No. I, I was, I couldn't understand. I, it was a foggy, cold morning, I remember. And, all of a sudden, all the, uh, boats began to whistle. I guess, uh, it was, there must have been something symbolic in that. 

And, uh, as we passed the Statue of Liberty, all the Jews stood silently on aboard and looked at it. And, uh, everybody just watched it silently as the boat went by. It was very [INAUDIBLE]. 

And then, seeing the, uh, these huge buildings, it was like seeing a prehistoric monster rising out of the sea. It was an incredible experience. I remember that distinctly. These huge buildings immersed in fog and coldness, and, uh, it was just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you got to this country, did you try to tell people what was happening? Did your parents try to tell people what was happening in Europe? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, they formed an organization called the ADA, the American Danzig Association, uh, where the, uh, the major, some of the major leaders, uh, ran this organization. Uh, there was a senator, a Jewish senator from Danzig. His name was Kamnitzer. 

He was, uh, on the board, as well Ansbach. He was director of the Dusseldorf Bank. And they formed an organization. And I think there was an attempt. I don't know. I can't tell you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your parents try-- 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: The problem was, one of the problems was we were, as Danzigers, we were considered aliens. Uh, and not refugees. Because we were Germans. So there were some, uh, there were documents going back and forth trying to establish that the Danzigers weren't really aliens. And, uh, I remember that. There was a lot of documents going back and forth between the State Department, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever overhear your parents talking about trying to tell Americans or the American government what was happening to the Jews in Europe? 

SIEGFRIED CRAW: Uh, I, I know that there was a lot of activity in that direction. There was the-- my parents, uh, organized a Polish club of Jews, where all the displaced Jews had a big organization. Uh, and there was the American Danzig Association in New York, and there was a lot of activity. 

I know there was a lot of, uh, information. Certainly there was a lot of information in the Jewish newspapers, which was being reported by the people who came over. So there was information there. There had to be. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your father do when he came here? 