SUBJECT: But after when the Germans start to be bad, this people need-- was the function from the Germans. And these people can no find. I mean, maybe in big towns, but no matter. 

So these people tells, yes, everybody needs to go to work. Because people need to go to work. I speak you before the actions, before the Holocaust. So some-- you see, it was problems with this people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure. 

SUBJECT: Sure, it was problem. But you see, because what was happen if my father wasn't Judenrat, I don't know. But normally, if my father need to be, he tell us no, he goes away, and other Jews, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: It was before. Was only one person, I don't remember the man the name, who was before the war even some things and he cames too. And he was really the best. After he was the president of the Judenrat. There was Jewish police, you know, and everything comes-- who was the Germans start to be-- who was-- everything started. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did that happen? When did things get worse then? 

SUBJECT: Slowly, slowly goes in, you know? There was step by step. And Poland was like that, step by step. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, and to you, you know, and-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, there was step and step, worse and worse. We feel that. We feel that. There's no one day. Step by step, like kommisar joined my father, take out my father, he-- do you know my father-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Kommisar, this German who ran the shop, you mean? 

SUBJECT: Yes. You know, and when these people write this letter to this governor of the kreizfuhrer, I don't know the name was. He likes to give back to my father the-- the keys to take him out. Because he found out that he do some monkey business, somethings he take to higher prizes. It was true. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The volksdeutsche? 

SUBJECT: The volksdeutsche yes. He take two higher prizes. So he close in the store for couple weeks, and my father was thinking he will have back. Sure, my father didn't go alone to this German to give him-- to give him back. There was-- you know, all time was somebody who would have the contact with the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: But once this man tells you need to come to another town, he give him the keys. There was-- and I tell you what the date and begin January '42. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: He comes by this German, and there was no soul bad. He tells Herr Kanar-- he calls him Herr Kanar, Mr. Kanar I cannot give you the key. It's bad times for you Jews, now. It's coming will be bad time for the Jews. He tells him something more, but from Berlin comes bad news for you Jews. I cannot give you the key back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was this Volksdeutsche? 

SUBJECT: No. There was the German who was the, like, governor, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Aha. Aha. So he told your father that-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I-- he didn't come give him back the key from this store because he close the store from the volks German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, yeah. 

SUBJECT: OK? He was volks German? Yes. After was no volks Germanm, never mind. He didn't give him the key back. He close his store. I mean, he don't call, he send somebody, another German over the prizes, you know, if you don't take in he sends somebody and he buys something he thinks is too high price. He find him, he do some things wrong. So he tell to close the store and take the key to him. 

So after a couple weeks, he ask my father or somebody, tell to Kanar that he can come to me and I will give him back the key in-- after January 1. It's a couple of days. So when he comes-- maybe it was of end of January, I don't remember-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure, sure. 

SUBJECT: When he comes by him, when the first time he comes in to this German, my father comes in with the German, and probably my father didn't have more the beard, because if the Germans comes in, all the Jews must-- you cannot-- 

INTERVIEWER: Shave their beards. 

SUBJECT: OK. My father comes in. He tells him, I cannot give you the key. It's bad news for you Jews. He don't talk to my-- I cannot give you the key. And I like to give you the key. I cannot do that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he say what the bad news was? 

SUBJECT: Yes. He don't tell what the bad news. He tell very bad news for you. I mean bed time, like that, bad news, bad time, he don't explain what. And for this reason, I cannot give you the key back. And not only that, I will give you special permission to go home, if my father had another permission to come to him. Now, he will go find find you with my permission, he will kill you. From one town to a other, those couple hours to go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, yeah. So the old permissions were no longer good. 

SUBJECT: No. No good. And my father come back and he telling, kids, there is a bad time for us, something's happen. And that was really Jan '42. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened then? 

SUBJECT: I remember [INAUDIBLE] killing start to kill people who find outside. And now I remember. Now I think that till '42, maybe the people can go out to visit outside town. But for '42 January, no more. That, I'm not sure. I can no remember. But I remember only this story with my father that he tells him, you can not go home if I don't get him permission. 

Don't forget, I tell you something's very important. For this German, he didn't [INAUDIBLE] for my father because he was a good German. Only he was a good German. Because my father pay a lot of money to this German. I mean, he doesn't give him directly the money, but he pay. He pay a lot of money to give him back the keys. 

And not only that, many Germans around who was the police Germans of that, if he was no so bad, if he was no so anti-Semitic, so all these Germans live a lot for money from the Jews. I mean, no official, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: There was people like macher he calls. I don't know the word macher. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Big shots. 

SUBJECT: Big shots who can talk with the Germans, who make business the Germans. He have the way-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, not big shots, it's more like intermediaries. 

SUBJECT: Yes, intermediaries, he said. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wheeler dealers. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, dealers like that. But that was not mostly the best people. You know it means-- it was good. I mean, we need this people. But there was a little hefker-junge, you know? A little like that. He takes for him a little money, he give the Germans. He was like that. 

My father go with [INAUDIBLE] because he takes-- you can have the keys back. So my father [INAUDIBLE] he pay a lot of money and he pays for the German, and after he tell he likes to see my father. My father didn't like to go. Like, he must thinking he would give the keys to this person. My father didn't like to see Germans, like Germans like that. 

So never mind. He comes to him, and the German talk to him like that. But this German have a lot of money from my father. I don't know how much money. It's-- there was many policemans Germans, no one in our town, the other towns, who is going with the boots, with the officer boots. That was all Jewish-- Jewish money. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When your father came home and said there's going to be bad times now, did he say what he thought was going to happen? 

SUBJECT: No. He didn't know what, you know? God will help us. My father was very, very religion person. And it was not in out God nothing. But that means now that he would not do somethings. But what we can do, you know? 

That was very difficult. And my father was no believe that he can do for himself, too. Because I mean, we live in society. You know what I mean? It's other Jews, families, brothers, sisters, we have a big family there. I mean, what I will do, even for him to go to [INAUDIBLE] of someplace alone, some no normally. Even he do that after. OK, never mind. 

My father do that after and he lives with very bad conscience in the concentration camps after. For this what he do. You know, I mean, because you know now, out, after from the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Maybe you should-- I have a feeling it's difficult to go into the Holocaust, but maybe we need to do it, to do it, go into the story of the Holocaust itself now. 

SUBJECT: OK. This-- OK, this story was that the-- one was a pressure of my father before the Holocaust. Big pressure of my father from the Germans that he is a rich person to give the dollars and to give the gold and the-- the diamonds. And he-- he was very hurt one time. And there was a big, for us, because I saw that, how he hit my father. 

But there was no official. I mean, they didn't come from high places to do that. You know? High places come other, before the action that the Jews from my town need to pay so many, many money for the action. The action cost money. I mean, to kill the Jews, you need to pay him. You know? But the Germans got, yes there was contribution. I don't know how many my town need to pay. But there was the couple days before the action. 

But what the Germans do, some Germans do that like the policemen do that, that was private. For him, a little money. You know? So my father take out all the money. He give them. And he say, I didn't have no dollars. I didn't have things. 

So there was to one person who knows the Germans, and he's coming. My father, my uncle is running to bring him. He bring him, and he saved my father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He bring him what? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. He talk with the Germans and maybe, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Some diamonds or dollar or something? 

SUBJECT: I don't know, maybe. Maybe my father give something more. I don't believe. I think my father give him the money. So he stopped to-- if not, he'd kill my father. I mean, that was to shock. You see shocks and shocks and shocks comes like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: But the bigger shock was the Holocaust. When you ran down the town, one day in this summer-- I don't remember days now. OK, there was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In '42 this was? 

SUBJECT: '42, sure. But don't forget, we know that before, we listen-- slowly, slowly we listen, even beginning '42 to our ears become some news from the east side when the Germans goes to the war with the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Russians. 

SUBJECT: --the Russians. We hear that something's happened. Something's happened there with the Jews. We don't know what exactly. You know? That the occupied territory from the Germans, not by the Russians, in Ukraine and east Poland and east Europe, that something's happened. 

And I remember, that once Saturday-- that was in '42-- there was couple weeks before the Holocaust start by us, because Poland where we live calls the general government. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: There was-- Frank was the governor of Krakow. OK? Somebody was it tells like that. It just like a problem. The SS comes in in a town and they kill the people who are find. And after there be normal, like we know the problems before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: That was what we was thinking about the Holocaust. And there was in spring '42, we hear some things like that. I don't hear every things, but like that. And I was thinking, oh, maybe I will go to the-- to the-- I don't know what to do, to go away for this one day to save my life, of our life for one day, and after we can come back. We don't understand. 

So I tell you only how this-- the atmosphere was. We don't know what is happened. We don't know even the name Holocaust this time. I mean, that comes later. 

We know there we be like the exp-- we take the Germans like-- the Jews take this, even my time, how was the our experience from before. Programs. That's the experience. So now will be bigger program, but the program's a program. Understand what I mean? 

So now, there was no program regularly. It was bigger like a program. So one day, I mean, I remember there was hot. We call s'iz zeyr warem, s'iz heis. It says hot. Hot was some things that we hear something will be. We don't know what. And there was so hot-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: In town. People was are crazy. People don't know what to do. We call hot. People-- we feel something's-- I don't know if our intuitions, or if somebody tell some things. We hear there was some things in Krakow ghetto. We hear something Warsaw ghetto takes. I mean, the first actions, we hear something. 

There was, you know, I tell some things. Many people tells, oh, I know what will be. I mean, people today tells. But I know what will be, and I go, I do that, if I did that. 

You see, like my town, I would only the experience from my town. I don't know. I never visit another big towns before the war. I was too young. Only, I would tell you that the people, to believe what the Germans, too-- so bad, you need to be bad to believe somebody to come do that. You understand what I mean? 

If you have no the experience, you cannot believe something. That is not human. Not only human, only I don't even a dog don't do that. So how come people believe in this time he go to kill us, or he go to-- to the kids, and to the gas chambers. Like that-- nobody was thinking that. If somebody tell that in this time, he think he is crazy. I mean, the people-- to believe that somebody kills so badly, you, I mean, who believe that. He need to be a literal killer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Understand what I mean? He need to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was unthinkable. It was unimaginable. 

SUBJECT: Right. Nobody. I mean, people was naive by us. 

SUBJECT: What did happen? 

SUBJECT: So people start and this-- till the day, till the-- the Germans comes in the evening. No, in the afternoon. He tells he will come, and the Judenrat tells that the Germans will come. We don't know will be happened. 

And the Germans comes, no many Germans, because was many the Polish, young people, who works by the Germans, I mean, he takes him to work. There was calls-- I don't know how it's in English-- yunaki, There was people who works for the Germans, simple work. Young people with the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Forced labor? 

SUBJECT: Yes, labor like, you know. And they come around, and Germans, too, the police, and the Germans. And the moment when he took that afternoon, people start to run out from town. I mean, people don't think what to do. Some people start to run out. Was crazy. 

And some people run out, and the man, one from the [INAUDIBLE], who make the-- the action, he found some people outside. He killed directly these people. I have a story. He kill one family, kills directly. He say, where you run? He say, you were run down, why you go in the fields? You have here the faith. Where you like to go? So he kill the family. 

Not only that, before, couple days, two, three days, somebody comes from the Judenrat, that-- there was contribution. And after-- listen good what was that-- after was one person, one-- one of the head, he tells, I will make a good action. We don't know what's a good action, but he need to have so and so money. That was private for him. I mean, you know? Some things, watches to give him that. And he will make a good action. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He will help in some way. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Will help in some way. No, he will be quietly, he will make quiet action. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. 

SUBJECT: OK? In this town would be quiet action. So people give him-- I remember somebody giving a big watch. People was from other towns, even from Krakow, from Warsaw, people take out everything what he have, you know? And he give jewelry, you know, to be-- even my mother give some things, I remember-- to make a good action. We don't know what's a god action, what's a bad action. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure. 

SUBJECT: OK. Now, many people start to run out in the same afternoon. My family was somethings happened. My sister tells, we need to run out. Not my father, my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Raquel? 

SUBJECT: Raquel. And the other sister, too. We knew to do somethings. So my father, what do you like to do? What we can do? What to run out from every-- where all the Jews will go, we'll go. That was his-- every Jew will go, I will go. That is all. Holkhim im klal-Israel. Mir gehen mit klal-Israel. That was the-- that was his mind. 

But this happened. My sister tells to me, and my mother tells to me-- my mother was different. My mother was something she tells, if he can't do something-- and we believe we have a lot of people who will help us. Because we have so many people who knows my father and knows me. I run out alone. We cannot go more. 

There was-- I tell you something. There was a couple hours before, I run out maybe two, three hours before there was, the town was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Encircled. 

SUBJECT: Encircled. I remember. And I go out to the fields and I don't know what will happen. You know? My sister run out. Everything has happened and everybody goes out but my family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They all ran away? 

SUBJECT: Yes, everybody goes apart. My father go to my mother. You see. And he tells me to go where I need to go, or what people I need to go, to this family outside town. And-- and he take out directly and he killed-- there was the good Holo-- I mean, the good action-- he killed all the old people. He make a selection. The next day there was the selection. He take out the old people and they killed him. My grandfather was killed. 

My mother-- my, OK, all the older people was killing of place. See, even kids sometimes. That was the good action. So I was thrown out at my family, and after we have the contact, and I pass a lot of the-- there was one, the biggest shock, I mean, there was the high point shock. 

I mean, that was-- that's the beginning from the story. I mean, till this time, even was bad he was home. It was a family. The some things I hear, I listen, that is war, you know? Even the first day, I remember there was bombardment. The Germans threw bombs and somebody was killed, a peasant by our town. 

So that is war. I mean, we-- in beginning we need to, we explain, that is war. That is more worse than war. That is against the Jew, the war. But nobody was-- till the Holocaust, the Holocaust was something that nobody-- it's, I don't know if we have words for this. I don't know of regular word. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I feel this is something that is very difficult for you to talk about. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I mean, we didn't have words for this. Because if we-- regularly words is not more words, and there are some is no normal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you still try to tell about the Holocaust, what happened after that? I know it's difficult, but maybe you can try a little. 

SUBJECT: I mean, I after was, we can come back to the town. I mean, he destroyed all these people. And after my father, me, and my mother, we was alive. We was the one-- from all the town, we was one family. We was alive. I mean, later, in September-- and after, we come to the camps. Because you can no be outside. 

My sister-- that's very too unusual-- I have two sisters, didn't come to the camp. Was two blonde girls, speak very good Polish. And we are have friends. You see this, too, because my father have a lot of friends, and a friend come from our town and he tells, I can make papers for so much and much money. I mean, Aryan papers, he calls. He make papers for my two sisters, for my mother, too. 

So but, I like in boy, like in person, I can-- boy, I mean-- I can no have that, because I'm circumcised. You know, this one from this-- I remember like, this time, that I was dreaming why I, when I run out from my town, why I am circumcised once. You know? Why so-- if I'm no circumcised. 

Because in Poland, who is no circumcised means it's no Jew. So I remember that that was the most worst that I was against me, and maybe against Jewishness. You know? Why I am a Jew? Sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, that's a very painful feeling. 

SUBJECT: You know-- you like to be a mouse. I remember that I was run, and I was thinking, I see a dog, I think, why I not a dog now? Why I'm no a mouse? Why I no a-- and I don't know what. And cow, and you know, and trees and flowers, some things, that I would be alive till after the war. Why I'm a Jew? There was the most terrible moments for me. This run out, that was the most terrible. 

You know, even the camps was so terrible, but after you-- you come slowly, slowly, and you live that, even was small wars. I mean, hungry and the dark, But that is so in shock. You know I write story, Run, Jacob, Run. There's very bad stuff, very true, what I write it. I called it "Christ and Me." 

You know, in this run, I speak to Jesus. You know? Many people don't understand what is that. Like, Jewish boy speak to Jesus? Yes. To they no Jewish boy must no speak to Jesus if he's a good Jew, even before the war. But people don't understand that was no normal time. 

There were some things, you know, and the fields, and the-- and the ways in Poland, you see statues. Every place you see a statue. I mean, we live our life with statues. Even we don't see that. I never look at my life till this time, in the face for, for the statue. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean the-- the statue of Christ? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, statue of Christ, he looks like that, of the mother. You know, she have the kid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Right. 

SUBJECT: She's made from stone, from wood, from, you know. And this time I look him. That was the next day. I remember because-- and I write about it. And how I look him, I-- I throw out. I mean-- [SPITTING SOUND] I see you first time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You threw up. 

SUBJECT: I mean, but after I start to look him and he look so pity on everybody. And [INAUDIBLE] I start to talk to him. I mean, in the place I talk to him, I didn't long talk to him, I think them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I mean, didn't talk. I was no to talk to him. I understand. But my thinking was to him, and I look him, and I thinking and thinking that if I would be the cross now, I be maybe safe. You know? It's-- it's, you know? I like to be the cross. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The cross-- 

SUBJECT: The cross self. To be like that to-- after the war. What's so bad? 

INTERVIEWER 1: To be the-- yeah. 

SUBJECT: To be-- you know, if you-- people who didn't, didn't pass-- and it's normally. It's normal that people don't understand. Also we-- maybe it's good that people don't understand. Because I don't understand. I mean even-- I mean, it was so in normal, the time, the situation, that with our thinking, because we live so normally. It was crazy, but it's normal. You know? 

But that was so unusual, that. That what small boy. And I-- I talk to him. I like to change with him. I like-- and I develop, sure. It's like a play I develop. Because that is I wrote that that in '75. Don't forget that. And that was imagination for me. I mean, rehearse from this time. 

But this time was the one, till today, the most biggest shock that I have. You know? That is-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That day when you were in the fields, and you're running. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I remember, I tell you something that's cruel. I take out my sex and I play. Maybe I will be like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, hoping that you will get the foreskin. 

SUBJECT: Because I know how it looks. I had gentiles for my friends, and I know how it looks no Jewish. So if I will be like that, oh, I can be alive. I can be alive. I can go to the Germans, say, look, I am no a Jew. Look. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have your foreskin. 

SUBJECT: I mean, my imagination was so this. It was the most, maybe today if I think that the most terrible was that I start to hate that I am a Jew. I start to hate maybe my father, even though I love him, and this time I have moments that I hate everybody. I say why I no born by the other people? Why I'm born here? You see? 

Because maybe-- I'm sure but my father was not this thinking. And I know he was not this thinking. He was opposite, because after I see that in the camps. Because when he was in the camps after with us, me, my mother-- in beginning-- me, my mother, and my father-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What camp was this? 

SUBJECT: We start in Krakow. We have not other way-- we have no other way to come to it. We pay to go to the camp. I mean, even that looks very unusual to pay to go in into camp, yes. Because outside, of [INAUDIBLE] can't kill it. [INAUDIBLE] my sister was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's the name of the camp? 

SUBJECT: In Krakow. In Yulak 1. That was in Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Plaszow. 

SUBJECT: Yes, by Miller. I mean, he was the commander. Everybody knows that. So we was in this camp. And I remember, and after I was in Skarzysko in Work C was very terrible. I was even the Jerusalimska, [INAUDIBLE] in Krakow a couple days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, this is Jerusalimska? 

SUBJECT: Jerusalimska. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is that? 

SUBJECT: Was a camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. 

SUBJECT: The big camp, and I was in the smaller camp, and that was in the bigger camp. There was all of us in Plaszow by Krakow. Was other camps, too, but that was the big camp. And after I was in Skarzysko in Work C. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they make there? 

SUBJECT: Oh, there was-- you know, that looks like in worker camp, you know, work camp. Not concentration camp. There was more wars that concentration camps. You know, there was terrible camps, special work C, you know. Terrible. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they make? 

SUBJECT: We work there for the industry for the Germans. I mean, no rifles but you make the ammunition. There was ammunition. People was yellow there, you know, because the ammunition there was some thing, some product that was yellow. And people died after three, four months. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in that? 

SUBJECT: I was there. My mother takes me out from there. OK, two. I have a chance. He take me out, she pay something, she gives something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long were you there? 

SUBJECT: I was there one year. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But not in Work C? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, in Work C I was. But no with this work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now if this work. 

SUBJECT: No this work. She takes me out. If she don't takes me out, I think you don't talk with me today. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, I heard about this. 

SUBJECT: Yes, sure. You know who Strigler? He wrote now in the forwards, he wrote a book about this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Huh. 

SUBJECT: And Work C he was, too. And I remember him, too. Some ways. Anyway-- and after I was in Buchewald, and after a couple-- a short time I was in Buchewald. 

And after I was in other place, and the dead marsh I make. But that I would make alone. There was not my mother. With my mother, I was in Buchenwald takes my mother to Germany to Leipzig, the same factories. And my father is going with me to Czestochowa. Forgot-- I was in Czestochowa six months. In Czestochowa, it takes-- tooks him along to Buchenwald, and couple days later he tooks me to Buchenwald. Yeah, so I saw him only once. In Buchewald we talk. 

But he was another-- and he died. My father died-- it tooks him out one day before the liberation Buchenwald, tooks him out in the dead march, and he died in the dead march. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were also in the dead march? 

SUBJECT: Yes, but no in that dead march. I was in other dead march. So he died in the dead march. I mean, he kill somebody. He can no go. And I don't know exactly, but somebody he doesn't like to tell me how he died, but I have the imagination. Because he tells to my sister. He lives this man, he saw that a little, how he died. And people notice him. 

So my mother comes back after the war. My sister was alive. Even my sister pass a lot even on the Aryan side. And I come back. When I come back in '45 to Lodz after the war, I was sure my father's alive, because a couple of months before, I saw him. 

So I tell about my mother, it's in year, more than a year, so I don't know what's happened with her. But the father, I see him five months ago, six months ago, in February-- in February? Of January, end of January, beginning Feb-- beginning February. I saw him in Buchenwald 

INTERVIEWER 1: In '45? 

SUBJECT: In '45. And I was liberated in May '45 eight. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So when you said goodbye to him you didn't know that-- you thought-- 

SUBJECT: I don't tell him goodbye. Yes, goodbye, I mean-- no. Please? I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, you said you saw your father and then you were separated again. 

SUBJECT: Yes, we were separated directly from Poland. I mean, he was to Buchenwald and I came to Buchenwald. And I was in Buchenwald. And they can't-- and they block from children, 66. I think there was another block, 8, but after, when the people come [INAUDIBLE] it was 66, block 66. That was for young people, till 16 years, I don't know, 17 years, like that. So I was in this-- in this block. And people tells me that my father, somebody see my father in the other blocks. 

So I like to go to see my father to be with him. But he tooks me to another place. I mean, Buchenwald have small camps, like that. I mean, with the blocks, couple blocks was-- couple blocks, couple blocks. So I saw him once only, in the-- in the-- who calls? Forgot it. I mean, there was separated. And who calls this separated, the-- the drutten The drutten. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The wires. 

SUBJECT: The wires. Yes. I saw him in the wires. That's all. So after, I didn't like to be in the camp. You see, because I like from the same time I tell that I am an specialist. People ask of specialist. And that was very good. In the camps it's good to tell, I'm a specialist. I don't like Buchenwald. I worry from Buchenwald, because we didn't work. 

And I was thinking-- it's my thinking-- it's good to work for the Germans. Because you know you can-- you know, it's better to work, that you are specialist, he needs you. I were not smart this time. Don't know if I do good of bad, but that was my thinking. So I tell, I'm a specialist. Of what? Because I work once of something said the camps. So I have experience. So I tell some things that I -- 

So the Ger-- he tooks me to another camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Buchenwald? 

SUBJECT: From-- from Buchenwald. And my father tells me, too, go away from here. If you can go out, go out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. So where did he go from Buchenwald? 

SUBJECT: He talk to Strasbourg. That's in Germany, and a place in the-- in the mines. I think there was 480 meter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mines. 

SUBJECT: Mines. Mines. And there he works for the Germans industry OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can we take about 10 more minutes, you think? 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's 2:30 now. And can you say something about this? So you were in the camps for about two years? 

SUBJECT: Three years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Three years. 

SUBJECT: What to tell about the camps? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Anything that sticks in your mind as remarkable, or-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. One from the-- one from the wars camps. And it's very, if I tell with humor, the most interesting camps. I mean, if you tell the interesting camp. There was work C. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Skarzys. 

SUBJECT: Skarzysk, Skarzysko-Kammiena. . 

INTERVIEWER 1: Skarzysk 

SUBJECT: Yes. Do you know, like in small guy who comes from the small town, I meet a lot interesting people in the camps. I don't know how to explain that. In Work C, there was selections, you know? I don't know if every Sunday, but every second Sunday was selections. 

I mean, because people was very, after couple, if you work-- I mean, after a couple time you works, he was-- he can to more work, so the Germans kill him. I mean, he kills even people was OK. So there wasn't this Sundays. 

I mean, in the morning can be an election-- selection. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Selection. 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry. Selection. After they give the soup, of can happen something else, afternoon was a concert. Can believe that? People give concerts. And there was talent people there. And they influence me very strongly. Even me, I sing. My father give me the permission to sing. 

There was one professor Ingberg. I know he had family in United States. He tells me that. Professor Ingberg. He was a violis-- violin, play violin, beautiful, for the Germans. Even in-- before he play that. And he plays, and then was-- I remember a girl, I don't know the name, she was from Warsaw. She was a cabaret singer. 

And there was people-- you can believe that I saw the first time Charlie Chaplin the camps? I mean, in my town was no electricity. I saw once Charlie Chaplin on my town. I think there was no play, only picture. You know, you give like pictures. See? And I hear about him. 

But the first time when I-- I play Charlie Chaplin, somebody at the camps imitate him. Do you know that I play today Charlie Chaplin? I mean, after I, I was-- it's somethings that they have an influence of me. I mean, they-- the good influence. 

This shows people who are singing. You can't believe it was so worse, and people look to sing, to make song-- I don't know if that's illusion. But people write this time-- I remember, I think this people live in Israel, three brothers or that-- who wrote poems, or they wrote songs. 

And there was songs, very satirically songs I remember I remember that Polish. I don't know who wrote that. How-- and there was a couple girls sing that. Our Wachführer I mean, the camp commandant for [INAUDIBLE], he likes that the Jew will look nice. 

(SINGING) [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] That to have a good Wachführer that he likes, that we will be quiet with no nerves before we go off conserves. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- we go off conserves? 

SUBJECT: Conserves, to be conserve, in the conserve. [INAUDIBLE] this today. I mean, people think like that. And anythings. And we sing-- I sing in the chorale Hebrew songs. You know? 

I remember this Professor Ingberg comes to my father. MeMatil barzel yashar hi kashra igul khasin... mashehu kazeh. There was in song. And the song in Hebrew song from Eretz Israel. And he didn't know Hebrew, but he knows this song because this man wasn't some organization. Akiba, he tells me. In Akiba, he was in organization in Krakow. There was very assimilate Jews but Zionists. So Akiba calls in Krakow. 

So he don't know the words. He come by my father to translate the words. And I sang this song, and other songs, too, in the camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father was with you in Skarzysk. 

SUBJECT: In Skarzysk with me, and he tells me, OK, go sing. So he understand, and that's good for me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Time is kind of short, I think, but maybe can you say a few words of how you live your life after the Holocaust, how you-- how this influenced your life afterwards and how you went about-- 

SUBJECT: I think that Israel-- I came to Israel, and I take-- I think Israel saved my life, to be normal. If-- if I am normal. I don't know. But to go back to be back normal, OK, to be-- there was Israel and I was in Youth Alia in Israel. 

And I think that was the best therapy for me. And that bring me to come back, I mean, to be-- Even I tell you some things, maybe it's very reaL after the war you like to forget. What I tell you now I will never tell you after the war that. I don't know why. This time I hate everythings what was. You know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean then? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I was thinking that we was bad. Even I know there was-- you know, the-- there was like, after war I hate even my father, all this Hasidic, and all this. Because all this, there was so-- I don't know how to explain it, but when we came to Israel, the atmosphere in Israel was so different, in some way maybe so not good, because against everything what was in the Holocaust. 

That's true. For one side was good to forgot. To forgot. But for the other side it was-- that what was gules (galuth) and that's true, there was gules. [INAUDIBLE] that can happen only in the gules. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES]: Diaspora. 

And I start to believe we didn't fight. Even I know how we can fight, now I understand better, you see. I mean, the people in Israel, the Israelis, didn't mean bad. Didn't mean bad. But was like that. And I-- when I came to Israel and I saw the sabras, big guys, blonde girls, you see, I was dreaming maybe this time to be maybe I come up to be like him. 

And I like to be-- and I was feeling some way that I am like him. I drive in tractor, I, you know, I was very strong, and I learn to learn Hebrew. I even don't like to learn any language more. You know? Only Hebrew, and to be an Israeli, and to be another person, and to change. And that was good. 

Even sometimes we think that was no good, because you know, we need to talk about the Holocaust. No. That was good. For me, it was good. The Youth Aliyah-- other than it saved my life, of some ways he give me so much that I-- maybe I can look back now more even normally this time. More right. 

I mean, in Youth Aliyah, with my madrikha till today, I make contact. I mean, she's [INAUDIBLE] 

[INTERVIEWER 1]: Madrikha means your leader? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah, she, too, comes from Poland, too. I mean-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you then when you went into Youth Aliyah? 

SUBJECT: 16 years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 16? 

SUBJECT: Yes. So that I was to bring me back and after I do service military, I was in the navy. I was 17 years when I was -- OK, I was in the navy after, and after I work on the ships, and after ended in Youth Aliyah, I start with Tiera. Sara Levi-- if you know here, Sara Levi-Tanai, who she is the-- now she is the head of the Theater of Inbal, she was one of my teachers, who she comes to teach us. And we make, after six months in Israel, we spoke Hebrew, we make Megilat Ruth. There was before she makes after Megilat Ruth the very professional in her theater. 

But this time she-- she came one of twice in week to our kibbutz. And I mean, that's-- that was one of the best times after the war. I mean, if no, maybe I'm-- I'm a different person. I think so. Maybe I'm a businessman today. I don't know. You know what I mean? Maybe only money was my-- my goal after the war. You know? 

If I remember now who was after the war, who was safe after the war, there was only young people, very young people who was a little idealistic, goals to Israel. Other people likes to make money, goes to America. That is true, you know? We make black market in Germany like that. And even I was, after the war directly, somethings like that to make-- to live, do something like that. 

But then I came come to Lodz. I go on a kibbutz, and this change my life of more normally. I don't know. I called it more normally. And the open-- the Aliyat Ha'Noar open for me, in the window, and to see maybe the people, to deal with the people no so badly. He bring me back to believe in people, if I can tell that. To believe in people. And I tell you, even today, till today, I believe in people. I don't believe in God. I believe in people. I can no explain that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you, then, have a family? 

SUBJECT: No. I was never married. But all my friends in Israel is married, and who passed the same. I mean, married, have kids, but never speak about the Holocaust. I didn't know why. I am the most who speak about the Holocaust, because maybe I'm an artist. Because an artist, he can no-- he need to live it himself. He need, you know, I like to be an actor before. 

And I find out, to be an actor, you must-- you experience must go on. You can no forgot your experience, because in beginning, we-- we forgot our experience. We like to have got everything. We need to-- to start a new life, but we are born of new. But like and actor, that's not possible. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you are-- you're a prof-- you're a professional actor now? 

SUBJECT: Please? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're a professional actor? 

SUBJECT: Yes, now I'm a professional, and you see, I do mime before I was an actor, and now [INAUDIBLE], now I too mime. And now I write a little, too, about this time. I have some one story, I have another story. And, uh-- but for other side, I didn't live in Israel. And I have bad conscience. You know? There's the one control that I have, that I don't live in Israel. 

But I know why I didn't live in Israel, because it was very difficult for me. But for other side I tell-- difficult. Maybe I need to live [INAUDIBLE]. You know, maybe I worry too much to live difficult. I don't know I will not be a [INAUDIBLE]. But I live like-- you know, I go from one country to the other. 

Now I live in New York. And I do what I like. Maybe this is my what I like to do. That is my goal. And I can save what I do. That give me courage and I'm optimistic. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I can no know how to explain it to. Maybe you, like a professional, you can explain that much better. I cannot explain it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think we will have to stop the interview now. 

SUBJECT: OK, I need to play this evening. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Thank very much. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

