[BEEPING SOUND] INTERVIEWER: Name rank, and serial number? 

SUBJECT: Got to put it in there. My name is Dori Lamb. I was born in Czernowitz, a city in a small northern province of Romania. This place changed hands during the World Wars. It was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire before the world-- First World War. So there was a lot of German culture, Ukrainian culture. 

The city, I think, had 700,000 inhabitants. I think there were about 90,000 Jews with a very rich cultural life-- synagogues, clubs, theaters, a medical school. You could-- there was a throb in the street. My parents both probably came to Czernowitz after the First World War from smaller town in Ukraine or Galicia. 

They were quite well off. My father had a chocolate factory, a gun store. My grandfather had a gun store. And I remember living in a little two complex house-- two houses, I mean-- around a courtyard with an orchard in the back. My parents were always going out. There were guests. There was something very vibrant about those early days. There were maids. My earliest memory-- 

INTERVIEWER: When were you born? 

SUBJECT: 1937. My earliest memory is of being pushed in a little stroller and covered with a blanket. And I didn't see much. But I just saw-- I felt the warmth of the daylight and the particular sense of peacefulness. Across the street, a woman lived who was married to a Gentile-- a Jewish woman-- and had a little daughter, Klaute And I was very fascinated watching. Her grandfather the Jew lived there, too. He was a balagula-- that's Yiddish for a driver for hor-- of horse and cart. 

And I remembered her coming back from church, and celebrating holidays. And that was quite interesting for me. She was older-- I think, five years older than I was, and liked to play with me. I was the baby. And sometimes tucked me in in the afternoon. And it was lovely to watch. I think it was my first love affair. 

I had a-- think of my room-- shades, sunshine through the shades, and the beautiful brass bed. And that was totally mine. I had-- there was a fear I sometimes had that a big man on a horse was coming up against the window. And when I was alone in my room. Of course, he never came. 

My grandfather was a Zionist leader, a religious scholar. And that gave a particular quality to holidays. It was very profound and dignified. Lots-- many guests. I also had a governess. And because of the particular cultural snobbery, she had to be a pure German. And she was a pure German. But-- she was-- I loved her. And I have many photos with my governess. So she was really, in a way, my mother in the-- for the first three years of my life. 

I think something dawned on me that things were going to change when she had to leave abruptly. That was in 1940, following the Russian-German pact. The Ribbentrop pact. The population was exchanged. Germans who lived in other countries-- no, wait. I missed something here. With that pact, the Russian occupied our town. And then they had to give it up, and we were under Russian occupation. And there was an exchange of population. 

Germans were required to leave and to go to Germany. Russians, I think, from Germany were required to return to Russia. And I remember my mother and my governess walking to the train station. And I walked some distance behind them, and felt that things were going to happen-- at least that I was not going to see Teta-- that's how I called my governess-- again. 

I don't know why I thought of some kind of fish or herring, and played with the thought all the time. And I was walking at a distance. And I don't even remember saying goodbye to her. But things were sort of empty for me after she left. I never saw her again. Her name was Bertha Stark. And I don't know what has become of her. 

Things began to be-- be more difficult. After the war broke out in 1941 and the Russians left, there were days of transition. And during those days Jews were completely a free prey to the local population. About three days that anything could be done. 

I have the-- I remember that during those days we bolted our gate. The little courtyard had a big gate which could be completely closed. And this was our little fortress. And with every knock on the gate, there was fright. My grandmother tried to get some milk, and supposedly for me, for the baby. I was the only grand-- child in the a whole household. 

And on the way back, was stopped by soldiers and threatened. And she pretended to be a Ukrainian farmer's wife. She didn't know any other language. And they let her by, but she returned very frightened and pale. 

INTERVIEWER: Your grandparents were whose parents? 

SUBJECT: My mother's parents. With-- the household consists of my mother's parents, my mother, my father, and I. After that came the Jewish star. And then I remember they-- there was a certain excitement about cutting all the stars and sewing them on. And children were exempt. 

I insisted that I wanted to wear a star, too. I understood it as a way of being proud. I wasn't going to allow myself to be exempt from this. But it also-- having to be so proud, insisting on the star, may also be because I perhaps didn't want to be Jewish at that moment. And I wanted to be like Clark and my neighbor, and not to have to wear the stars. And I couldn't tolerate this kind of thinking myself. 

So I came up with opposite. Yes, I want to be a Jew, and I want to wear a star. But this is what I consciously remember-- the fight that I had with my parents that I wanted to wear a star. And we reached a compromise. I was given a little gold star on a necklace to wear. 

We were taken briefly to a ghetto. Transports began to leave for-- with Jews taken to Transnistria. That's the occupied region of the Ukraine-- occupied by the Romanian troops. One could remain in town. And it was really a fight for time-- hoping that the war will somehow end by getting special permits. So those who were essential or were employed were allowed to stay in the town, and not taken away. 

There were red permits, green permits-- whatever color. A particular permit was issued by the mayor of the town. The pop-- Popovich permits. And we had-- we had one of those. And because my father was working, and therefore was important for the war effort. We felt somewhat secure with that permit, really. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they let your father continue to run the chocolate factory? 

No No. Everything was taken away. He worked in some kind of-- the government job. Everything was taken away. His stores. But that was already also taken away by the Russians before that had nationalized everything. 

I-- one afternoon in the spring of 1942, while I was playing on our glass porch on my tricycle, there was a knock on the gate. And several policemen came in and asked us to join them for a few hours. They wanted to take us through a-- some customs station. We were sure we would be back. 

Our-- my grandparents wanted to come with us, but they refused. They needed only the younger people, not to bother the older people. We did have a sense that something might be happening, and took suitcases and some food, and with a horse and a cart, we were brought to a railway station. 

It was probably somewhat true that they rounded up people in order to complete a transport. And some who couldn't find a place in the wagons may have gone home. But we weren't that lucky. There was place for us in one of those car-- cattle cars. At the train station we were thoroughly searched. I remember it was like really a good customs station. The tables, and where you had to put your luggage, and you-- everything was taken out, and they were searching in the seams where people had sewn in any money, or gold coins, or jewelry. 

I distinctly remember that the official asked my mother to take off her earrings and her wedding band. And she begged them to leave the wedding band, and he said no. And she had to turn it over. And she said something to my father that, well, it doesn't matter if we are married, whether we have a wedding band or not. 

There was also bread being distributed at that railway station provided by the Jewish community. So that who knew more well as what was going on, so that people could have some food on their journey. I want to stress that, because we hardly had time to say goodbye at home. It was as though we went out for a small trip. 

And it was-- the whole thing was a bit unreal. Before I knew, we were on the cattle cars. And the train was riding. And there was standing place-- space only. People crowded, leaning on each other. And I remember the training-- the train journeying into the night. It was getting very dark. 

And people were crying around me, and I didn't quite know why. So I look for a reason to cry, and I began crying about my little brass bed. I'm going to miss it. My mother had the presence of mind to reassure me that she had two coats. And once we got to the-- where we were going to get, she's going to buy me another brass bed. So I probably stopped crying. 

I think that journey went on through nights and days. I don't remember for how long. I remember one particular time around noon that we stopped at a station-- still, I think, somewhere in Romania. And I was terribly thirsty. There was, of course, no food, no drink. And my father ran out to get-- trying to find some water. 

And the locomotive-- the whistle of the locomotive began blowing. And I was frightened out of our mind that he would not come back in time, and would-- the train would leave without him. He made it. And I regret so much-- why did I say that I was thirsty? Why did I send him out? 

They-- I-- the journey continued. Of course, there was no toilet. And the needs when the usual pail that was in the train-- in the corner of the wagon. Mostly I remember the thirst. It probably was 48 hours, maybe 72. I don't know how long. That we arrive-- until we arrive at the border for me and others. That trip is only several hours trip, I think. But the train didn't move in a straight line, or was on the sidelines for many hours, waiting for other trains to pass by. 

INTERVIEWER: Looking back, do you think you remember? Or do you think you are remembering what your mother and father told you of this trip? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. That is clear cut visual imagery. There are many more things that I was told. But those are-- the way I remember is in glimpses, not in the continuity. And those are clear imagery-- images that I have. And I think I never forgot, really. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever-- was it ever explained to you how your father was able to get off the train, even to look for water, without-- 

SUBJECT: No. But that-- it was true that there were many borders. And I think a problem with some laxity. This journey brought us to the border of Romania, into the Ukrainian territory occupied by the Romanian soldiers. And the border is the River Dniester. Transnistria means beyond the Dnister. So the area beyond that river. 

And it was-- I remember arriving at the river, and being ferried in boats-- about 30, 40 people in the boat-- across the river. And that's almost a moment where time stopped moving. Because I liked that trip very much. A boat trip across the river. So it was a certain adventure. And I've liked boat trips since, really. 

It's interesting that the two ways of transportation I like most as train rides and boat trips. And it's a way of recapturing the pleasant part of that adventure. And the third thing is camping, which we did shortly afterwards. We crossed the river, and we're all left on a-- the side of a hill for overnight. And we had a blanket-- we slept outside. 

And I think to a certain extent, this was exciting, although there was dread. Because we really didn't know where we were going. But for me, I try to turn it into an adventure. I remember as we're lying through the night near those rail tracks-- the trains were passing by. And I again was fascinated by the locomotives. And those were military trains with troops. 

And it was very interesting, kind of, to see those big machines being moved, and the-- the hundreds of soldiers, and sitting in the window, and with the patriotic flags, and-- [SIGHS] I don't know how we were moved on. It probably was a train from that side of the hill across the river. 

We were transported to a camp which was on another border on the River Bug. Now the River Bug was the boundary between the Romanian-occupied territory and the German-occupied territory. And near that river, we were placed into a camp which was called, in those days, the stone quarry. It was an old a Russian czarist penal colony-- colony. Penal colony. Surrounded by wasteland or marshes for miles and miles. There was no village. 

A group of barracks around a big-- appellplatz-- parade ground. And surrounded by barbed wires. Very close to the River Bug. Probably about 100 yards. I know that around 5,000 people were transported over several days into that compound. Again, imagery from life there is catch-- is sketchy. Sleeping on-- in a-- like 30 or 40 people in a room on the floor. It was very important to preserve one's territory. And I used to-- that your place, where you could sleep at night. And I used to sleep between my mother and my father. 

Very early in the morning, we stood on the appel. And that could last for hours. We were really not a-- and there was also an appel for at night. There was little else to do during the day. We were not allowed to return to the barracks throughout the day. Only for sleep. And that was, in a way, to protect us-- to keep the hygiene. 

This-- the rumor went that the commander of the camp wanted to keep us alive. And forced us, and sometimes through cruel beatings, to leave the barracks in the morning, and to be outside, and to not contaminate them by staying there. 

I remember cooking on little fireplaces whatever there was to cook. There was no work, and there was no food. However, the villagers from quite distant villages were allowed in once or twice a week. And all kind of barter went on. You could trade your shirt for a bread, or a shawl for something, for some vegetable. And this is the way people managed to live. Some who had money were able to buy. 

At that-- in that camp, also, I could see people deteriorating. Very-- gung-- going-- becoming very fat. Which later on, I understood was their hungry demand is swelling. There was a group of insane-- patients of a psychiatric hospital who were brought there. And they would roam-- roam around. And I can remember particular one man in rags, a grayish, heavy, who would all the time babble. And he used to collect potato peels, and throw in the garbage, and try and find some kind of food. But he had some kind of experience of being joyful, or at least, this is how I recall him. 

I remember once during appel witnessing a beating-- a flogging-- where someone was flogged-- he received 25 hits over his shoulder. I don't know for what-- what was the-- what the crime was. But we had to watch him. And I could see the whip descending and the-- the kind of the quirk or tremble his whole-- whole body would make. I don't think he screamed. 

After the beating, I couldn't quite grasp how he was-- took it, and how he could live now. And I moved closer to him. And I could see the bloody marks on his back. And he was smoking a cigarette. And was it-- well, it was a puzzle to me how this man could sit there-- he was a young man, blond-- cafe-- bleached blond hair, tanned. And sitting there smoking a cigarette with this-- this marks on his back. 

I think I witnessed hangings, but it's vague. What I was mostly frightened of were the morning gatherings. Having to be in time and get out. And I would get into panic attacks and scream that I didn't want to go out, especially that we had German inspections from time to time. The Germans would come from across the river, and take groups from our midst across to the-- to their side. 

They used to promise good food and shelter in exchange-- in exchange for labor. And many people went voluntarily. We-- we suspected it. But others didn't want to believe that something was going to happen. My mother used to say, she never believed what a German was going to say. She knew that those people were shot within several months after they crossed the-- cross-- taken over the river. Or maybe even before that. 

That was a territory, I think, where the Einsatzgruppen were functioning-- the German extermination squads. So I had a certain sense of a-- of danger to my life. And I was screaming in the morning. And my mother had a bottle of phenobarb just in small dosages, and used to give me some now to quiet me down. Or used to give me a good thrashing to quiet me down. Something where-- where I sensed the physical pain, I would stop screaming. 

My mother had a very clear sense of what the situation was in which we were, that we-- there-- we were taken there in order to be exterminated. And the most important thing was that they were still together. And she said quite openly, she did not want me, her child, to be without parents, because there were also children roaming around, and slowly dying of hunger. And she did not want to see that. So the moment we were going to be separate, she was going to poison me. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: She said this? 

SUBJECT: She said this. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember hearing? 

SUBJECT: I remember this. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember hearing your mother talk to your father about things. Did she talk about your grandparents-- having left them without any-- 

SUBJECT: No. She only would say, I would like to go home. And if I-- and this was the kind of a fantasy with-- between my mother and I, that we would walk along the train tracks until we got to Chernivtsi for days and days. 

INTERVIEWER: You never heard her speak with your father about having left her parents without a separation? 

SUBJECT: I don't-- later on, we established some contact with her brother who was in Bucharest. And through him we heard that they were still alive. But we didn't know, really, that-- whether they were alive or not, or whether they were taken to another transport. 

INTERVIEWER: The money. You said people were searched, stripped, looked in their seams. And yet there were people who had money to barter with food. How did that happen? Do you know? 

SUBJECT: Later on, there were a system of couriers established, that the Romanian officers, traveling from Romania to the front line. And for a very good fee, they would transfer money from relatives to the people in the-- in the-- in this camp. I also think people managed to hide-- in their mouth, in their other orifices. There was-- however they were searched, they managed to hide something. 

And you could barter your clothing. Now, I-- they-- there was quite a polarization between my mother and my father. My father believed that the Germans promised us. They promised us work, it's going to be all right. My mother did not believe. I even heard from my father argue-- in argument, that, look, Hitler was talking about the resolution of the Jewish problem. 

He must mean a land, perhaps Madagascar. That was the-- one of the-- the possible solutions were mentioned in the '30s or before. He will give us a land. And this is-- he must have something in mind. And my mother said, no. This is the end. This is death. Actually, I was afraid-- both of the Germans, and I was afraid of my mother. That if we were separated, she was going to poison me. 

From that camp, I-- as-- people were being taken time and again to the German side. And so the population would diminish. They would come in with their trucks and take over a few hundred people. And then again come in. [SIGHS] We tried to escape. And there were many officers for, again, very substantial bribes, selected a group of people they planned to take to another compound nearby. 

It was a complicated schema that, while the Germans were in our town, they would take us into [INAUDIBLE] in nearby kind of compound. And so we would be able to escape the Germans like-- the Germans coming and taking us. In the midst of-- we all packed and carry-- with our rucksacks and our suitcases, and began walking. 

And a German officer, who supposedly was syphilitic, got into a violent burst of anger in the middle, and began shooting. He particularly want to shoot one man who had annoyed him, and mistook him for my father. So this I remember. A kind of silvery like a-- a silver colored pistol pointed at my father. And my mother jumped in front of my father. 

And he got so furious with her that he took a rubber stick and hit her on-- hit her on her head. And so then I watched this. And then he ordered the whole convoy to turn back. And we turned back. And were back in our camp. That-- we had been there, I think, for five or six months. And it was clear that they were not terribly many people left, and it was approaching an end. 

And again, at this, I really no more I don't remember. There was money collected for a group-- special group who would be brought to a nearby town. We didn't have enough, the full sum. But my parents gave whatever they did have to a lawyer. I remember he was named Stolar. And he said he might include us on that list. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Or your mother told you? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember this. 

SUBJECT: I remember-- I read on. Yes, I remember the name. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember being cold, hot, the weather? Six months-- 

SUBJECT: It was-- and it was getting cold. It was crisp days, sunshine, but getting quite cold. I think it was around November. October, November. You-- anyone couldn't fix-- said that something was coming. And then the night was approaching. And during that night, my parents just didn't go to sleep, because they were waiting for the Ger-- arrival of the Germans. 

I think it was by the crack of dawn that they were all driven out in the big appelplatz in the middle, and stayed for hours. That special group of people who had paid the ransom was also there. And everybody was gathered-- 1,000 people, maybe more, in groups of 30. And on this parade ground. 

And we heard the noise of trucks. And I vaguely remember German uniforms. After hours of waiting out there, my father was a leader of the group. So he felt an enormous responsibility towards the group to stay with them, to be with them. 

All of a sudden, I saw certain people picking up their suitcase and running. And that was that a lawyer-- Stoler-- and a thou-- I think, maybe 150 people with him. That I remember. My mother asked him, where are you going? And his response was, this is only for me, not for you. So she said, wherever you go, I shall go, too. 

My father did not want to leave this group, and said, I am responsible for these people. I am their leader. I must stay. And my mother grabbed the suitcase in one hand and my hand in the other, and said, if you want to stay, stay. The child and I are going. And he joined us. And we were running. I think we were among the last. And several hundred yards, 400 or 500 yards. There was-- there were no guards at the perimeter at that moment. Everybody was around the center with the Germans' arrivals. 

And we arrived at this small house. The door was locked. My parents knocked at the door-- knocked very-- pounded at the door, and it wasn't opened. And my mother said, if you don't let us in, we'll just give you away. And the door was opened then. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: 150 people were in there? 

SUBJECT: More, even, I think. More even. It was-- so it-- very crowded. Everybody was standing pressed together, and those-- and we were waiting there. And you were not supposed to-- you you were supposed to be completely quiet. Not a noise. They were quite annoyed with me, because I-- I had the whooping cough at that time. 

And I had a cough, and I had to keep quiet. And I did keep quiet. The day-- I think the time dragged on in complete silence. And it was-- we could hear the noise of trucks, people screaming, and shots. And at some moment, we heard the German order, "Juden ha raus!" Jews out! And that meant we were discovered. 

And the people began to say goodbye to each other, to hug. My mother-- father give my mother his watch. Expecting men to be exterminated first. From the shots, I think, it was clear that something was going on outside. We-- the Romanian soldier that was guarding the house didn't allow the Germans in, and somehow managed to get hold of the commander of the camp, who declared us as his, quote, "specialists," closed quote. We were people who were needed to keep up the barracks and to keep up the compound in order that the whole place not decay. 

And this is how we were saved at that time. At night, the all doors were opened, and you could leave. The whole camp was empty. And I really remember walking, and the sound of footsteps, because there was such an emptiness. And it was a very-- it's a clear sky, the stars. And I asked my father, why? [SIGHS] And he said something, this is impossible. Churchill is not going to look this happen. 

And the big hope was-- his big hope was that there will be some-- a live intervention, some miracle. Churchill is not going to let this happen to us. Really from that-- but a moment onwards, we became illegal. At least, were not in any official records. The camp stopped existing. And the remnants-- that the people were left-- were-- had no names or no list. Were, in a sense, free to move, but had nowhere to go. 

Just a few glimpses from that camp life. There were times that you could even swim in the River Bug. When the transports became a frequent, we were not allowed to approach the rivers by the Romanians. They would shoot if anyone came close to the river. And I was ill a lot of-- most of the time. I had scarlet fever and typhoid-- some typhoid, and-- and strep throats. 

And parents would not let children live-- play with me, because I was-- I could infect them. There was only one little girl who was allowed by her parents to play with me. Her name was Paula Druckmann. And I remember once sitting on the bank of the river, our feet dangling in the water, and she told me that you can eat grass. And that's how people can live. 

And she picked up a grass hump and ate it. And I followed her and picked up a grass hump and ate it, too. Well, it didn't taste very good. And there is a certain quality of a sunshine in summertime, and almost a vacation, to some of the days in camp when I didn't want to notice what was happening around me. I was sitting on the riverbank with this little girl, and tasting the grass. 

Well, I-- coming back to that night, probably somewhere in October, where the camp was deserted. We stayed for a while longer there. A Romanian officer to a sarg-, to- took us-- told us that it was very unsafe. That if we were gone-- if we were discovered by the Germans across the river, they would again take us to the other side. 

And by that time, we knew very clearly that there was certain death. So you better move. And we got into a convoy with a Romanian guard. By that time, I think it was-- it was snowing. And I remember walking after a cart and a horse, and just walking for days and days. And then overnight in a barn. It was freezing. 

At some time, I developed a temperature. And it was really-- the snow was quite deep. And my father was carrying me on his back-- on his shoulder. And I thought to myself, my god, I mean, this just makes it so heavy for him. He must want to drop me. And the snow-- he-- the snow was so deep. And he-- it was so difficult for him to get his feet out of the snow to take another step. 

We probably walked this way for days, until we arrived in a little town with a Jewish community, and also with a number of Jews who had been deported from Romania. The name of the town was Obodovka. 

The way I remember it-- and it may not be correct-- was that townspeople came to meet us, and they thought I was a piece of luggage, and stole me, and took me into a room, and then opened the luggage, and found there was a child. It may not have been that way, because people just took me in. And I was in a room. And they gave me something to eat. And-- until my parents could find a place to live. 

Again, we had-- we were illegal. So it was not easy to find-- find a place. Finally, we found a room in [INAUDIBLE]-- part of the forest near the town, and-- with one of the villagers. And it was-- there are two families that will share that room. It's a-- that villager was connected with underground. And there were parties and meetings in the-- in the barn and around. And we were in a quite dangerous spot, because of German and Romanian search parties, for the partisans. 

Eventually, we were-- the town-- the Jewish community and the town knew about that-- the new-- newcomers. And whenever there was a quota of people to be delivered to the Germans, the newcomers would be picked first. Because we're the latest, you want-- even those who had arrived there half a year before us had a certain tenure in the place. 

Sorry-- I remember several times, my parents being taken away in the middle of the night. [SIGHS] And I stayed with a neighbor. And I promised to be good. One of these times, my father had not come back. And men were taken away and that was it. 

INTERVIEWER: And you never saw him again? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: He just left one morning and-- 

SUBJECT: He was taken away in the middle of the night by a search party. And then my-- both of my parents. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Both your parents were taken away? 

SUBJECT: Were taken away. And my mother-- my mother was let go. And she has a story about it-- how she was allowed to go, and here the men were kept, and then taken on, into some transport. We don't know what happened. Ah-- even-- but before that, I kept urging my parents to let me go. 

Because I had a feeling, as a child, I could probably find my way back to Chernivtsi, or escape and manage to be unnoticed. And my parents quite clearly answered that I was safer staying with them. But they had quite a few arguments with me. I remember saying to them, you-- many times, you have already lived. You went to spas and vacation places. You told me so many things. I haven't lived. I want to live. So let me go. And of course, they didn't. 

At some point, there was a room where the children were being gathered and sent back to Romania, or possibly to Switzerland, in a nearby town. And I forced my father to take me to that gathering place, which-- and I remember that trip with him. We had to stay overnight at some inn in between. He arrived there, and what he saw convinced him not to leave me. And he took me back. 

INTERVIEWER: Back to where? 

SUBJECT: Back to Obodovka-- to that little town. There was-- it was a nearby town in Balta, where the children were gathered. Some of the children may have been taken back to Romania. I also know of children who were then burned in a house as the Romanian troops later on withdrew. So some may have been saved. But I think many did not. But it-- the conditions were such that my father decided not to leave me there. Whatever would happen to all of us, as long as we are together, there was some kind of safety. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you-- do you think your mother let him take you even to see the place? 

SUBJECT: I think-- I just didn't let up. I begged, and screamed, and yelled, and convinced. And I begged for my life. And I was fighting all the time. And he kind of showed me, look. This is it. It's dirty, it's crowded. There's no paradise there. And do you want to stay there? And I-- my self-reliance didn't want to stay there. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you ever think about the fact that your mother let you out of her sight? No. 

SUBJECT: Not-- not really, because she did keep-- well, she let me out of her sight now, pretty far away. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. I mean, she let your father take her-- take you. 

SUBJECT: She let-- take me. Right. 

INTERVIEWER: You were only five. 

SUBJECT: Ah, six-- more than-- six and a half, six and something. 

INTERVIEWER: This is 1943, then. 

SUBJECT: And I think we already-- yeah, a late thirty-- '43. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Late '43. Ah-- well. Yes. In the latter part of '43 and the beginning of '44, we became more-- we were legalized. And moved into a room, of course, with many other people near the-- in the center of the town. A room which was on the-- near a highway. And I used to sit near that highway and watch. And you could-- I watch the troop movement. 

And those would be columns moving day and night of soldiers on foot and of vehicles. Of ambulances, and of armored vehicles, moving all the time. And I kept seeing them moving in one direction. One particular day, two German-- Germans came in. And I was terribly frightened. And I remember they were young men in blue uniforms, quite gentle. 

They were looking for a piece of rope, which we didn't have, I think. But I was-- I thought this was the end. Anyway, I kept near that window, and watching the troops moving endlessly. And then, something peculiar happened. I think it was in the spring of 1944. The true-- the troops began moving in the opposite direction. And the same thing. 

And there were more ambulances. I saw them walking and walking endlessly in the opposite direction. And then, for a day or so, it was quiet, except that we did hear the noise of authority, and the Russians liberated us. 

INTERVIEWER: I am-- want to press you a bit on the time frame, because this is from a child's view. You went away first in 1941? 

SUBJECT: 2. 

INTERVIEWER: '42. 

SUBJECT: In spring of 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Spring of '42. You were in that camp in Transnistra till-- 

SUBJECT: November of 40-- 

INTERVIEWER: 3. 

SUBJECT: 2. 

INTERVIEWER: November of '42, yes. 

SUBJECT: 2. 

INTERVIEWER: And then, a whole year or more in this town? 

SUBJECT: In this town, which was a-- a ghetto-like town, with raids, and people being taken away, and ransoms, and all kind of things went on. But it was a more normal environment than the camp, I think, before that. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever wondered why you weren't taken to a concentration camp as such? Why you were not moved into Germany, or Poland, or why they left you in Romania? 

SUBJECT: They-- this was the Romanian solution. They took the Jews of-- Basarabia Bucovina of the certain provinces, and I think about 200,000, and transported them to Transnistra. Even before the journey began, their possible explanation. So from our area-- we were under Romanian occupation. And the Romanian government, really. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever hear the term about the Romanian Iron Guard with-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it called in the language you heard it in? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember-- I can't recall the name. I speak Romanian, but I can't recall. Fier is iron. I don't remember the name-- what guard is. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you ever talk with your mother about this past? Or do you leave it rest? 

SUBJECT: No, we do talk. When she tells me things, I don't remember them, and don't manage to retain them, really. It's what I remember which stays with me. She's told me many more details. I don't-- even this won't remember any-- any of them to bridge this. But I have certain things which are alive, and those stay. 

INTERVIEWER: Several questions. One is, after you were liberated, what happened? 

SUBJECT: After we were liberated, the big exodus began. It was really moving. The Jews came out from everywhere by the thousands. And everybody was on the roads and hitchhiking. And, you know, the Russian troops used to give us lifts in their trucks for a period of the way. I remember a Russian captain who gave us a lift until the River Giester, and then he parted from us and said, please bless me. Because I'm going to the front line, and I would like to survive. And who did that? 

At some particular point, it was almost comical. We saw a little hand-drawn carriage with a lot of-- with luggage on it and five children and a woman walking. This was my father's sister and her five children who were still alive. And boy, by chance, we met on the road. But this was-- it was a certain springtime atmosphere. There's a certain anticipation, hope. And when you saw these-- and there was freedom. We could move around. 

It would happen on ammunition trains going into-- going west to the front lines. And they would let us come with them. We really were not very far behind the front lines, advancing back towards home. 

I remember the particular moment when we arrived home, which we had managed to get hold of a cart and a horse from some train station. And came close to that street where we lived. Now, we didn't know whether my grandparents were alive or the house was still there. We knew nothing. And a kind of dread coming closer to the home. 

And as the carriage entered the street, I could see the house. And then I saw my grandmother crossing. And my mother ran up to her. And she didn't recognize her in the beginning. And then she started crying, of course, and I quickly-- the house was there. I ran in. The first thing I ran was to the cupboard with my toys. And I opened it, and it was empty. And what was left? Maybe some little broken things. But that was the moment of coming home. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your grandfather still alive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my grandfather was alive, my grandmother was alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you begin looking for your father? Or what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, I-- I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, not you apparently. 

SUBJECT: We don't know what happened. We waited. There was always belief, for many years, that he's alive somewhere-- that he's maybe somewhere in Russia, that maybe he has another family, all kinds of were things that went through my mind. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: How long did you stay in Romania after that? 

SUBJECT: This-- we were in the Russia now. 

INTERVIEWER: Well-- 

SUBJECT: It was Russian until '46. And then it crossed the border into the-- into Romania and stayed in Romania proper until 1950. 

INTERVIEWER: In Romania proper-- in what city? 

SUBJECT: Still on the border. A little town-- [INAUDIBLE]. See, the place-- the town in which I was born became a Russian town now. It was-- it's still a Russian town. So the border was moved about 50 miles to the west. And we were allowed to cross by the Russians. We were allowed to cross into Romania in 1946. 

Let me just mention, the period after the war was a very important one. I remember thinking of a huge army. And I was going to build an enormous army. And I was inventing things-- a submarine and a perpetual mobile-- something that will never stop. And I thought two wheels-- cogwheels, if you-- or four cogwheels, one within the other, they will keep moving forever. And I thought I had invented something tremendous. 

And I was going to have troops and all this with a-- with a kind of purpose that I was going to fight the Germans, and win the war, and be decorated, and-- the very lively kind of fantasy life. Also, not only my own. Other children had similar kind of a fantasy lives. And we used to share them. We used to dream of those big army corps and corps and brigades which we would lead into battle. And we gave each other ranks of officers and marshals. It was free. Children would sometimes organize into bands with a kind of military-like purpose and play at war. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't feel any discrimination? Any kind of intolerance? Any kind of bad vibrations, living in now Romania from '46 to '50? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- first-- we-- at that particular time, Jews were still protected somehow. They had been wronged before. So they were the supporters of the present regime who freed them. The local population was afraid. And those people had done-- many programs as Jews before the war. Now it was quite fashionable and not to be an anti-Semite. 

I remember one instance, however, where the son of a priest in my class-- I think I was at that time around 10 or 11. And he was quite a spoiled young boy. And we were waiting for our gym lesson, and he turned around to me and called me Jew in the Romanian language. And it's-- [? [SPEAKING ROMANIAN] ?] it's really-- not only Jew. It's a-- it's close to cursing. And I don't know where I got the courage. I slapped him in the face as strong as I could. And he didn't respond. He just became as meek as a lamb. 

INTERVIEWER: Your fantasies about your father-- that he might still be alive. And you're a psychiatrist now. How have you come to terms with this? With all the loss, the reconciliation of the probable outcome? 

SUBJECT: It's-- you know, it's still, for me, like a whole world is not really lost. I don't-- it simply was a picture frame which was taken out of the slide machine and was put aside. And it's somewhere ready to be put back. I know it's loss, of course. But at night, it sometimes-- and before I fall asleep, there are moments which I have a sense that my grandparents and my father, they're really alive in some place. And one can turn the clock back and begin at that moment. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go to Israel with your parents-- with your grandparents and your mother? 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: Your grandparents survived all of that. 

SUBJECT: All of my that. And shortly after my grandfather died-- I think four or six months after I went to Israel. And he could be buried in Israel. It was one of his dreams. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they tell you what happened to them in Czernowitz while you were gone? 

SUBJECT: If they did, then I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: They were not very harassed. I think there were troops or loot moved into the house, occupied furniture, occupied them. I don't know what else happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Your grandmother? How long did she live? 

SUBJECT: She lived till I was in medical school in 19-- I was in second year of medical school, I think 1957, when she died. Very suddenly. I was-- received a telegram to come home, and I knew. And I-- the weekend before they were still home. And she had a sense that something was-- might happen. She said to me that-- she said goodbye to me. I didn't quite take it seriously. But when I received the telegram, I realized that was it. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else that you're left with besides a sense of the slide projector having been stopped and the slides removed temporarily? 

SUBJECT: Mm. I think there's a certain dread. And the dread before the-- the morning gatherings. And that there might be an explosion any moment. Now, this is partially something that I remember and partially what-- there is something that I was told. That I used to-- after they shut off the war, I was sleeping over in a cousin of my mother's. 

And I said to her before I went to sleep, Aunt Teddy, you know, at night I scream. Please don't be worried about that. That's something I have to do. And I go back to sleep. You just don't get up. So obviously I was aware of something that was very frightening to me, and particularly about having to do with those early moments, and having to go out and face ah-- the-- the-- I don't know what to face. 

INTERVIEWER: You were so young, and yet the images are so clear. From a-- [CHUCKLES] from a professional point of view, how do you account for this clarity of vision of image for a four-year-old, five-year-old, six-year-old? 

SUBJECT: I think that older images that have people talking are very clear. They're almost over-clear. There is certain-- 