INTERVIEWER: --do one more take, or part of one. And you tell-- because I feel-- what? It's not done yet? 

SUBJECT: It's OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Wait. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Anytime. Wait a minute. 

SUBJECT: One second. I'd like to-- I like-- I just have a story I would like to tell you. It happened on Simhat Torah 1941. I'm going back a little bit. And, uh, they took some people to work on the road and all of a sudden, we heard shooting going down in the city. And my brother was at work and, uh, some of the people escaped from the ditches. 

And they were telling my mother that they were shooting and maybe your son is there also. We don't know if he escaped. Then after, my mother ran to this place of shooting. She ran towards it. And, uh, she called my brother's name, Nachman, Nachman. And the policemen or the collaborators or the soldiers looked up at her and they said they couldn't care less about her. 

But they have taken a group of people, of young men, and they were digging the ditch, a grave-- and they didn't know and they asked the policemen, how deep shall we would dig it? And they said, it's for yourself and it's up to you how deep you would like it to be. And then they asked for volunteers to come out to cover up this grave. 

It was near the church, actually, they dug this grave. And one of the boys said, I think we better take this sand and throw it at the policemen and in the faces and run for our lives. And then a religious boy, another one said-- Maizel was his name-- he said, no. We better say our final prayers. And that should be it because if we will kill one German, one collaborator, they probably will kill 100 or hundreds of our friends or neighbors or our other Jewish people there. 

So we-- our turn has come. And he-- how do I know this story is one of the boys finally felt that he is alive from the grave. While they were covering them up, he felt that he was-- he moved and there was silence. And he told it-- I heard him tell the story. And he was alive. Well-- and the people that were putting the-- the [INAUDIBLE] on the grave said, if anyone is alive, run. 

And he escaped in his underwear. He was running while his blood was coming from his ear and his shoulder. He felt no pain, he said. He was just wiping his blood from his head. Apparently, he was shot twice. Once it was a skin wound, apparently, and also in his arm, aiming at his head-- brain and heart. At that time, he survived, but they did finally-- and he told us who died in the grave there. 

His name was Arthur Sandler and he did not survive the final solution. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you survive? 

SUBJECT: From-- I resisted to die, as I said before. And we went into the forest because they said there are partisans in the forest there organizing. And since we are-- were young and we decided to take a chance there. And my grandmother also. But she was a healthy woman. 

And we were 10 people. We went to the forest, laying around. My brother and my cousins were going night after night on the roads and crossroads looking for partisans. And the partisans would not come, the underground fighters. Maybe they were not organized themselves or maybe they were looking for people with weapons, with police rifle or a gun, which we did not have at that time. 

And after a month being in the forest, we built in the forest a hut or a hutte from a-- our hand, with our hands. I mean, my parents did that and my brothers and my cousins. And everyone help however they could, whatever they can contribute. We were in the rain, we were soaking wet. But for whatever reason it is we did not get sick. 

I guess all of our reserved energies were pulled together and as if they resisted to get sick. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did this last, and when did liberation come to you? 

SUBJECT: Well, that was in 1942, the summer of 1942. In August 1942, a rumor came to us in the forest that they decided to take the women, men, and young children to go to cross the front line. And actually, the front line was at Stalingrad, Moscow, Leningrad. When the Russians and the Germans were fighting, it was a decisive battle at that time for life and death. And this was really the decisive battle of war, if you were-- of course, the fighting was going on. 

It was closer to the Stalingrad in the winter of Stalingrad. And the partisans decided to take us over to the other side, take a chance. And they asked my cousin, saying, what shall we do? And he said, go on, you have a better chance than staying here. But my brother did not come. And they surrounded us and they wanted to-- the Germans had an order to kill us all, in the forest. 

Some spies probably from the villages that people have spies there and told us that there are a group of people. I'm cutting this story, making it short, I hope, making it understandable. They have, um, killed the dead with mines, thrown mines. It's like not bombs, but it is from a-- from a artillery, a small artillery. I don't know the military names for all of those weapons really. And we were getting organized to go to cross the border, across the front line. 

And actually, we were supposed to cross the front line of, well, closer to Moscow because the Germans were concentrating the troops southward by Stalingrad and north by Leningrad. So they decided-- whoever it was, the leader, decided that this would be the best place for us to cross the front line. And we walked during the night. We started-- we did not originally start-- it was a group of about 150. 

I really don't know the exact amount of people that started of this journey across the border. It was a question of thousands, a couple of thousands of miles. Because it was not a straight road. We had to go byways, by villages, by forests. Us And at the time of departure, the leader of our group said, I'll tell you what. See those trees in the forest? Look at them. In case of problems, return to his position. 

And I as a child looked up to those tall trees and they all looked alike to me. And I said, how am I going to know the difference of the trees, even though I had learned that trees and-- if it's northward that trees have greener growth I learned in school but it was not applicable at that moment. Anyway, we, um-- it was scary, but we were not frightened. We were hopeful, I believe. 

I believe that-- that-- I prayed to God that he should let me live. I wanted so much to be alive, to be able to tell this story, not to forget. Zekhor Ve'Al tishkakh. Remember, do not forget. Tell it and teach it to the children. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that where you were liberated? Is that-- 

SUBJECT: I was not liberated yet. I-- we were walking. And it's along walk and it is very long. And I don't think we have the time to go that far. And we were, uh, going at night. And in the daytime, we, uh-- how-- what did we do for food? We had the men, the young folks, used to go into the village and get potatoes or whatever was available for us. And they boiled it halfway and a potato was coming to a person or two potatoes maybe, half cooked, half raw. 

But we did not complain about the conditions as long as we were alive and going forward. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you felt the day that it was all over, or you thought it was all over? 

SUBJECT: I wanted to go home badly. I looked for my brother and for anyone else that's alive. My grandmother was wounded at that time and my father, realizing that a woman is screaming, he grabbed her in his hands and carried her. He covered her wound, her leg wound. She must have been in her sixties at that time. To me she looked always old because grandmothers do have a tendency to look old. 

And, uh, he picked her up because my father was strong and, uh, a family, dedicated person, a good man. He carried her, touched up her wound with tore off his shirt and covered her wound, running with her. But she couldn't go with us across the front line. And there was a Dr. Cutler and they couldn't tell us when we would move. 

But we wouldn't start our journey without her and without my brother-- my older brother, that is. But my younger brother, I guess, wanted to remain with the fighters in the forest. He did not want to go anywhere. He wanted just to stay with the resistant parties and movement there. And my grandmother could not walk. And they said-- the doctor promised us, whatever we can do, we'll do all we can for your grandmother. 

But, um, she cannot go with you and you cannot stay here. And we said, what if we stay in the forest? They said, then you are on your own, you will not hear from us. In other words, food supplies you will have to get on your own. It was-- they gave us a choice, either to be on our own in the forest, which was impossible to survive the winters on your own, or to go wherever they told us to go. And we walked and my grandmother remained fight-- with the fighting forces, which turned out to be a great help and a great active member of the partisan movement, my grandmother did. 

Her leg was, uh, healed temporarily and was bandaged up by this Dr. Cutler, who did magic work in the forest for the wounded soldiers. And no one-- he cut legs and arms, he fixed everyone without-- with a minimum of medication, whatever. But he was a very capable, able doctor. And, uh, he did as he promised and she had survived in the forest cooking, mending, preparing food for the boys. 

And, uh, there was especially one, the leader of the movement there or movement of the group, of the partisans, that took special care of my grandmother remaining in the forest. And I looked or my brother, Nachman, after 1944, when our territory was liberated. But-- and he did not call and he did not write. He did not come, he did not appear. 

And how ironic it is that this is my grandmother who is old and wounded-- 

INTERVIEWER: You never saw your brother again? 

SUBJECT: I have never seen my brother again. I'm still in search of my brother. I hope- I don't know. I hope. I don't know. If the unknown-- you know, the unknown frightens someone and the unknown fascinates someone. I was fascinating always by the unknown, what there is to learn. I'm fascinating, but I'm frightened of it, what I may find out. We had regards that he was with the fighting groups. 

He was a skier and he must have been with the skiing battalion that was scouting for the army against the German in the war. When the liberation came, I wanted to go back to my hometown in the worst way. And it was-- took a long time until we got permission to get to our hometown from where we were, at that time far east-- not the Far East, but it was far east removed from my town. It was Europe. And uh, I, uh-- only if I could hear from my brother. 

If I go home, I'll hear from him. But, uh, we never did. We waited. And I felt-- when I came home, there was-- my home was rubble. It was brick, it was stone. There was rubble. It was destruction. It was like that was the Holocaust. It was the end. There was no home. 

And I felt a physical-- although I know it must be psychological, because no one was choking me. And I felt like a-- a feeling of my like some-- like ghost. And I'm walking and I said, this was the house where my aunt lived and this was my grandmother's house and this was where my friend was and this was my cousin's house. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you well received by the people in the village? 

SUBJECT: I will to you I was not too sensitive for the people of the town at the time because my grandmother already came from the forest and she prepared for us. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel now about having lived through this? Your relationship to people now, within yourself? What do you think about? 

SUBJECT: I believe in the goodness of man and I do believe that there is goodness and there is-- everyone has a right and a responsibility to save his life. I believe that people are good, basically. I am afraid of mass-- mass hysteria. I do believe that there is a universal God. Why he did it, I-- I'm not blaming anyone. I blame no one. 

I feel-- I live with it every day, even though people think I have not spoken about it. But we talk about our experiences. We take one episode and we can speak about it in the family-- the circle of our friends. We do. And we understand each other. We one-- say one word and we say the other one can continue and take over, even though the family structure was different, the town was different, the date of the shkhita of the is different. 

After I came back, I went back to the village to the barn where I was hiding, as you asked me before, how does it feel to be [INAUDIBLE]? And I had the same feeling. I was grasping for air. I was short of air. I needed air. I was choking. And it must have been psychosomatic, probably, as I see it now. 

I said, I can't stay here. I can't stay. And I-- I thanked the people. I had appreciation for what they have done with us, for us during the war when it was really a matter of life and death. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think about those people now? Have you tried to get in touch with those people? 

SUBJECT: We were in touch with them. They are in the Soviet Union. We were afraid that by writing to them too much and too much correspondence, we were afraid. We heard through someone else that the man of the house had died since. And, uh, we have helped them by sending packages from the United States of America. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you believe people are basically good. What do you tell your children about what the Nazis did to you? 

SUBJECT: I tell them the way it is. I can't-- I do not judge. I tell it like it was. I do not moralize. I was not demoralized. I was never demoralized. I said-- I decided I found salvation in, uh, reading wherever I could find reading. I read the Book of Psalms Tehillim, which I had carried with me all the way through. I went through fire, literal fire, and water, literal water, through the rivers all the way to my neck. 

My-- the closest that I came to death-- many times I did come close to death during the war. I'm going back now. And, uh, I have found that I-- they were shooting bullets were whizzing all around me. And they have a special kind of a whistle that you-- if you don't-- you should-- you don't know it until you really are there. And we-- I heard them and I thought that something was missing because people told me if one gets shot, you cannot feel the pain. 

And I was touching myself if I could, uh, if I'm still alive, if I can run. And all of a sudden, like in a bad dream if you try to run and you can't run and you want to run. And that was reality. How I feel about it right now, with my-- I really feel that I had survived. I kept up my faith and my belief by teaching other children. 

I think by being what I am, the way I am, I teach Judaism in spite of all. I teach them the Jewish prayers or the prayers to the one and only God, which is in heaven for us all. I teach in the prayers and love the Hebrew language. Maybe this is what have kept me up all through these years and kept my morale up. I remember poems that I have-- poems which I have memorized. 

We did have to memorize epic poems especially, rather than the short poems, stories, prose. I read-- I new the prayers by heart. I went to school here in the United States. I am taking pride in teaching it to the children now and to continue in the tradition of my fathers, my-- and sisters. I-- I love what I am. This is part of me, the Hebrew language, the faith that kept me up. How I feel, I feel that when I do retire-- 