CREW: Ready? 

CREW: Tell us when 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: Start? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: My name is Suzannah Riesz. I was born in Hungary in 1924. And I grew up in Hungary. I went to school there. Because I remember when I was six years old-- not before that-- I went to school. And we went-- I went to a Jewish school for the elementary school. And then I went to Jewish school for four years after that. And then in other four years that was a state school which we called business school. And that's where I graduated from. That happened in 1941. June. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you born exactly? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was born in Hungary, Debrecen. Which is population about 200,000. The life was very normal. We were-- we grew up together, Jews, Christians, I mean, Hungarians. My hus-- my father owned a textile store, which was very nice. So he worked very hard to give us a beautiful life, so I could have everything I wanted. And I did. I was loved, and spoiled, and pampered. 

That's what made that worse when I was just thrown out to the world after-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is-- could you describe the beautiful life? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We had clubs event. We had dances. We went to clubs where we met these other people. And we danced. We had nice music and beautiful books to read. A nice home. Every-- everything. We went to vacation every year. Uh, there is a lake in Hungary which is beautiful called Balaton. We went there for vacation. We went to Czechoslovakia. It was a spa. And we never had any problem-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Health spa? 

SUBJECT: No, bath. We never had any problem that-- when I can remember, because we were Jews. That happened later when the Germans started to run down other countries like Poland, Czechoslovakia, et cetera. Then we started to feel that we are not first class citizens anymore. They started to take away everything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mrs. Riesz. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Back in the early days-- 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were young and in school, you had friends who weren't Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You never felt that there was a difference between-- 

SUBJECT: Never felt-- we had mostly Jewish friends. That's how we grew up. That's how we learned. We belonged to the synagogue. Every Saturday we went to the synagogue with the whole school. And we sang. We had the service. And it was beautiful. After that, we went home. My mother always light-- lit candles Friday night. And Saturday night we always had guests for dinner. And we had a wonderful life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You never felt anything in the Hungarian-- 

SUBJECT: Not that time. Later. Later, like, when Hitler ran down the countries, then the Hungarian behavior changed toward us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you des-- I-- that synagogue morning. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the singing. Men and women? 

SUBJECT: No, women were separate. And men were sep-- that was-- it wasn't orthodox. But there was no temple in Hungary which would allow women and men together. It was a conservative Jewish population. OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So how-- how did the women pray? 

SUBJECT: Hebrew. Yeah, I can read Hebrew. I-- I pray in Hebrew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember a prayer from that time? 

SUBJECT: Ah. I don't think so. I can read the book. But I don't remember that. Because now I don't go. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was singing? 

SUBJECT: Me. A choir. I was always in the choir. Because I had a good voice. And I enjoyed that very much. Later I sang in the [? [NON ENGLISH] ?] in the choir. And, uh, it was beautiful. I was very happy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the [? [NON ENGLISH] ?] 

SUBJECT: Uh, [? [NON ENGLISH]. ?] No. I-- I don't remember it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: Uh, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you continued singing in a choir here? Or-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. So when I grew up, the last-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's stay with-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --those early times. You mentioned there were clubs. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- 

SUBJECT: It was for businessmens like my father. And we belonged there. He went, played cards, weekends. And I went there. We had dances for the young people. And programs, entertainment. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were these only for Jewish people? 

SUBJECT: That was only for Jewish people. In that time, we only had Jewish friends. And we went only to clubs where-- where only Jewish people. Later, it was mixed. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before we come to later, I, uh-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you were pampered, and-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, my-- if I told them to buy this for me-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like what? 

SUBJECT: --the next day they-- a coat or a-- a fir, or a nice dress, or anything. My hus-- my father worked very hard. But it was a good store. And we were open Saturdays. Which my grandmother didn't know. Because she was religious. She wore a wig. Both grandmother. And there was a little town when I was born. I grew up in Debrecen. But I was born in a smaller town, like, 10,000 people. It's called Nyirbator. That's where I was born. But we lived in Debrecen. 

Uh, my mother was very happy. Very nice lady. Very good looking. Uh, she dressed beautiful. And my father, too. It was a good happy life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were-- 

SUBJECT: It-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the only child? 

SUBJECT: Only child, yes. I had relatives like cousins. We grew up together. We didn't like each other like sisters. But I never had a sister or a brother of my own. Uh, so after elementary school, I started in a Jewish school for four years. It's, uh-- I don't know how you call that in English. The next four years. When I finished this school, they were only Jewish people in-- Jewish kids in the school. But after that, I went-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, boys and girls? 

SUBJECT: No. No, never. I never went, uh, to a school that have a mixed. And in my time, nobody did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did Jewish, uh, girls learn about the world? 

SUBJECT: Not too much at that time. Uh, I read a lot about the world. But in the school, uh, I don't think we learned too much about it. We had-- later we learned, in the last four years. But in these four years, we had mathematic and languages. French, German, chemistry, physic, history. But mostly, we learned from Hungarian history. And geography. We just-- not in details. Just we knew where the United States, or Africa, or Asia were. 

About the world, we didn't know too much. We were very naive. It was a closed world with relatives. Uh, almost always until that part of my life. Only in the last four years. I went to a state school where were Christians just as well as Jews. But we were very good friends. They came to my house. We went to their house. It was when I graduated when I was 18 years old. After that, everything changed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was in 19-- 

SUBJECT: '41. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see that changed? 

SUBJECT: The change that-- uh, we heard that the Germans wanted to make-- create a world without Jews. A little bit, but not completely. Even then they were starting to take people out from Poland. I mean, fir-- first from Germany. Then Poland, Czechoslovakia. We didn't know that. Just we heard rumors. 

But a little later on the Czechoslovakian Jews started to come into Hungary. Uh, I think I have to admit that the Hungarian government knew about it. Not officially. They had some papers. And they came, escaped from the Holocaust. And then, uh, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember Czechoslovakian Jews? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell about specific? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Uh, well, my grandmother lived in a street where were-- almost everybody was Jewish. And their family in the same house. Uh, it was a family from Czechoslovakia who had escaped. I mostly remember the boy, because he was my age. And he started to tell us stories which was unbelievable. I just could not imagine that it can happen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What stories? 

SUBJECT: That-- that they take people out from the country and deport them. And they take off everything. And the old people, and the sick people, and the little people-- little kids-- were killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember especially any one story that this Czechoslovakian Jewish boy told you? 

SUBJECT: He-- he just generalized the thing. Uh, but he told me that his friend's parents were taken away. And some people escaped from the train when they went to Germany-- oh, not Germany. Uh, to Poland. It was a camp called Auschwitz. 

But I didn't believe it. And my parents didn't believe it either. The most of all, we did not believe that the Hungarians will let us be taken out of the country. We grew up together. We had the same culture, the same food. We sang the same songs. So we just said that, if it happened anywhere, it cannot happen in Hungary. Because they wouldn't let us go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you feel patriotic? 

SUBJECT: Which was a lie. Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you patriotic? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. I sang the songs like the national anthem in a choir. And, uh, yes. I loved that. Until I learned that I am a second class citizen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you think the boy was lying to you? 

SUBJECT: No, I thought he e-- exaggerate. I thought maybe the old people were taken somewhere where they-- during the war, you know. Until they were liberated. They will survive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But he was not the only person who told you about what was going on. 

SUBJECT: He wasn't. But not too many more person I talked about. I closed my mind. I didn't want to believe it. So what you don't want to believe, very hard to convince you of the opposite. 

Now, we lived in a house where there was several apartments. And one of the apartments changed, uh, owner. It moved in a detective. You know, for the police. And then it was '43, 1943. His wife asked us to come in with my girlfriend. I had a girlfriend in the same house who also was Jewish. She had two brothers. These were very good friends. 

And then we went into this apartment. And the lady of the house told us, you better get out of here. Go to Budapest. You are young. You can have false papers. Because the people-- the Jewish people will be taken out of this country. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who was this lady? 

SUBJECT: The detective's wife who moved into their apartment in the same yard with us. And I didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He wasn't Jewish. 

SUBJECT: No. But she was a good lady. Because she wanted to warn us. So two of my friends without knowing-- I knowing, went to Budapest with false papers. And they survived. 

Uh, can I go on now to when the year came? When I was taken-- I mean, we were taken-- my family was taken out from Hungary? Or you want me to talk about more in the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you go-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When this lady told you to leave, did you talk about it with your parents? 

SUBJECT: That's a good question. Maybe I mentioned it, but not-- we didn't think it was an important-- I-- and I would not separate from my parents anyway. You know, I-- I just wouldn't leave them alone. Uh, I couldn't do it. OK, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When such rumors came-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --from the boy, or from other Czech Jews-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --or the lady, were they talked about in Jewish circles? Clubs? 

SUBJECT: Yes-- not clubs, no. It was just underneath. It never surfaced. I mean, they didn't talk about it openly in a club, no. Only, you know, friends to friends. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did friends to friends say? 

SUBJECT: They said the same thing. But not too many friends I had who came from-- uh, I was very young. And I just wanted to be friends with the young people. But I knew that this boy is very serious. He's a very nice boy. And I didn't think he was lying. I think I thought that he was not-- uh, he didn't know the truth. He just make it bigger than it is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it talked about in shul? 

SUBJECT: No, I don't think so. The rabbi-- oh, the last time we went to shul, the rabbi talked about it. Uh, and what he said was that, let's stick together. Let's help each other. If we have to go through a-- a painful and difficult period in-- in our life, let's be together. Let's help each other. 

And, uh, but he didn't talk about the-- the people who were taken out of the country. We thought the worst can happen that they will go to a ghetto, which, you know, in Poland, in Warsaw, it was still a ghetto where people lived. That's why we believed that we will-- won't be taken out of the country, probably. We knew that the ghetto in Warsaw is still exist. But we never heard of the uprising. 

I think that happened. And I was not in Hungary anymore. And in the camp, we didn't hear anything, you know. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were very close to your parents. 

SUBJECT: Very close. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You wouldn't leave them. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So didn't you share with them, didn't they share with you, concerns about what could happen to you as a family? 

SUBJECT: No. As I told you, that my father had so many customers, Hungarians. They were so friendly. And we were comfortable with them. So we could not imagine that it can happen here. I mean, in Hungary. Until it did, when it was too late. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But then you were already second class citizens. At that time. 

SUBJECT: Yes, in '43. They, uh, sent me a letter. I was in the second year business school. They sent me a letter that I better, uh, enroll in the next class, uh, quickly. Because they won't take too many Jews. So that was openly, uh, said. So I went right away. And I enrolled. And it was not too many Jews in the class there. 

Um, see. Uh, I remember when I graduated we still had a good life. I mean, we didn't feel the pressure that much. My father's store was open. I went to school. I had friends. We had everything around us that we needed. More than it was needed. But until the Germans came into Hungary, March 19-- in 1944, we didn't feel that bad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No-- no yellow star? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No yellow star? 

SUBJECT: After that, when they came in. After, when they came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But a war was going on. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, did you, uh, think what would happen, or talk, if the Germans won the war? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we knew they wouldn't win. Uh, we knew that. No, the rumors came that they have to go back, back, and back, in '44 especially. No, we didn't think that-- that's why. That was a plus that I was convinced that we cannot be affected by the war. Which was wrong. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But Hungarians were allies of Germany. Hungary was-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, but they behaved with us, uh-- we-- we didn't feel the war in Hungary then. People who fought, like soldiers. But I didn't have anybody like that. So we didn't feel it until the Germans came into Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, didn't the Hungarians take Jews to be [? [NON ENGLISH]? ?] 

SUBJECT: Yes, after-- after that. Oh, wait a minute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

SUBJECT: I'm wrong. Yes, you're right. It was long before that that the army took the Jewish people. They didn't wear uniform. They wore a yellow armband. And they were taken to Russia, some of them, to fight. If somebody was Jewish, it was not the same like with a soldier. OK? And they didn't wear uniforms. So they were obviously Jewish. Everybody knew with the armband, the yellow armband. 

They were in the army, but not in uniform. And they made the dirty work. Like digging, uh, ditches. And, uh, uh, carrying stones to the other place. And things like that. They wanted to humiliate them. And they did. 

But a lot of people were [? [NON ENGLISH]. ?] But my father wasn't. If he was, maybe he is alive today. My hus-- my father's brother was. And he came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you knew about it. So why were-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, we knew about that. Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So why do you say that it wasn't until the Germans actually came in that you felt threatened? 

SUBJECT: It's very hard to answer that question. I-- only thing I can tell you, we were dumb. I-- nothing else. We were just not thinking right. We could feel. But we didn't. Life went on. And, uh, we-- probably, like psychotically-- I blocked that out of my mind. That's-- because that's what I wanted. And my parents didn't-- they didn't believe either, that we will be taken out of the country. 

And we heard of Auschwitz from this boy who was my friend. But that was only when we went to the ghetto, which was in '44. Uh, a couple of months before we were taken away, which was in July 1. So it could be in-- in March. Oh, yes, March 19 when the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- 

SUBJECT: They right away were-- uh, told us to put on the yellow star, so everybody can recognize that we were Jews. And then they created a ghetto which was a part of Debrecen. The streets where we are Jewish anyway. They were-- the Jewish temple is there. And my grandmother lived there. So we had to move out from apartment. Move in with them, and a lot of my relatives, too. And that's when it was-- when it started to get tough. And when we learned that the Hungarians, who were our friends, turned against us. And they were our enemies. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you spe-- do you remember particular friends who treated you differently than-- 

SUBJECT: No. Because, uh, we didn't-- we didn't go to school anymore then. I wanted to enroll to the university, but they didn't take Jews. It was a numerus clausus. Remember this word? No Jews, uh, in the universities. Uh, so when we went into the ghetto, we talked about the war in other countries. And we heard rumors more. 

But we were involved with our-- life we-- went on. And we were so much together. We felt secure. I think we felt more secure, because we was together. We thought maybe we will live here until the war is over. The rumors came from the front, too, that the Germans are in trouble. And they cannot win the war. And it was only-- we were taken-- my family, my close family, and my grandmothers, and my relatives were taken away July 1. That was when we went to Auschwitz. 

But in the meantime, uh, the ghetto was, uh, eliminated before that. And we moved to a-- what did they call it in English? It's a brick factory. OK, brick factory, which had some, uh, roof but no side. So side was open. And we lived in this little-- like a cubicle, my family, and other family, and other family for a few weeks. Uh, we-- you couldn't lay down. Because it was not enough space. We had to sleep sitting when the weather was bad. When the weather was better we could go out, you know. But only in this territory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You always had hope because you thought the war was going to be over? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And I still trusted the Hungarians. Now, what happened after that, we realized that it's not that easy. Uh, the national guard, they were terrible. They came to the-- this place. They beat up people. Uh, I remember once that a young, very young, 15-year-old boy who was-- now, I have to find the word. He was a German extraction. Or-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Origin. 

SUBJECT: Yes. His parent-- but that's a other type of German. They speak a little differently. Do you understand Schwab? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: But they were speaking German. They felt that they were German. But it was a little different. He came to this place and ordered everybody, including the sick and the old, to, uh, lay on the floor. A 15-year-old boy. After that, we saw that it was something wrong going on. I mean, we didn't the felt that-- we just can escape from the war. But we still didn't believe that they will taken us all until the last day. 

The last day, the national guard came in. And it was an officer. I remember him. He said to gather together. We-- he wanted to make a statement. We will be taken-- taken out from the country. And we owe our former country to leave our jewelry and money. And give it to them. Pardon? Oh, you need sign language? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, you're covering your microphone. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I'm sorry. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would you say that again? This man came-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --to the brick factory. 

SUBJECT: Right. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: He called you together. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And he said-- do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. You remember him. 

SUBJECT: He was an officer. He came to tell us that we will be taken out from the country. And we owe our former country to leave our valuables, jewelry, and money. And give it to them. Then we knew that we will be taken out. 

Now, it was another rumor from another direction, Romania, that the Romanian Jews lived-- Iron Guard killed a lot of people. But in general, the Jewish people were gathered in a camp in the country. So we thought maybe we will be taken the same thing. But when this officers told us, it was no doubt about it anymore. So we were, uh-- even then I didn't, uh, consider escape. I wanted to be with them. I was a part of them. I mean, the Jews in the ghetto. Uh, so we were together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he-- you said you were a part of them. Did you feel you were still a part of Hungary? 

SUBJECT: No. My family. No, not-- then I knew that they hated us. And they want us to go leave the country. Another reason was that they will take our-- our valuables which we left behind in the apartment. So, uh, there were three-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That man told you that you're not Hungarians any longer. 

SUBJECT: No, he didn't say that. But he implied when he said that we will be taken out from your former country. That meant that we were not Hungarians anymore. Um, so there were three transports. We're taken out. 

The first and the second went to Austria, to a camp which was very good. They-- the Red Cross visited this camp. So have-- they had to show them a good camp. The first two transports went to Vienna. And at on Vienna. They worked. The family lived together. They didn't kill them. They worked. And they earned their food or whatever. And most of them came home. The third transport which we went with was go-- went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there screaming, or yelling, or protest when this man announced that you would have to leave? 

SUBJECT: No. What can you do against, uh, arms? We were unarmed. Old people, sick people. The-- the healthy young males were in arbeitslager, [NON-ENGLISH]. Mostly old people, women, and children. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, Mrs. Riesz, the man stood there. And he announced that you would have to leave your former country. And you would have to leave all your belongings. What did people do? Did they cry? Did they scream? Did they-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They did nothing? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Some people committed suicide. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right there? 

SUBJECT: Right there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what did you see? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we saw them, all of them. They were lying on the floor dying. Because everything was open, you know. And my former teacher from high school and her husband committed suicide. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT: Everybody who committed suicide die-- died there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT: Oh, they had poison. They were smarter than us, probably. Because they-- they had poison. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what exactly did you see that happened to your former teacher and her husband? 

SUBJECT: They were lying on the floor, uh, making the sound when you're dying. What's the name of this? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like a rattle. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Death rattle. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see them take the poison? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't see that. Uh, I just saw them lying there and dying. And we thought about it. We thought that maybe they are right. Maybe they escaped what is coming. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- we is? 

SUBJECT: Uh, my friends, my relatives. We thought that over. We cried. And, uh, we said that maybe they are right. Maybe we will have a, uh, a worse time coming. And we won't be able to escape. But I still never considered suicide. I was too young. And my parents never considered it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Wasn't there a lot of noise and confusion during all of this? 

SUBJECT: Oh, confusion, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, can you describe-- 

SUBJECT: But we-- nobody, uh, as far as I know, nobody escaped. Which-- maybe if you had a lot of money and bribed the national guard or-- maybe they did. But I don't know anything about it. I don't know-- 10 people who escaped in-- in my city. Some of them paid the Hungarians. I know one M.D. With her mother. She was in a dark room from July until October. Because Debrecen was one of the first cities which were liberated by the Russians. 

So it was July, August, September, No-- uh, four months. If they didn't take us for four months, they would-- they would be alive now. But Debrecen was the first to have a-- be liberated. Budapest was much later. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to you? 

SUBJECT: Me? Oh, we were-- uh, we went to the train. Took everything which we can hold in two hands. That's all we could take. They told us. Because there was not enough room. Which we later learned that this train was for 80 cows. One of them. Was a long train. But one of the, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wagon? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Was for 80 cows. I don't know how many people were there. But we hardly could sit. Very little place. They closed all the doors. And, uh, we felt when the train started to go. We didn't know where. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was daytime? 

SUBJECT: Daytime, yes. In the morning. In the morning. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In July? 

SUBJECT: July 1. We were in the train for three days. No food. Very little water. No bathroom. Some people died there. Some people got sick. Uh, everybody was sick for three days. You know, but I was young and strong. And my parents were relatively young and strong. 

But older people, uh, they collapsed. They fainted from the heat. It was July 1, remember. No water. Very little. If they gave something to the national guard, they give us a little water. Only if you gave them something valuable. So that went on three days. I sat with my mother and my father the last time. I didn't know it was the last time. And then when we arrived-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember talking to them? 

SUBJECT: Talking to them, yes. Talking-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of what? 

SUBJECT: We wanted to know where they're taking us. Everybody was so tired, and so hot, and so-- that we hardly talked. I was-- it-- I think that after two days, my-- our minds were just blocked. We couldn't think from the suffering of thirst, and hunger, and heat, and everything. 

I remember when we arrived. And I saw lots of people with striped uniform. Men. They were the ones who helped us to get down. And they were from Czechoslovakia. They speak, uh, all speak German. So they were a komando. That's the-- that's a-- whose job was to wait for the train arrive and, uh, help us down. 

And then it was yelling and screaming. And they said, mit funf in reie. Always with five people in a row. That's-- that's the most painful I have to say. Uh, when we get off the train. 

Only-- the only thing I can think about it, that my mind was blocked off to. I couldn't think anymore. We arrived to a man standing there. Doctor Mengele. You've heard about him, I'm sure. No? He was the man-- the M.D. He was an M.D. He made research in the camp with twins. Then he was the one who selected the people who will leave and the people who will die. But we didn't know that. 

See, the reason I told you that these people were Czech. Because they kept telling in Slovakian to the people who understood, be careful. The left side is death. But not in Hungarian. No German. So they tried to be careful as much as they could. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They tried to warn you. 

SUBJECT: They warned them. Not me. We speak only Hungarian and German. They couldn't say it in German. Because the Germans were there. They spoke, uh, Czech and Slovakian. And a lot of people escaped death like that. So we arrived to Mengele. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Escaped death? 

SUBJECT: Escape death. Because they went to the right. That was two way you could go, the right and the left. The left was the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You yourself decided which way you would-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, no. I did not decide. I said the people who want-- the people who who were-- who understood Czech or Slovakian, they tried to form a row so they were on the right side. And a lot of people escaped this way. But we didn't understand anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But if Doctor Mengele or whoever was standing there-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --told you to go to the left, did you have a choice that you could go to-- 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't have a choice. He was the god. He decided with one finger like this. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, how did he decide with the finger? What did you say-- 

SUBJECT: He-- he made like that. And like this. Then we went to the side where he showed us, where he pointed to. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But if people understood Czech, they tried to leave that side? 

SUBJECT: Right, right. And most were successful. Well, I tell you something else-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- run over to the other-- or what? 

SUBJECT: No, when they went-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: --they tried to move in this side, the right side. And then Mengele, you know. Uh, he let them go. They were older than my mother, some of them. Or my father. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did he-- 

SUBJECT: They were lucky. It just depends on luck. But I tell you something else. After the selection, my mother was this side. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember coming close to-- 

SUBJECT: Right. Like, just before him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe him? 

SUBJECT: Well, my mother was in this side. And I was in the-- if we were on the other side, maybe she lives today. And I blame myself for the rest of my life of that. Because then I was selected. And I went to the right. My mother went to the left. 

When I looked back, I saw that my aunt from Debrecen, and her sister, and the two daughters, my cousins, were on the back. So I said to myself, why are they here? They said that the old people will be taken by car or by bus. They don't have to, uh-- they wanted to justify it. They don't have to walk. They were tired. 

My mother was 44 years old. Beautiful. With beautiful clothes. But after three days in the train without food and water, she didn't look like she did before. So Mengele just made like that. And that was it. But I didn't know where they're going. I had no idea. But when I saw my two aunts on the back-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: On the back is-- 

SUBJECT: A long, long line from the-- they kept pouring out from the train. And they formed lines-- lines. And he selected everybody. After that, we were five people in a row walking to-- toward the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So your aunt was on the right side? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: With you. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So then you worried about your mother? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't think. I just couldn't think. After three days, this-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you said you looked back and-- 

SUBJECT: Now-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --you saw your aunt. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that's what I was-- I-- I'm going to tell you. First thing when I had a chance to talk to them, I asked them. One of my-- I mean, I had an aunt who was in the same camp with me with her daughter. And she had a sister who was older than her. And her daughter. We were together in a-- you know what she said when she was before Mengele? In German, she said, I am young. I want to work. 

Now, who taught her to tell that? Or it was an instinct. Or it was smartness. I don't know how to describe it. And Mengele, said-- and I speak German, too. I could ask him. He said, how old are you? She said, 35. She was 45. And he was a doctor. He knew. And he smiled, and he let her go. 

When my aunt saw this, they were behind them. She said the same thing. And she escaped. She-- she saved her life. She's still living. That's why I, uh, blame myself. That I couldn't save my mother's life. 

So then we went-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? Because you didn't tell your mother to say that? Or why? 

SUBJECT: Why-- I didn't know what to say. But, uh, why did she know, and I don't? She didn't speak, uh, Czechoslovakian either. I don't know who told her. No, I don't think anybody told her. She just like felt that it is obvious. Or it is reasonable to think that if you are young and strong, that you will be more useful than if you are not. I don't know why she said. But she saved both of their lives. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But how could you have saved your mother? 

SUBJECT: If I tell Mengele that she's young, strong. Because she was. But I didn't say a word. I just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember-- 

SUBJECT: --stood there like crazy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the moment that you and your mother-- 

SUBJECT: The moment when I was before him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your mother? And-- 

SUBJECT: With my mother. She was on my left-- left side. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You believed them when they said they were going to send trucks and buses? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. It was dumb. I was very naive. As I told you, I was spoiled and loved. And I just-- they throw me out to somewhere, a foreign country without any clothes or anything. So I stopped thinking. That-- that's the only thing I can think of. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That moment you were standing with your mother, did you look at each other? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT: I didn't-- I don't think-- not that I can remember. I don't think I even kissed her. They said that we will meet in a few minutes. And I believed that. Why? I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you saw her walking? 

SUBJECT: Ye-- yes, I saw her walking. I didn't see any car or a truck. But I-- I under-- I heard that later they came for them. And they took them by car or by truck. So when we went toward the camp in Auschwitz-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you look back? 

SUBJECT: I looked back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To her walking away? 

SUBJECT: Yes. But I-- what can-- what could I do? I could run after her, which people did. And they died, too. I-- I-- the only thing I can think of is I stopped thinking then. So when we arrived to the camp, which was 13,000 people-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your father? 

SUBJECT: It-- I will tell you that. 13,000 people. Uh, it was B Abschnitt Drei the name of the camp. Which was across the C camp, which was better than ours. Certain-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: B section 3? 

SUBJECT: B-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Section 3. 

SUBJECT: Right. Uh, we had about 20 barracks. Every barrack was separate from the other. And when we arrived, we had to take off everything. Only the shoes. Some people put something in their shoes, like a diamond. Or-- I don't know. I was not smart enough even for that. I didn't. 

So we were there without anything, any clothes. And they shaved our heads and everything else. Uh, my cousin was with me all the way. One of the cousins who lives in Israel now. Uh, we were taken to this, uh-- it was a sign on that it's a shower, which was. 

We went. We had the shower. And we get-- then we had to go and stand before somebody who gave us some rags. Because they were not clothes. And we never had the striped uniform like they showed on Holocaust. We just had some rags. If we could keep our clothes at least. But no. 

The women, only a blouse and their skirt. Nothing underwear. They didn't give us. And we arrived. And they showed us where to go. And we were so tired and so upset that-- all we wanted to lay down and sleep. We didn't have a pillow or a cover. It was on the bare floor where we slept. But not only that. We didn't have enough space to-- to put my-- our legs or-- you know. It was humiliating. It was unhuman. Uh, anything. Anything that you can imagine. 

Uh, it was no water in the camp. Every day a big truck came with a load of water. And he put that in a ba-- basin, in a pool or whatever. That's all we got, 13,000 people, to get for drinking and washing. And it was unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you take the water out from there? 

SUBJECT: That's another question. We didn't have any dish. They had dish provided for the food. If you didn't have a dish, you couldn't take water or food. If you had, you stole it. Because they didn't give us. In any way, we were guilty. But we had to survive. So we took the water. But the important thing is that's why I told you that the C camp was better. Because they had water in the-- in the washroom. But we didn't. So. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you take the water then, if you had no dish? 

SUBJECT: But I stole one. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From where? 

SUBJECT: Well, the kitchen, from the kitchen. It was a big kitchen for that many people. And, uh, by that-- I-- oh, I have to tell you that we saw the Germans mostly in the morning when we had to stand with five people in a row, which called, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Appell. 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Appell. 

SUBJECT: Appell. We had to stand with five in a row. And in the morning, we got black coffee without anything in a dish, which you had to stole-- steal. And you have to drink after each other, which I never in my life did at home. Uh, that was the breakfast. 

INTERVIEWER 2: One-- one-- one dish for five people? 

SUBJECT: Five. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember stealing the dish, how you did it? 

SUBJECT: Went to the kitchen and took it. That's what I wanted to tell you. There were no Germans in the kitchen. Only Jewish people who came before us, or who came with us. Some people were selected to work in the kitchen. Uh, we just went and took one. If they saw it, they would turn their head. They didn't want to see it, you know. 

So that's how-- but every time the truck came with the water, we were on appell Which, you couldn't move. Until the appell was done, you couldn't move. Now, that means that they counted how many people. And if the number what they thought was correct didn't fit, they punished us. 

We had to kneel down. It was, uh, little stones. Until they find. But they never found. They always had to ask somebody from the, uh-- there was a blockalteste in every barrack. And they were stubendienst who-- from us-- who had to distribute the food or distribute whatever was, you know, given to us. And so we couldn't take the water when it came. 

After the appell everybody, 13,000 people, ran to the water. Tried to take. And it was un-- I cannot describe that. It was terrible. You had to have water to survive. And the food-- when the food was distributed it was no food. It was a soup with some, uh, potatoes, and, uh, carrots, and something like that. It was very watery. And that's all we got for the lunch. 

At night we get one piece of bread, one margarine a piece, and something, salami or-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they distribute the food? 

SUBJECT: Oh, there were people for-- that was their job to do that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But for the soup? 

SUBJECT: They were Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no. For the soup. For the water, you had to go one place. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 13,000 people. For the soup, did you go-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, that was, uh, for-- for every block. It was one big dish for the soup for every block. And we went, you know. You had to wait on a line. And maybe in-- at the end, it was nothing sometimes. We were always hungry. And we were always thirsty. And some people died. And some people got sick. 

It was a hospital without any medicine. The doctors who came with us, who we knew from the-- I was in the same city, uh, one of them was very good. The other one was terrible. She didn't help at all. So people who went to the hospital, most of them, died. There were no medication, no sanitation. You know, no bathroom, no-- bathroom was part of a-- an open air. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did this bad doctor do? 

SUBJECT: First of all, she had a lot-- get out of here. You are not sick. How can I prove that I felt bad? They didn't have a temper-- a unit-- a, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thermometer. 

SUBJECT: Thermometer. Uh, and they didn't believe us. If you were very sick, uh-- oh, I have to tell you that. Uh, it was a little lake nearby. It was-- oh, it was barbed-- barbed wire all over the camp. It was electricity in the wire, so you couldn't escape. Some people died like that. They went there, and they died like this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: On purpose? 

SUBJECT: On purpose. Uh, this lake was within the camp. But the guard couldn't let us go. So at night, when he was walking away we went and stolen dish. Take a little water. Because if we wouldn't, uh, be able to wash ourselves, we wouldn't survive. So we had to steal the dish. We had to steal the water. Sometimes the guard turned his head. And he didn't want to see it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a-- 

SUBJECT: German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A German guard. 

SUBJECT: The guards were German. But the blockaltestes and lageraltestes were Jews who were-- 