INTERVIEWER: What happened to your daughter? 

SUBJECT: OK? Can I go on? 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: My wife came along and pulled me out from the front and pulled me to the back, saying, [INAUDIBLE], we have always time. And it so happened that in a certain moment, they just cut off and run away with the trains and with the people. And whoever went with these trains never came back. 

Now, here we are, the Russ-- the Germans are gone. Everybody is going to the ammunition depot getting a gun and whatever you can grab-- a bread, a shirt, a pair of pants, anything to wear. We were almost naked, just a piece of rag. And I was physically broke because one of the Germans broke my ribs. And as a matter of fact, I was to Germany two years ago to the trial of that guy. 

Now, when we were left alone, we tried to go out. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you were to the trial of the German who broke your ribs? 

SUBJECT: Right, in Frankfurt am Main two years ago. And the German, he was there. And I told him the story. 

INTERVIEWER: How did he break your ribs? 

SUBJECT: Well, they gave you a plan of the factory, of the sections, why you were there, and how you get there, and how do you know this is him. And I told them, my wife happens to work in his office, where she controlled the bullets. In other words, each batch of bullets has to be checked through a certain apparatus, which she did. And I really happened to go there. 

And I have seen a Jewish fellow, of course, pulling a wagon with little boxes of bullets, which are very heavy. And this overturned. And I ran to the floor to help him out to put it back. Then came that guy along, and he start just hitting me with his boots here and there until I was just ready to collapse. And of course, coming out of that, you couldn't report you were sick because if you were sick, they put you in the oven. So I just put around on my ribs strips of rags, whatever I could, in order to breathe. 

In the end of that trial, I asked the judge for permission to talk to him, to that German. And I said, look, you probably did not forget all this, what you did. If you would be a decent human being, you would come down, repent, and say, look, I'm sorry. But it seems to me that you are just a killer. 

Coming back to my story, which reminds me of the Liberation, you didn't know what to do. In the stake out you had in the street, you see the Germans still going to the trains on one side and the Russians coming from the other side. One was afraid of the other. So we just didn't go out [SIGHS] until the Russians came in. 

And when they came in, they said, you are liberated. You can go wherever you want. You can take with you wherever you want and go. So we go. We go where we lived. [CHUCKLES] They don't let you in. There lives another family, you know, with our furniture, with everything. What are you going to do? 

So luckily, we went into an apartment where the Gestapo used to have the first headquarters when they came in. And we were-- my wife and I, my brother-in-law and his wife-- unfortunately, his wife just going to have a baby. She was-- this was the only mishap. And at the same night, the Russian officers came up, and they want to sleep over there. Sure. They gave my wife the bed, and they slept on the floor. 

And the next day, my sister-in-law gave birth to a boy-- I wish you could see him-- on the table in the kitchen. Then again, the Russians took us into town. And they ripped open all the stores and said, take whatever you want. So everybody took cigarettes, liquor, whatever we could. And that's how we started the market for exchange for money in order to buy what we want, what you need. 

There was a Russian tank in the hall where I lived-- big tank, as big as a house. And the Luftwaffe still was coming around. While the Germans were going, the Luftwaffe was still coming around bombing. And I asked him, where are you going? Aren't you afraid? He says, we are not afraid of anything. You want to come? I says, yes. I went up to my wife, and I said, look, my wife, we have to do something. 

And I went with that Russian guy, with the army-- let's put it this way-- up to Breslau, which was German. And there still was war. And after the Germans left, they again opened up all the stores and said, look, whatever you want, take it. My-- my lucky number was empty. There was nothing there. 

But I went back to Czestochowa And yet I want to pick up my child. I know she's in this monastery. But how are you going to pick it up? She's there as an orphan. 

So my wife and I went there, and we start talking to the nuns. They didn't believe it. She has no parents. She's a devoted kid to Jesus Christ, to the Church. 

Well, we just couldn't let it go by that. We called in one monk, and another monk, and then came the head men. And we tried to convince them that this is our child. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the child recognize you? 

SUBJECT: At the time, I didn't realize. But then they came up with a verdict. Let the child make her own choice. 

INTERVIEWER: Like King Solomon. 

SUBJECT: She was walking from one end to the other, back and forth. She didn't know what to do. And finally, she probably recognized me and got to me crying, I want to go with you. 

We got her home on the conditions that we let have all the holy items which she had, and we will have Jesus Christ's picture on the wall, and we we let her do the praying. And the nuns came over every day to check out that this is done. And we let her do it. And Then. She start to go to school. 

And the first day she went to school, she came home crying. Am I Jewish? I said, of course you're Jewish. Who told you this? The kids in school. If I am Jewish, why I have that on the bed over my head, that Christ and all these things? I don't want to live here. I want to get out. 

Since I was in Breslau already, we took them to Breslau. And from there, with the help of the Haganah, we crossed the border to Czechoslovakia, and from there to Germany. But she was so scared in Germany over the Germans that she didn't want to stay in Germany, either. 

So a rabbi from London came down to collect the remnants of children who had no parents to take them to London. And I had a brother-in-law in London, an Englishman. And we gave him an address and said, look, she's an orphan. And here again, she's in London as an orphan. 

Well, we lived in Germany for-- until 1949. Let me put it this way. When I came to the United States-- I forget to tell you how we picked up again our child. I send my wife to London to pick up the child. She came back empty-handed. Then I went to London. 

And luckily, there was a woman consul, American consul. And I told her the whole story, that we have to go to America. We have permits to go. We had another child in Munich, a boy, who was born there. And she understood, and she arranged it that I got the child back again. 

It's un-- unbelievable, but this is a story which I wouldn't believe myself if I wouldn't go through it. Just miracles. Miracles are happened if you're very desperate. 

We came to the United States. We landed in Houston, Texas. And I start to look. I had a cousin who is a surgeon in Houston, has his clinic. Of course, he has a nice home with air conditioning, with the maids and so forth. Beautiful. 

But as I looked onto it, coming from another world, just like Jesus would come back and look at the world-- what's happened to the world? I was just like coming back from grave, dead, without feeling. Here, people live normally, playing the piano, having maids, good times. They laugh. And here we are death. 

CREW: Do you want to change the tape? 

INTERVIEWER: No. I think we just cut the tape here. 

CREW: OK. All right. 

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, can you pick up here? 

CREW: Just wait a few seconds. 

INTERVIEWER: He'll [INAUDIBLE]. 

CREW: OK, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: People wonder why we never smile, we never laugh. That part of our brain is death. We don't know what is love. My child, my daughter, never laughs. She's now a grown, wonderful person. She lives in Los Angeles, California. And I have a son who lives in Atlanta, Georgia, who's married. He went to law school. So was my daughter. 

But the difference between that child's life and my son is in two worlds. She can never laugh. She never has fun. But he is an American boy. When he came here, he was two years old. 

And this is why people are wondering why some of us are apathetic. Wherever I go, I feel like an outsider. I look at it. How could the world survive and let that happen? 

But life in itself is stronger than anything. We have to go on living. I have been a manager at the Topps organization for 15 years. And when they liquidated, I picked up another job, which I picked up in 1950. And I work now at Horowitz Brothers in New Haven. 

I am very happy with my family, the way we can make it happy. And we are happy to be in the United States, which still is the best country which we have known after traveling all over the world. Thank you. 