DIRECTOR: OK. We're rolling. 

SUBJECT: My name is Daniel George Fisher. I was born in Craidorolt. And that's a town, small village, next to Satu Mare, not far from Satu Mare, in Transylvania. I was living there until I was about eight years old, and then I went to Huedin, a larger town where my grandparents lived for the purposes of learning Yiddish. They spoke Yiddish in their house. And after I finished there first grade, I came back to Craidorolt for the rest of my primary education. 

After that, when I was 10, I went to Satu Mare again for Lycee. I was there for a year. And then in 1941, when Transylvania became attached to Hungary, I moved to Oradea, to a Jewish high school, Jewish Hungarian high school. And I was there until the war, until we were taken away. 

INTERVIEWER: In the meantime, things happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, when I came back from Huedin, I was in second grade. I was eight years old or so. The little village did not have uniforms for Boy Scouts. And where I was, in Huedin, being a larger town, you had to wear a uniform. And on Boy Scout day, I wore my uniform. Well, I didn't realize this, but I was the only one there with a uniform, and I was severely beaten. Perhaps because I was different. I was wearing a uniform. A few years later, everybody else was wearing uniforms for Boy Scout day in my little village as well. 

The changes in the village were very, very subtle. Anti-Semitism existed all the time, and a small minority of Jews living in this village were always known to be Jews. And it was expected that someone was going to trip you up, whether he was a friend or someone who went to school with, a contemporary. Or if there were more of them than your friends, they ganged up on you. This was in the village. It happened in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: How big was the village? 

SUBJECT: About 2000 people. 

INTERVIEWER: And how many Jews? 

SUBJECT: Maybe 70, 60 people? My parents were quite well to do businessmen, and they were hobnobbing with the intelligentsia of the community. Who were the intelligentsia? The teachers, the various functionaries, physicians, the mayor, the priests. And we had a fairly reasonably safe life there. Of course, when '44 came about, 1944, and the things that were happening, there was just no getting out. 

INTERVIEWER: Until 1944, you didn't know that something was happening to Jews? You didn't sense anything? 

SUBJECT: No. I didn't sense anything. I knew there was a war going on. I was with some of my friends in Zionist organizations. We were looking towards Zion, towards Israel. We knew that the diaspora should really come to an end for Jews. But we didn't realize what things were going on. Yes, there was a word here and there of gas chamber. But it was so remote, and so unthinkable, and so unbelievable that it was not considered to be factual. 

DIRECTOR: Did your non-Jewish acquaintances start treating you differently? You said there was always the ganging up, the usual kind of discrimination. But more than that? 

SUBJECT: Not really. I think that the way I have seen my life up until 1944, this really was the modus vivendi. This is the way Jews lived there, and were living there at the time. 

DIRECTOR: Just accepting-- 

SUBJECT: Accepting that of course once things became changed, in March of 1944, when the Germans entered Hungary, that was a whole totally different situation. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you, and what exactly do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, in 1944 I was 15 and a 1/2 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: In what grade? 

SUBJECT: I was in Lycee in the fifth grade. Lycee. 

INTERVIEWER: High school? 

SUBJECT: High school. I was-- in the early spring, this was March, April of 1944, school was abruptly closed. We were all told to go home, because at this point ghettos were being formed. Vacation really was just early. Spring vacation, Passover, was coming on. We went home. We had Passover as usual, except things were happening at this time. 

First came the Stars of David, the yellow Star of David, that Jews had to wear. And then very rapidly we weren't allowed to go out after dark. There was a curfew. You were not allowed to go between towns, travel. And in the beginning of May of 1944, we in the little shtetl Craidorolt, were taken into the school house, into an empty school house-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the day? And how they began? And what you saw, what you heard, what you did, what your family did? 

SUBJECT: Well, in a way we were perhaps unusual. My father was approached during this period of time by a number of Gentiles who wanted to hide him. They hide the family. They obviously knew that things were going to be bad for us. And they came to us to-- came to my father-- to say, look, we'll put you up somewhere on a farm, in a barn, whenever. My father felt that he was a Hungarian patriot, that he fought in the First World War. He was wounded, and he was decorated. And the Hungarians would not do anything to him. 

And nevertheless, we were told to get one suitcase per person and to make the trip to the schoolhouse-- which we did-- for an overnight stay. 

The following day, we were put on-- 

INTERVIEWER: It was full of people, that school house? 

SUBJECT: Full of people, that school house, with their baggages. We had tinned food and so forth, and some water that we brought ourselves with us. And we ate and slept as we could that night. And the next morning-- 

DIRECTOR: Was it noisy? Was it quiet in that school house with all those people? Were people upset? Were they crying? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was not-- we were leaving our place, our houses. But nobody was abusive to us at this point. And the words filtering down is that they're taking all the Jews and they're going to put us into some camp or work area, where we would be staying together. And so far there has been no separation of anyone. My grandmother was living with us. She was in her 70s. My father's mother. She was with us, and we were able to take care of her. 

I did something unusual in the school house. This came back to me later on. I wrote on one of the wall panels that, "they may take Danny Fisher away, but I shall return." In Hungarian. And later on, when I came back, I found that one of my former classmates, a girl who was in the detail to clean up this school house, saw that. And went all over town and told them about what was written on the wall. And when they found out that I was really alive and I was coming back, there was some furor about that little note on the wall. 

DIRECTOR: You knew you were going away. What did you feel about being taken away? 

SUBJECT: It was totally unknown. I'd been going to school up to that point. I was young, protected. I knew there was a war going on, but I didn't know what was happening with the Jews elsewhere. 

DIRECTOR: What happened? 

SUBJECT: The next day we were taken to the ghetto in Satu Mare, which was a four or five hour trip on a horse drawn carriage. With all these people, old and young. And we arrived in the ghetto. And we were given some lodgings in a house. The area of the town which was most Jewish was taken over as the ghetto. There was no ghetto in Satu Mare, but there was a Jewish section. And the people who were not Jewish were moved out, and everybody from the surrounding area was moved into this section. 

In the ghetto, some situation occurred that were surprising to me, and sort of made me think about the changes that are about to take place. I met my rabbi, who ordinarily had a long flowing beard. And I knew him for all my years as this man with this long flowing beard. Well, this man appeared one day with this square short beard, talking to my father. I didn't recognize him. He was my rabbi. Our shohet from our town. It was, I guess to me at that time, it brought portents of great change to come. 

And changes did take place. My family was not together anymore. I had a brother who was two years younger than I. We were living in the same room, as it were, but we were not home most of the time. The things that were surprising to me in the ghetto that some very well-known people were committing suicide with drugs. Well known physicians. Which was all over the ghetto that such and so, and such and so. 

And my friends and I were talking about trying to break out. And then reason prevailed that the word is that we'll be with our parents, that we'll all be together. That we'll be taken somewhere where it's reasonable for us to stay, for Jews to stay until the war is over. That anything coming back to us that sounded very, very ominous was really not reasonable and not true. Such as people being killed, because they were Jews indiscriminately. We didn't believe it. 

And the ghetto leadership thought to put that word out, that there is no such thing and that that's not true. 

INTERVIEWER: Did people explain those suicides? Why? Were there rumors? 

SUBJECT: Well, the rumors were of gas chambers, and that's all. And these were the bad rumors. And these rumors were unacceptable to the leadership, and were squelched. And they were not to be believed. And most people didn't believe them. And went and did what they were told to do. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did you go on? How was life in the ghetto? How did you leave the ghetto? What happened next? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: The ghetto is sort of a blur in my mind. I remember one fellow who was a physician who was from my town who trained in Paris. But he became mentally ill. He was a brilliant man who finished his studies, and he came back into the town absolutely non compos mentis. He was walking around in his pajamas, and just was not behaving properly. And I remember this fellow walking around in the ghetto as if he was-- well, he was oblivious of the change in status. And in a way I envied him, that to him it really doesn't make any difference. His status is the same. 

DIRECTOR: Did you think they were giving this information about gas chambers to frighten you, and that's why you didn't believe it? Because you thought they were just trying to frighten you? Why didn't you believe it? 

SUBJECT: I really didn't want to believe it. I really didn't want to-- I don't think I wanted to deal with that. I don't think that I put it to myself saying, there are two possibilities. There is, or there isn't. If there is, these are pros. And if there isn't, then-- I don't think I made that intellectual comparison. I just assumed that it was a rumor, just like it came down from the leadership, and left it at that. 

My parents didn't seem to be too disturbed at it. At least they did not discuss it with me. My father was-- he trusted me very much. He gave me all his money to put away. 

DIRECTOR: Put away where? 

SUBJECT: Well, before we left. Now going back to before the ghetto. This is the spring of 1944. And our garden is dug up. We had a veranda surrounding the house, and inside this veranda was a grape arbor. And each winter, the grapes would be buried in the ground and each spring the grape vines would be brought up and put on trellises. And one day my father handed me a very large sum of money in dollars. 

INTERVIEWER: How much? 

SUBJECT: $3,000. 

DIRECTOR: In Hungarian money? 

SUBJECT: No, no. In dollars. US dollars. And he said, son, put it away. Just tell me where you put it. And I really didn't comprehend it. Our relationship was very good, but I considered myself a youngster. I was one of the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]-- a kid. And I thought about it a little bit, and I decided what I should do. And I did. I took the money, rolled it up, put in a couple of tubes of piping, sealed it. And as the grape arbor was dug up, the garden was dug up, I went next to the veranda and took out one brick from the foundation, cut the brick in half, put the tubes in, put the brick back, covered it up, and there it was. 

And it was forgotten. Actually, there was some pound notes in there. And I believe that the pound notes belonged to one of my father's sisters-- one of my aunts. And the word got out-- I assume that my father sent word where the money was hidden, because somewhere along the line, retrospectively, I believe my father realized that we may not be coming back. And he gave out the word to other members of the family, his sisters, that there was some money hidden and where it was hidden. Because before I came back, there had been people there digging. 

INTERVIEWER: He probably wanted you to do it so that you should know where the money-- 

SUBJECT: Perhaps. I have other evidence that they really felt that I was perhaps not going to go to waste. Later on, an episode came up where this became very obvious to me. But in the ghetto, soon enough we found out that we were to be going somewhere. And the word was that we were going to go to a place to be decided and relocated where we would be all together. And those that can work would work, and those that can't work won't work, but we'll be all together and they'll feed us. 

And one day, we just were told to start moving to the plaza. Everyone got their little suitcase. And I noticed when we were gathering there that my grandmother was being shoved onto the truck. Because the older people were taken out by truck to the railroad sidings. And this was a bit-- there was an armed Hungarian soldier there who was doing the shoving. This awakened in me that things may be very bad. 

And we walked out to the railroad sidings. Nice, sunny day by the banks of the Somes river, where I used to bathe when I was-- years before. And we ended up at the railroad siding, got into the cattle wagons. My grandmother wasn't with us, because she came with the truck. So she entered another wagon. And we had a four day trip. 

Interestingly enough, on this trip there were two little windows, one on either side of this wagon. And maybe two days out of Satu Mare into the trip, I looked out and I saw a young man, a railroad worker, who was from our town. He was a boy whose parents, I believe, were in America at one time. And we used to call him Joey. Actually, in Hungarian, he was Joey. His name was Joe. And I recognized him, and I hailed to him, said hello to him. He didn't say a word. Maybe he didn't know. But he was doing the switching. And the train traveled on. 

The fourth day we arrived. And the last station was-- we sort of had an idea where we were going, because we saw railroad stations and signs of towns. And we knew we were going towards Prussia. We had that idea. But we had no idea-- we never heard the word Auschwitz. We never heard a word of Birkenau. We never heard-- at least I didn't. It was totally, totally new. 

DIRECTOR: What did you think about them putting you in that railroad car, box car, with no amenities, no facilities? Didn't that seem like a terrible thing? 

SUBJECT: Terrible, yes. But then again, I must have at that point had the mentality of the diaspora Jew. I thought this was our lot. We had really no food at this point. There was a bucket for all the 80 people. It was quite degrading. And I felt sorry for my parents being in this position. They were very nice people. And this was-- and they didn't complain. I felt sorry for my brother-- he was younger. It was uncomfortable. 

We arrived to Auschwitz-- actually Katowice first, and then the next stop, the railroad siding with this unbelievable smell of burning something or other, feathers, that later on realized were something else. And doors opened. And all at once, things began to happen so fast that it's almost like a blur. You see all these people with their uniforms, striped uniforms with the little hats, talking Yiddish, which I really didn't know that well. And the Yiddish may have been a little bit different dialect, so I really didn't understand a word. 

DIRECTOR: Was it loud? 

SUBJECT: It was loud, and fast. And the whole tone had changed. Up until now, we were sort of treated, "please, go", "go this way." 