[AUDIO TONE] INTERVIEWER 1: Are you ready? John? 

TECHNICIAN: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Rolling. 

LEO GERECHTER: My name is Leo Gerechter. I was born in Berlin, Germany, February 23, 1921. I had a regular upbringing of a regular middle-class Jewish family. I attended school-- started with public school for four years, which was a sort of a neighborhood school. From there I went to the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like? 

LEO GERECHTER: The school was a-- was a school where no particular problem as far as Jewish ki-- Jewishness is concerned. It was a regular school. I would almost say like a clone of a United States school. I-- we played outside. We had our breaks, and we had our lunches, and we had our games, and we learned how to read and write. Uh, you know, uh, gym classes, which I always-- was the best part of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it a mixed population? 

LEO GERECHTER: It was a mixed class but not girls and boys. It was separated. The boys were separated. There was not-- but as far as the people were concerned, they were mixed, they were Jews, non-Jews, Protestants, Catholics. And, uh, I attended the school for four years. Then I went-- when I was 10 years old, we started-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any particular teacher that you remember from there? 

LEO GERECHTER: No, not really any-- any particular teacher, I do not remember. I do not remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A friend that you had there? 

LEO GERECHTER: There was one friend that we had. We grew up together. He was the son-- I'll come to him a little bit later on. He was-- he was a-- he was a neighbor's son. And to me, he was also-- his parents were also a friend of my family. We were very close. He was not Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They lived in your apartment? 

LEO GERECHTER: They lived in our apartment house. Yes. We lived on the first floor, and they lived on the fourth floor. Uh, we sort of grew up together. Came holidays, my father, you know, I used to get a suit. He used to get a suit. And I used to get a toy. We were very, very close-- extremely close friends. 

Of course, we had other friends. We had, uh, we had also relatives and friends and, uh-- see I was the youngest of four children. I had three sisters which were much, much older and then I was. The youngest sister, there was a eight-year difference so, uh, so-- No, let's see. OK. 

So there was nothing really very eventful in public school. It was just a regular, everyday occurrence. You went to school. You had your vacations. And, uh, n-- no problem whatsoever that I recall. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your parents, what were they doing? Where were they from? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, my parents? My parents came-- what they call the Province Posen, which after the second-- after the First World War was-- became Polish. Since our family was always German speaking and German oriented, they opted to stay German citizen, and they, of course, had to leave. 

It was a practically-- the way I understand it, the way I was told is they could not take very many things along. It was just like a-- almost like a-- they had to leave it in 48 or so hours, the way I understood it. They-- they went to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 1920. 

LEO GERECHTER: That was in 1920, yes. It must have been the middle of 1920, because I understand my mother was already pregnant. It was an interesting story. So they came, but my parents must have been well-to-do even then. Because they-- when they came to Germany there was a-- to Berlin-- there was a great shortage of apartments. So my father decided to buy a five-story apartment house because there was an apartment empty. 

So, evidently, I don't remember it. I remember the apartment house. I have a picture of it at home. I think I showed it to you and me sitting up there on the balcony as a baby. From there, we lived there about two or three years. And then-- and then we moved to Schoneberg in-- in Berlin which is a little bit better, high up, middle class section. We moved there. Of, course, I don't remember those days either. That really-- that was really the first place I remember to have lived and to have gone to school and to have celebrated holidays, gone to synagogue. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the synagogue like there? 

LEO GERECHTER: The synagogue we belonged to was a-- there were quite a few synagogues in our neighborhood, in our area. We chose to belong-- I don't know why-- but we chose to belong to an orthodox synagogue. And I think the reason was because it was practically across the street from us. That synagogue was a very, very nice synagogue. 

And it was in the-- in the back yard. It was built in the backyard of an apartment house. The apartment house was surrounding that. Uh, that was the-- that was the only reason that particular synagogue survived the 1938 Crystal Night, because they could not burn it. If they would have burned that particular synagogue, they would have burned the surrounding apartment houses. And there were, of course, quite a few non-Jews there. 

They did not burn it. They did not destroy it . That was in use. It was always in use up to the time I left in 1939. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember the name of it? 

LEO GERECHTER: Munchiner Strasse synagogue. 

There was no particular name. They-- They named the synagogues usually after the street it was on. Uh, because later on, when I was 13, 14 years old, I sang in a-- in a choir in the synagogue. And that was the Prinzregenten Synagogue or the Freidenstrasse Synagogue. There was no particular name, not like in this country. 

Uh, but just to go back again. See I'm-- I'm-- [CHUCKLES] I'm jumping. From-- from this particular school, then this particular school, I went to a school called [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] I was 10 years old, and I entered the school there in 19-- it must have been three, twenty, six. Must of been about '31 or '32. Somewhere around that. I'm not quite sure of the date. 

But the first couple years were-- there were no problems there. As a matter of fact, Berlin was a very, very city that was leaning towards the left. It was a social democratic area where we lived, but there was also a lot of Communists in this particular town. I remember one teacher in particular. He was my math teacher in that gymnasium. He was a Communist. He was a member of the Communist Party. 

The reason we found that out, later on he-- he had to leave. And he had to go into hiding in about 1935 or '36. And the-- but the first three years were very uneventful. The teachers did not give us any problems, et cetera. They-- I think it was-- it must have been around 1935 or '36. 

I was about 14 or 15 years old. The order was given that everybody had to sing the national anthem-- the German Deutschland, Deutschland, Uber Alles, and the Horst Wessel song. There were a few other Jewish boys there. We belonged to always-- to a Zionist organization. I belonged to a Zionist organization of one kind or the other since I was-- I don't know-- about five, six years old. My sisters belonged to it. 

We belonged to-- I particular-- I belonged to the [? [GERMAN] ?] at first, which was a Boy Scout-type, uh, organization. We went on weekend trips into the country, and we stayed and-- uh, oh, on different farms, et cetera. But then I-- later on I-- when I was-- when I joined-- when I-- when I went into the gymnasium, I became a member of a rowing club. This might be of interest. Uh. 

And for two or three years we-- we went rowing in what they call the Tiergarten on the Spree. That's the river Spree. And then all of a sudden, we could not go rowing anymore. They just came just like this. All the Jewish people could not go and could not join in sport anymore. So they-- there were-- so there were two Jewish rowing clubs-- the Ivria and the Judine I joined the Ivria rowing club. 

It was also in Tiergarten. It was also on the Spree. We had on clubhouse et cetera. That was really my first, first contact where I came where I was really aware that something is happening. Uh, the, uh-- so we're back to this song. So the-- there was about three or four other boys involved in that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jewish boys? 

LEO GERECHTER: Two Jewish boys, yeah. They were Jewish boys. They were involved in that, and we decided we are not going to sing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The school edict was everybody had to sing. 

LEO GERECHTER: Everybody had to sing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The German national anthem. 

LEO GERECHTER: And we decided since we don't-- we could not possibly sing that because, uh, we're already second-class citizens, we thought. It wasn't this bad, but we already had the-- we were already segregated. The Gentiles cannot not play with us anymore. We could not-- we could not join in-- I belonged to the track team. I was a sprinter in school. I could not, uh, participate, so I was one of the uh, better sprinters. 

In this particular year, I-- I won a few, uh, cups, whatever they gave us. And I-- and I could not understand why I couldn't, you know, and that was in sense we could not participate. We felt we-- we shouldn't sing. So we were called and the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the whole class was singing? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah. In the morning like-- uh, you know, they were-- which was never happened before, by the way. That came during the, you know, the patriotic, uh, uh, ideas came during the Hitler regime. I don't remember ever doing it before. We-- we had never, uh, uh, any kind of political thoughts in school. They were always very nonpolitical-- the high schools. Colleges were a little different. But the high school, this particular high school. And the-- eh, second order there was about 40% to 50% Jewish student population in this particular school. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you decide not to sing the song? Did you discuss it? Or-- 

LEO GERECHTER: I think we did discuss it. Yes. I don't really-- that, exactly, I don't recall. It-- it-- I think we must have discussed it with a few other people. This particular teacher-- I can't think of his name. I see his picture in front of me, but I can't think of his name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's he like? 

LEO GERECHTER: Uh, this, uh, he was the math teacher. We discussed it with him. We felt he was on our side. He was the fellow that was later on removed. Gone into hiding and disappeared then. Eh, he-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was the Communist teacher. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes, he was the-- Yes, he was. I-- I-- uh, I have-- and then he thought it was a good idea to, uh, because we-- you see-- actually, in the beginning, the first few years in Germany, I think there was a total disbelief of that thing could not happen. And the thing was, uh, there was-- so people now say they know there was no resistance, but there was some resistance. 

There was maybe a, uh, a small resistance. There wasn't very much, but there was some. People did a few things because I always heard the grown-ups talk, and well, it's not going to last. It's going to be over anyway. You know, they could never last because, uh, our friends, you know, and we had a lot of non-Jewish friends. 

And we-- we went out together, and we did things together, you know, and people cannot turn around. Needless to say, this thing changed. Uh, but anyway, to come back to this. And I was called, and we were called the three, yeah, three boys plus myself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A whole class stood up singing. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, singing the song. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were-- 

LEO GERECHTER: And then having the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Salute 

LEO GERECHTER: The salute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were-- 

LEO GERECHTER: And we were-- we were not singing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And didn't-- 

LEO GERECHTER: We were not singing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And no salute. 

LEO GERECHTER: We were not singing and no salute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And other Jewish children in the class were? 

LEO GERECHTER: Some of them were. Yes. Some of them were, some of them were not. There were some kids there that we didn't know they were Jewish. They didn't know they were Jewish. They had people that were half Jewish, their father was Jewish, the mother was Jewish, et cetera, et cetera. There was a mixed, uh, there was a mixed thing. And they wanted to know why we're not singing. 

So we said, well, we thought-- and I remember that-- we were not allowed to sing this particular song. So the teacher said, no, you are supposed to sing it. Well, we thought we shouldn't sing it. We were called to the-- to the principal's office. The principal said we had to be turned over to, I guess, the Board of Education or somewhere. 

A letter was written-- I remember that-- to my mother that I have to be removed from school since I no longer of-- of school. You know, you only have to go-- I think it was up to 14 years old. After that you do not have to go to school. You are already-- you can go. 

So I don't have to go to school any longer, and my mother felt that I should continue my education. And eventually, of course, hopefully, going to college. So-- so we were called, and we called up the Judische Gemeinde my mother did. And they got me and two other boys. Was it two or three? I'm not quite sure. But I think they must fall all together. But I'm not sure, it could have been three. 

We were transferred over to the school-- [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] which was a, uh, which was a, uh, high school, a Jewish high school, which was then in operation already. But, uh, uh, did not attend that. It was mostly attended by other people. I don't know who attended them-- I guess religious people that didn't want to work on Saturday. 

You know, we went to school on Saturday. We attended school on Saturday. We didn't have five days school. We had six days school from 8:00 till-- I think it was from 8:00 to 2:00 that we had classes. So anyway, so this is a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was the first time-- 

LEO GERECHTER: --I really came into contact with any kind of anti-Semitism. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And there was the first time they were-- the song was required? 

LEO GERECHTER: No. That went on for quite a while already. It was not-- it was just for some reason or the other a doctor. The teacher's name was Dr. Martin. He was a-- he was really a nice guy. I guess he was worried about himself. He was the one that really noticed that we were not participating, and he asked us why? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had not been participating before? 

LEO GERECHTER: In singing the-- yeah. But it been on already for a week or two. Ever since we were removed from the athletic teams, et cetera. We were still-- we were still playing sports as far as the class is concerned. There was no-- uh, no segregation there. 

The only segregation we had was when we had-- actually, the only segregation we had-- but that went on for years and years and years when they were teaching religion in school. You know, the Jews went to the Jewish part, the Catholics went to the Catholic part, and the Protestant-- This is very unique, I think, for Germany that they had that there and we went to, you know, learn Hebrew, whatever, little we learned there. 

And, uh-- and-- but what I think is there's very interesting story though is the friend of ours. His name was Bach. He was a very, very close friend of my family-- I mentioned that before-- and the son and all that. And all of a sudden, one day-- that where he lived on the fourth floor, and we lived on the first floor, and I remembered my mother, and I think one my sister. We ran out, and he came down in the elevator and he had the brown SA uniform on. Well, the shock was, uh, unbelievable, you know. It's hard to describe. The, you know, it was a man that was always, uh, uh, claiming to be a great Social Democrat, and there he was in uniform. So we must have-- we figured that he must have been a member of the party for quite a while. 

He just felt, you know, in 1935 or so or thereabouts, it was time to come out in the open. And that was the first time we saw him in the uniform. He walked right by us. He just like-- he didn't know us. He did not-- he made, you know, and, uh-- From there on, when he saw us on the street, he didn't talk to us, he didn't say hello. 

The son did not play with me any longer. And we were just, like-- it was just like a-- like a curtain was pulled. And that was really the second time where I came in contact with anti-Semitism, where I noticed that people-- that things are changing. That people will change, and things can happen. 

It's almost like, you know, like you talk to people today, they say it can't happen here. You know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's go back. Your own family, and your father's occupation. 

LEO GERECHTER: OK. My father was a manufacturer of ladies dresses. We had a factory and a showroom on the garment section in Berlin which was called the House for [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] Uh, I don't remember how big we were or how small our place is. All I remember is uh, they had a-- sort of a warehouse there with racks and racks of dresses. And I came up there, and I used to play running around as a small boy, and that I remember. 

My father, uh, gave up the business, not because of the-- because he got ill. He developed a heart condition, and he passed away in 1933, in January 1933, just shortly before Hitler came to power. I think it was about a week or two before he came to power. 

And my mother was, of course, left with my three sisters. My three sisters were already through college. Uh, two of them went to college. One of them did not go to college, the younger one. Uh, the, uh, they went to college. They were working. And I was working too. I was working part time, you know, like, uh, delivering the [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] newspaper every Friday afternoon. 

And I worked for a, uh, for a Jewish shoe repair shop knocking on houses, knocking on doors, you know. Trying to get shoes so you repair them and deliver them, to make a couple of pennies there. It wasn't-- it seemed to me that after my father passed away, things have financially have changed somewhat. My mother was a little bit more, uh, uh, probably tied up in money. So we-- I never had any problem. I don't remember having any problem financially. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember your bar mitzvah? Yes. My bar mitzvah, I remember very distinctly my bar mitzvah. I was not-- uh, uh, we were not a very religious family. We were always pro-- very, very Jewish. In other words, we belong to-- but as far as religion is concerned, we had a kosher home, but we didn't-- we attended synagogue, you know, three, four times a year. And my parents went too. 

My grandmother was very religious. And my parents already, and we went to Yizkor, you know, this everyday type thing. And, uh, my bar mitzvah and, uh, I-- I had a choice of just saying the-- because of my Hebrew was not too good, and it still isn't-- and I had a choice of saying the-- the Maftir. And I insisted that I'm going to say to the Maftir which took me quite a while to learn. 

But I insist-- I said that. I said the Maftir at the syna-- there was quite a few people there. And we had the usual affair, you know. I made the usual speech. And I made the-- you know we had the usual relatives coming and everybody gave me a fountain pen and, uh, books and, uh, uh, I don't remember anything in-- that anything was really-- anything unusual about the bar mitvah, except that my father wasn't there. 

And I was very close to my father. I was the only boy. You know, the youngest, and I was very spoiled, and by my sisters and my parents. I-- I missed my father very much, that I remember. Reading the bar mitzvah was very uneventful, basically. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. That year in Germany in 1933, 1934-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were public addresses, marches, tor-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes. There was quite a few marches. We used to see, they had the-- they-- they were marching through our, you know, the like trucks loads of-- of-- of people were running, and they were-- I remember the-- we had an election at one time. I think they were electing, uh, that was different already. 

Because I remember I used to go over my pe-- when my people went voting, I used to go with them. And I remember there was always people standing in front there with different-- that must have been before 1933 with different placards-- vote for the Social Democratic Party, vote for the Deutscnationale Party, Ludenberg, and vote for this and vote for that. 

And then I think in-- in 1933 or '34, they were electing a president. And there was suddenly only yes or no on the ballot, but we still voted then. My parents still vote. Of course, I didn't vote. But my parents vote. I think my older sister voted already. My other two sisters did not vote. There was a difference. Yes. Yes we have a, uh, we-- we had a-- we have a-- my father has a-- it might be and interesting story. 

My son recently went on a trip around the world last year. And he decided to stop by in Berlin. And he stopped by in Berlin, and he saw the house where I lived. It's still there. And he also decided that he's going to go to the Jewish cemetery which is in the eastern part of Berlin-- [? [SPEAKING GERMAN]. ?] 

Amazingly enough, he found the grave of my father with a headstone, and with everything which was absolutely intact. So the Germans, evidently, did not destroy, for some reason, this particular cemetery. So I heard that they destroyed others. But this particular one in Berlin, they left alone which is a tremendously big cemetery. I remember we used to go there, and it was-- it's not a small-- uh, uh, you know, must have-- I don't know how many thousands of people were buried there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The streets of Berlin in 1934 and political rallies and marches. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. There were political rallies. There were political rallies because I-- I did not attend any political rallies, but I had relatives that attended political rallies. I had, uh, and talked mainly of a-- of a brother of an uncle of mine. His name was Jack [? [SPEAKING GERMAN], ?] who was a flyer during the First World War. 

He was with the-- with the Red Baron, the [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] He was one of the original flyers that Hermann Goring. And they belonged to a Jewish war veteran. I think they used to-- they called him [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] And their job was to go to Nazi, uh, rallies and heckle the Nazis, and they got into fights, et cetera, et cetera. Now, this particular-- I call him Uncle. He wasn't really an uncle he was a brother of an uncle of mine, but we called him uncle, uncle Jakob. He was a uh, he was a much decorated Jewish war veteran. 

INTERVIEWER 1: German hero. 

LEO GERECHTER: A German hero. Absolutely. Yes. He was such a big hero, that in 1933, or '34, he got a letter from Hermann Goring saying no matter what, nothing is going to happen to him, because he remembers him as a, uh, uh, as a comrade in arms. 

And they were flying those little, uh, those little airplanes, you know, and they were, uh, doing all kinds of crazy things. He was telling us stories. They did-- they landed in the middle of the city with those things and they had to-- to-- before they could get them up in the air, they had to have people hanging on the back. And Goring-- you know, they were-- they were really very, very, [CHUCKLES] uh, well, like every-- like young people. 

He emigrated in 1935 to Israel. And he was resp-- Oh, no, before that, after the-- after the second-- after the First World War, the-- because of the Geneva Convention, Germany could not have motor-driven airplanes. They could not build any, they could not fly any. 

So what this uncle did, they started gliding pilot program out somewhere in the Rhur, I think it was, I don't remember. He, uh, he was a very tal-- he started that too, he was a-- even then, I'm talking now 19-- Uh, of course, those are stories that I heard, and I have pictures. I had pictures, I don't have. 

But anyway, he went to Israel and he also started teaching the Haganah how to fly, but he passed away since. And-- but he was a great German hero. He was a painter. He's a very nice man, but he also-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they heckled at-- 

Yeah, they had-- but they-- when they were talking about Jews, you know, the story always went around the Jews didn't go and fight. The Jews didn't want to join the service. And Jews didn't do this, and Jews didn't do this. They spoke up. My uncle got up. There was a man. He was-- he had a broken back. He was completely uh, 

INTERVIEWER 1: Paralyzed. 

LEO GERECHTER: Sh-- Yeah. Well, not paralyzed, but he only could walk with-- with-- with-- with walking sticks. He was always in a heavy metal-- metal frame because, you know. And he spoke up, and he wore his, I guess, part of the uniform or whatever they did. Uh, we had, uh, we have some relatives in this country. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did this man try to prove the Jews did fight. 

LEO GERECHTER: Did fight. That the Jews did fight. That the Jews fought just as much as anybody else, that they-- that they served their, uh, conscription. I-- I have an uncle that came to this country in 1880 to the United States. And when in-- in-- in when it was 1898, he went back. So he wasn't in the United States already. 

He went back to-- to the-- to Germany to serve his year in the Kaiser's army not to lose the German citizen. They did not become American citizen till after the start of the First World War. Then, of course, things have changed. So in other words, they were very, very, very positively, uh, German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Patriotic. 

LEO GERECHTER: --my-- my-- my family, yes. Yes. But again they were-- they were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see some of those rallies or torch marches? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes. I saw the-- well, they actually-- I saw-- I saw quite a few as a kid because they came by the house there for some reason or the other. Yes, I did. And they marched. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were they like? Can you describe them? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, they were very, very highly military. Well organized. There were a lot of flags, I remember, a lot of flags flying and bands playing. And we were standing there, you know, and, uh, felt very uneasy. And they had children marching with the little black, uh, short pants and the-- yes, they did have that. I did not, of course, we did not participate. We sort of got away from it, because we know we didn't particularly look for any-- any problem. 

Uh, we also have a, uh, I also have a-- have a cousin by the name, uh-- It's not a cousin, it's a cousin's cousin. He was-- and now in a street is named after him in Berlin, in East Berlin-- the Baum Alley-- B, A, U, M-- Baum Alley. He was one of the first Jewish victims of the Nazis. 

Eh, the reason why he was a victim, he was a-- a member, they say, of the Communist Party, and he was responsible in killing Horst Wessel. Him and three other-- four other men. When Hitler came to power, he was actually the first-- the first person, after Hitler came to power in 1933. 

It happened right in the beginning. I remember they were talking about it. He was arrested and shot right then and there. Today there's an Baum Alley in Berlin named after him with a plaque on it that can be seen there. I think I have a picture of it. I think my son brought a picture of it. I can give it to you if you're-- if you're interested. I can find it. I ask my son. I think it's a slide. 

Uh, now, actually, the-- the first-- the first real big, big problem came in 1938. There wasn't-- pr-- as far as demonstrations are concerned. A man was killed in Switzerland. A German uh, I think he was an ambassador. I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Greenspan. 

LEO GERECHTER: The Greenspan thing, yes. vom Rath I think was his name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

LEO GERECHTER: And the-- he was-- and then the rumor had it that they are going to take-- you know, after the man died, and they-- and they-- they wanted this, uh, Greenspan or something, they thought that-- the-- the rumor had it that they are going to have a-- some kind of a purge in Germany. 

But when they were in Germany, the-- the idea was, the way I recall it is, they were very systematically. When they went to a home, trying to arrest somebody, if they were looking for uh, Mr. so-and-so, and Mr. so-and-so wasn't there by any chance, they kept on going. 

They did not take-- for some reason, you know, like I will tell you a little story maybe later on, and that's like we, in the American army, they're different, you know, when we couldn't find whoever we were looking for, we took the whole shooting match and let them worry in the rear who to-- who to weed out. 

But the Germans, they do everything systematically, and they were looking for so-and-so, and that-- he wasn't there. That was the end of it. So I remember that-- that particular night. We did not know what was going on, but it was already, uh, swastikas were painted throughout the day. And then signs were painted Juden Raus and Juden et cetera. 

So my mother decided that I should-- since I was the only male in our particular family-- my mother decided that I should go into hiding. And for some reason or the other she sent me to an uncle of mine. I don't recall why. Oh, yeah. I-- I think he was also-- he was also a, uh, German, uh, war hero. He was a-- he was a officer in the German infantry, you know. 

And he was-- you know, that they figured, you know, that they might get some-- and they did at that time, there were some-- they had some privileges, I thought. I don't recall exactly what their privileges were, but they did have some privileges. So anyway, I was hiding. And then the next day, when then we heard that they were going-- they actually did. That night they were going around arresting the head of the household and taking them to concentration camp. 

They did not come to my house. So after about two days, I went back home. But that was the night they were burning all the synagogues, they were breaking windows, they were, uh, that was, uh, just an awful, awful night. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe what you saw when you came out? 

LEO GERECHTER: When I came out of hiding, you see, I was not out for two or three days. When I came out of hiding, I went back home and we saw every Jewish store window was broken, was-- was, uh, the merchandise was robbed. The, uh, we then we heard already from different friends-- this one was arrested, that one was taken away. We didn't know where they were taking them. That one was taken away. This one was taken away. 

And, uh, and we went and we saw-- and we saw the-- there was a brand new synagogue. Must have been about four or five years old. [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] was a conservative synagogue that was completely, uh, burned down. And then, of course, we read the paper that, uh, that was spontaneous. Of course we knew better. It was not spontaneous. Nothing ever was spontaneous. It was organized. 

The-- the only other time, the only other time I remember, uh, just in resto-- retrospect was the burning of the Reichstag. I remember that. Yeah. Uh, they're-- all of a sudden, we read in the paper that somebody, some Communist burnt the Reichstag. 

And they also-- after they burnt the Reichstag, they also came around arresting people. That seemed to be their favorite, uh, pastime. Whenever something went-- and I remember that the Reichstag was burning. But, actually, in Berlin nobody believed that it was done by this particular person. The story had it that the Nazi was burning it because they wanted to eliminate. After that, that was af-- that-- after that, they eliminated all parties. That gave them their excuse to eliminate all parties. 

And, uh, so, uh, I saw the Reichstag after that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Burned. 

LEO GERECHTER: Burned. Yes. And I remember there was a big, big dome, uh, and it was completely-- uh, all you could see is the charred, uh, uh, girders there hanging out. That was somewhere near-- Unter den Linden, which was a big, big wide street where they were always marching back and forth. And all the embassies were there in this particular area. And the chancellery were there. 

Uh, I-- uh, but actually, that was the-- the-- the 1930 in November. I think it was November 10 or 11. I'm not sure of the date. But it was either one of those. Eh, that was actually the time where-- where I really, really noticed that there was-- there was no-- no way of, uh, of-- of no future for a Jew in Germany. 

That was the time my sister was working for the Palestine-Amt, Je-- Jewish agency of Palestine in Berlin-- [? [SPEAKING GERMAN] ?] And she was, uh, uh, she was in charge of Hachshara type, you know, people going on Hachshara. Training for-- for Israel to go to Israel. And that's when they started. 

But she worked, already, a couple of years. And they needed some young people that could bring papers or so. You know, they could travel. There was still a way of traveling then in 1938. Up to 1939, actually, there was a way, and I had to go. And one time I remember I had to go to London for a few days to bring over some-- some list. 

I don't really exactly know what that was, but I had to bring a manila envelope to the Jewish agency of Palestine, in London and, uh, this-- but what our job was, and I had a little job there, young people that wanted to go to Israel, so they couldn't go to Israel or a ship-- they called it Sonder Hachsharah. They were shipped to different countries under the-- the German knew about it. 

They did not stop. For some reason or the other, they did not stop immigration. You could not take anything with you. If you had anything of value, you could not take anything. Uh, uh, that was-- that was-- confiscated long time ago. I remember-- I don't remember the year anymore, but there was a time where every Jew and-- was supposed to turn in all their jewels, all their gold, and all their silver. 

And, uh, we had the-- well, silver candelabras, and silver-- uh, uh, some-- what do you call the box, you know, for-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Spice box. 

LEO GERECHTER: Spice box. And we had all those things, you know. And silver, uh, uh, flatware, and a lot of things. And what they-- and gold rings, you know, you had to turn everything in. So what they did is they were-- there was jewelers there that removed the, uh, I don't know what good it would do if anybody would come to your house and look at it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean the markings? 

LEO GERECHTER: They removed the markings that it was 14 karat gold, et cetera. Uh, an interesting story which I forgot to tell you. Uh, one of my sisters was married in 1936. Second sister. She married to a fellow that was born and raised in Berlin. And all of a sudden, one day, he wakes up and he gets arrested and deported to Poland. 

That was a deal where they decided that everybody that's a-- the reason why he was deported to Poland, we found out later on, is because his mother, evidently, was at one time Polish citizen. I don't know if she became a German. Maybe she stayed Po-- I don't know. But anyway. So he was deported just overnight. They took thousands and thousands of people and sent them to-- to Poland. 

And my sister could not go. They would not let her go. So because of that, a big business started to flourish. Anybody that wanted to go for a few hundred marks, was able to go across the border illegally. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Into Poland. 

LEO GERECHTER: Into Poland. And, uh, she-- she went somewhere. I don't remember any more where she went. And she had to be in hiding there. And one night, they took about 40, 50 women across to Poland into-- into the Austrian part of the Galicia of Poland. Because that's where he went. He went to Krakow. And that was the-- I think it must have been about 1936. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That-- that deportation went on. And during the year of the Olympics? 

LEO GERECHTER: No. I don't-- no. Was '36 was the Olympics? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

LEO GERECHTER: That must have been, then, either the year before the Olympics or the year after the Olympics. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened here? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tell us about the Olympics? 

LEO GERECHTER: The Olympics, yes. As a matter of fact, if anybody would translate those letters that I have, this particular deportation, my sister wrote me from Krakow, and she explained later on-- three years later-- how she got across. Because in that time, you know, all you could say, I'm fine and, because every letter was opened. The-- During the Olympics, there was a-- was a very interesting thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What'd you see? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, yeah. Right. During-- before the Olympics started, the year before the Olympics started, they used to have a lot of, lot of newspapers. Eh, the Volkischer Beobachter, uh, the Angriff, especially Der Stümer, which was an a-- which was really an anti-Jewish, uh, paper. And, uh, of because in 19-- just before-- shortly before the Olympics, about two or three months before the Olympics-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What months were? 

LEO GERECHTER: I would say the Olympics, I think, were in July, August. It was summer. Because I remember we-- we saw the, uh, newspapers. I did not go to the Olympics. But I could have gone. It was-- it was possible to go then, but we didn't go. Uh, all the anti-Jewish slogans disappeared. They were whitewashed, they were taken away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see about this? Who whitewashed them? 

LEO GERECHTER: People. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw? 

LEO GERECHTER: There was-- the poverty people were hired to do that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw workers? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, yes. Yes. Oh, yes, was all washed down. And the-- and the, uh, and for the two weeks or three weeks before the Olympics and during the Olympics, Der Stümer, disappeared from the newsstand. It was not available. And there was no-- no anti-Jewish rhetoric. There was, uh-- in other words, like nothing happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were there any Jewish uh, participants from Germany on the teams? 

LEO GERECHTER: No. I don't think so. I don't know. I doubt that very, very much. There might have been Jewish participants from other countries. I do not know. There was no Israel then, of course. And there-- so they did not participate. I have not met anybody that was directly connected with the Olympics. 

Uh, so we saw the people, you know, they walked around. Uh, and uh, because-- but we did not, uh-- there was just like a different-- and as soon as the Olympics were over, about two or three weeks later, it seemed to be the whole thing started again with twice as much gusto as before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The anti-Semitism. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes. Now, uh, the-- I-- I really don't know. All I remember is we were very, very happy. That I remember, though, is then when, uh, Jesse Owens, one that was quite, uh, known that Hitler was snubbing him, you know. And he wasn't-- and we were very happy that the Americans won, and that the black people won the-- whatever it was. 

We didn't have television, of course. But we were listening to it on the-- on the radio. We were-- I was, anyway, a great sports fan. I remember staying up till 2:00, 3:00 o'clock in the morning when Schmeling came to the United States and was fighting on the shortwave radio. 

We listened to it. And it was-- it was a great delight when Joe Louis knocked him out the second time. And it was great. You know, we were looking for-- for little things that-- we couldn't say anything, you know, but that made the Jewish population very, very happy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When a black one-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, it could have been anybody. It happened to be that George Louis was black. Because we, for some reason or the other, we were not that much concerned. See-- uh, we were not that much concerned with color. Which I was very surprised when I came to the United States. That was a great surprise to me how people were concerned with color. 

But, of course, we, uh, weren't concerned with color because we hardly ever saw anybody that does, uh, you know, we didn't, uh. That's one thing I couldn't understand. I remember asking my uncle, what is this? Why is this? That, uh, that was one of the things I was puzzled about when I came over. As far as my leaving Germany was concerned, was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you make the decision? 

LEO GERECHTER: How did I make the decision? I did not make the decision. My mother made the decision. My mother made the decision that as a male member of the family I had to leave. As I said before, they did not bother the females for some reason or the other. It was the males they went after. 

And my mother decided, and she wrote to my uncle who I mentioned before, that uh, it would be very nice if he would send papers. And he started the ball rolling. And he sent an affidavit just for me. And it took about a year or two before I could come to the United States. 

I was-- I think, uh, almost 17 and 1/2 years old. I came to the United States. I went to live in Pittsburgh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you left in Germany? 

LEO GERECHTER: And I left-- and I left Germany. I went from Germany. I went-- I got my papers because, you see, I was-- they had a-- the United States had a quota system. And since my family-- the rest of my family-- was born in Posen, and that was at that time Polish, They were considered Polish quota. 

But the Polish quota was filled, I think, the-- I remember, to the year 1950 or 1960. But I was the German quota, and the German quota was not filled. So I had no trouble in getting-- once I had the papers and all that-- I had no trouble in getting my visa to come to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were the only one who really could enter the United States, and your mother and sisters could not get a quota number. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you remember the last day? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, my last day was a very, very-- was a very, very sad day. It was a lot of sadness. My grandmother was still living, my sisters were home. They took me to the train. I went by train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother? 

LEO GERECHTER: My mother took me, yes, we went to the train. And the train went into-- into Holland. I left from Rotterdam. I had to stay in Rotterdam for a couple of days. No. I don't know why. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the moment that you said goodbye? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. It was like a very, very sad goodbye. I think they had the feeling, and I had the feeling that I never would see them again. So we were trying and, uh, there was a-- was a very final-- was a final feeling. Uh, I felt I was-- I was taken away from my family. And, of course, I was-- it was very upsetting. 

I don't remember anymore what I did. I'm sure I cried a lot. I cried quite a bit in the first few days, even on the boat coming over. The homesickness was, uh, was a tremend-- to me, it was a very, very tremendous trauma to, uh-- I've never been away except for camp, maybe, in the summer time. And that was not a good, uh, experience even then. I did not like it, uh, camp, you know, I did not like to be away, especially after my father passed away. 

I felt that I was sort of the head of the family, and I was, you know-- I don't know what gave me the impression. Maybe it was mentioned to me at one time or the other. And we-- we-- we went to-- we went to the train. I remember that. And the train and everybody was crying. Was very, very sad. 

It was like, well, you were-- it was just-- it was a very final-- it was a very final goodbye. So we were hoping that eventually-- so there was no thought of extermination then. Uh, I-- I was able to, uh, to-- to have contact with my-- with my family till, uh, till I think, approximately, 1942. 

We had some friends of ours that immigrated to Switzerland. My mother used to send him letters to Switzerland. Who-- and he in turn sent letters to me. So I kept contact. I think I lost contact when I-- aft-- even I think while I was still in the service, in the beginning, when I first joined the service. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The United States service? 

LEO GERECHTER: The United States Army, yes. I joined the United States Army. I joined in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. I lived in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year did you join? 

LEO GERECHTER: 19-- well, I-- it was 1940 42. I joined the service in 194e from Pittsburgh. I-- I enlisted. I volunteered because I was not a citizen at that time. Uh, they didn't draft you, but they would not have you would have been interned even as a-- and I-- I joined the service which I thought, it was for me, the right thing to do. Um, I went to Camp Mead. From there-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why was it the right thing? 

LEO GERECHTER: To join the service? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

LEO GERECHTER: Because as a Jew, I was mad. I felt I had a personal ax to grind. And I volunteered for service in. I had a choice of going-- I had a choice of refusing to go to the Western Front. I could have gone to-- that choice I had. But I choose to go to-- to the Western Front, to Europe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Spec-- you had specifically in mind fighting-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the Jews? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. That was part of it. Other part was also to try to find out, uh, what happened to my family. Uh, and the-- to, uh, maybe, you know, to hope against hope that the-- you know, maybe I can find somebody. Because then, already, you know, by the time I get overseas, which was in '43, then, already, rumors started to come that the people are being deported. People are going to be here, people are going to be there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before you went over, '42, the beginning of '43-- 

LEO GERECHTER: '43 I went over. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right. But in the beginning of '42, what were the stories that you heard in Pittsburgh about what was going on? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, that they, uh, uh, I really, uh, that people are being arrested. That people are, uh, they cannot-- they cannot work. They can only work, you know, in limited-- that they cannot get, uh, they are not, uh, they cannot, uh, do things. They cannot live a normal life. 

That people are being arrested. But again, mostly male. They did not, for some reason, they didn't bother females. That was not uh, not-- unless there were something, you know, uh, every once in a while you heard that a woman was uh, arres-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The letters from your mother? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. And sisters. 

LEO GERECHTER: And sisters. What, eh, what did they say? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, it was mostly, uh, a personal thing very, uh, uh, this one had a baby or this one passed away. And the neighbor did this, and this one went away. This one left. This one went to Israel, or this one went to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is that because they were censored? 

LEO GERECHTER: Every letter was censored, yes. It was opened. You could see that on the back. Uh, they were very-- uh, they, uh, they-- they cut out very, very little. Usually when the letter was sent, and they didn't like it, they just uh, destroyed it. I had very, very little-- once in a while, I had a letter that was crossed out something. Not very important thing. 

See, a-- a lot of people went to Shanghai then, for awhile. An awful lot people were able to go. So they wrote that this neighbor was able to go to Shanghai. This one, and what happened to their papers? Did you talk to this person? Did you talk to that person? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there any uh, movement to try to get your family over? 

LEO GERECHTER: There was. There was movement. I, of course, was trying to get my family over. It was very difficult for me to get papers for them. Uh, affidavits they called them. You know, because my uncle-- well, I'd rather not go into that. Uh, he was not, uh, he felt he did his duty, and the rest, uh, just, uh, he did not try very hard. 

So I tried with other people, which I finally found a Mr. Weikoff who sent some papers for them, but it was too late. It just didn't-- didn't gel. And then all of a sudden, there was just a break-off of communications. And, uh, there was no more, uh, there was nothing anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No more letters? 

LEO GERECHTER: No more letters. Nothing. Just disappeared, and then I never heard from them again. They- well, while I was in the service-- 

[THREE KNOCKS] 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. We're changing film. 

LEO GERECHTER: Ah. 

