CREW: If I haven't, then I'll let you know. 

INTERVIEWER: No, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. 

HANNAH FOX: I-- well, how long is this going to take? 

INTERVIEWER: I don't-- doesn't matter. Whatever it takes. 

HANNAH FOX: How long-- 

INTERVIEWER: Whatever it takes. 

HANNAH FOX: Oh. Oh. All right. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? 

HANNAH FOX: We designed our day for this. 

INTERVIEWER: It's fine. That's wonderful. 

HANNAH FOX: and it's so much. 

INTERVIEWER: Whatever it takes. We do not impose that. 

CREW: Whenever you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. We're ready. Mrs. Fox, will you start and give us your full name and your-- your add-- where you lived, where you were born. 

HANNAH FOX: Hannah Fox. I was born in Zgierz, Poland. Zgierz, it's a town of 40,000 inhabitants near Lodz. Lodz was the second biggest in Poland. And we are a fam-- we were a large family. Sisters and brothers, parents, friends. 

A beautiful place. It was a textile town. And people did a lot of business. It was flourishing. 1939 was a good year. 

And then September 1, 9:00 in the morning, the sirens were ringing. And the world was-- the war broke out. Wojna wybuchła, It's in Polish. The war broke out. 

My mother went with the maid to the market to buy for Sabbath-- this was Friday morning-- to prepare for the Sabbath. This was warm. So usually, we prepare Thursday. But this time, we figured Friday would be good enough. 

There was no shopping because there-- everybody was dispersed. The peasants, everybody had to run to shelters or whatever they could. The bombs were falling. 

There was no food that day. There was no Sabbath. And that's how the whole hell began. The world has never been the same since. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

HANNAH FOX: At first there was-- we didn't really believe it. People didn't believe a war broke out. Because the older people, my mother's generation, had lived through the First World War. And this is only 20 years after. So at first we didn't believe it. But then it was real. When the bombs were falling, it was real. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel about being Jewish? After all, you must have known that-- 

HANNAH FOX: We knew what was going on in Germany. We know that this is Nazi. We know that the first-- as soon-- if they come in-- hopefully, we did not. Because the Polish army, we were hoping the Polish army would fight and fight them off and there would be no occupation, it wouldn't be anything. 

Only a week. After a week. First we ran, looked for shelter. We ran to the-- ran to the country. We were hiding there. 

And then after a week, we heard that the Germans are approaching and they're in town. And we started coming out of the shelters. We went to the village, wherever we could find place to hide. 

And they were shooting. Their planes were so low. They were shooting at the children, women and children, people running from shelter. We figured we could just as well go back home. 

We came home. You know, for war, we knew, we heard about war. People were preparing food and coal for the winter. We didn't have central heating like now. Everything was-- we were robbed, was open. The population-- the sheer hell began. 

There was no food. There was nothing. We couldn't buy anything. 

Later, when the Germans came in-- this was following Friday-- they gave an ordinance to open the stores. But people-- there-- there was no food anymore, because they couldn't import it. And that started-- that's how it started. 

Then they were calling people for work, Jews for work. That means, you know, cleaning up their-- whatever dirt they brought in. 

INTERVIEWER: Not-- 

HANNAH FOX: And that-- not only did we work for them-- women, children, men-- but they beat us. Nobody came home in one piece. At first we worked all day and they sent us home beaten up. That-- my brother had to be in bed for two weeks on his stomach because his back was one sheer sore. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they call the Polish people to work, too? 

HANNAH FOX: The Polish-- they called the Polish people to show them where Jews lived. The Polish people showed them, helped them, show where Jews lived. Yes, the Polish people were quite a bit of help to them. 

INTERVIEWER: No, but they didn't ask the Polish people to work that way? 

HANNAH FOX: No. We don't know anything about that. The factories were closed. It was a chaos. It-- life was never normal anymore. We had to stand in line for a-- if they said that one bakery baked, there is bread there, we stand in line two hours, maybe, to get a loaf of bread. 

It was sheer hell. But the biggest hell-- with my vague memory, what I remember, what hurt me most-- because after three months, we were transported to Lodz, ghetto Lodz. They cleaned out the city-- was the burning of the synagogue. 

We had such a beautiful synagogue. We took such pride in it. We were 12,000 Jews in that town. 40,000 inhabitants, 12,000 Jews. 

And the synagogue, it was so beautiful. It was a sky with stars. I have never seen one after, one like it. And the stained glass windows, and they put in so much work and cleaned it. We-- every Jew took pr-- We paid taxes for that. The Polish government didn't help us. 

And they were burning the synagogue. We heard that they're burning the synagogue. Three times they tried. Three times, they couldn't succeed, until they finally used pails and pails of gasoline. We thought maybe there is a god in heaven that does not want the synagogue burned. And they burned it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

HANNAH FOX: Yes. It was two houses-- we were two hou-- three houses away. And we ran. Because the fire was so big that we did-- we thought that everything else will go with it. 

And after that, everybody started to leave this-- the town anyway. People ran wherever they could. They ran to Warsaw ghetto. They-- where would [INAUDIBLE]. 

It was no place, actually, to run to. But people thought that they would rescue themselves. And after that, about a week after we were told to leave our house, which I never saw again, only in my dreams. It hurt so. 

INTERVIEWER: How do-- how were you told? 

HANNAH FOX: The-- the Germans came in, raus, raus, raus. All we could take was just a coat. We were lucky enough they let us take something. Because it was winter. It was December. 

MR. FOX: Raus means out. 

HANNAH FOX: Out. Raus, raus, raus. 

MR. FOX: It's German. 

HANNAH FOX: And we took a few belongings. And it was a-- it's still tram going to the Warsaw to ghe-- to Lodz. It was only 10 kilometer, which is about six miles. And that's how we got to ghetto Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Fox, tell us where you were born, what year, and where you were. 

MR. FOX: I was born in 1911 in the city of Lodz, in a part of the city which became, later, the ghetto of Lodz. So I lived there all-- with my family all-- all the years till the evacuation in 19-- the end of 1944-- 

INTERVIEWER: You-- 

MR. FOX: --to the concentration camp. 

HANNAH FOX: We lived there-- 

MR. FOX: I lived there-- September 1st, when the war broke out, we had three stores, shoe stores, in the-- on the-- on one of the main streets in Lodz. Lodz was a big city, textile city, of 900,000 population. And about a quarter of a million Jews lived there, spread over the city. September 1, when I was in one of the stores, we heard the first s-- s-- 

HANNAH FOX: Sirens. 

MR. FOX: --sirens. Bombardment. And the light went out. We knew it started. Then the hell-- the real hell started for us. 

They gave-- 10 days later, about, the German soldiers came into-- to the city. And they gave an ordinance a few-- maybe-- in the beginning of October, they gave an ordinance to-- to tell them how much merchandise each store-- not only to us, to everybody, to all the Jews. 

So my mother-- we-- we were three brothers there-- we were five brothers. And my father. We didn't go to the store because we were afraid to show up in the street. They called men to work-- 

HANNAH FOX: Work. 

MR. FOX: --to send away. So my mother and a few salesgirls-- we had salesgirls-- went in on a Sunday to take-- 

HANNAH FOX: Take inventory. 

MR. FOX: --to take inventory. This was Sunday. A man came in through the back door, a Polack. He wanted a pair of shoes to buy. 

My mother told him we're not allowed Sunday to sell you shoes. So he went out to the street and brought in a German soldier or SS man, whatever he was. And right away, he-- he-- he arrested my mother, sent-- and she was for four months in prison. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? Where was she-- 

MR. FOX: In Lodz. City of Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER: They put her in a prison in-- 

MR. FOX: Prison for four months, right away, till the end of January she left the prison. Now, we-- they confiscated from all three stores, ours, about 20,000 pair of shoes. And they closed the stores, plundered the stores, closed the stores. Nobody could go in and out. 

HANNAH FOX: They sealed it. 

MR. FOX: They sealed it-- 

HANNAH FOX: They seal on it. 

MR. FOX: --you know? And I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you and your father and your brothers? 

MR. FOX: We were hidden in-- in-- in an apartment on the s-- in the-- on the-- on the roof in the building we lived. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know what was going on in the store? 

MR. FOX: We knew later what happened. The girls, the salesgirls came out. They arrested my mother, our mother. But the salesgirl told us what happened there. And then we-- we knew which prison she was sent. The name of the street was the Kopernika, we called it. Kopernika Prison. 

Then it started, the hell. We had our mother in prison. We knew the ghetto will be closed sometimes. It was no ghetto yet. The ghett-- 

HANNAH FOX: Was still open. 

MR. FOX: It was open. The ghetto was 19-- in the middle of 1940 was they closed-- they sent over all the Jews from the city, spread over the city, send to the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Fox, let me ask you. No one has ever told us what the ghetto or what the Jewish section was like before it was a ghetto. 

MR. FOX: It was not a Jewish section the city. Jews were living all over spread in the city. All over the whole city, spread-- like in New York, Jews live all over. 

HANNAH FOX: They assigned a certain part. 

MR. FOX: But they assigned a certain part later for the ghetto. The downtown. Let's call it downtown of the city. 

HANNAH FOX: Old town. 

MR. FOX: Old town or downtown. 

HANNAH FOX: Old town. 

MR. FOX: Old town. That's right. I was born in the old town. And then they sent all the people from the city, they had to move in to the part, all quarter of a million or so Jews have to move in in this part. 

Let's say we had a three-room apartment, or other people had two-room or four-room, in each room, had to live on-- we have to take in an-- a family from the outside. Because the people had to have someplace to live, which came in, the Jewish people. So in our apartment, we were three families living in the ghetto. And then the-- the-- the ghetto was closed. That means-- 

HANNAH FOX: Yes. 

MR. FOX: --there were guards around the ghetto. 

HANNAH FOX: Barbed wire. 

MR. FOX: Barbed wire and guards. We couldn't move in-- we couldn't move in or out. We lived-- this was the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, you, Mrs. Fox, you came to the ghetto. Now, how did you get there? And where did you find a place to live? 

HANNAH FOX: Oh, that's a good question. We had relatives. And like my husband just said, that everybody had to-- you were not-- were not allowed to live more than in one room. 

You see, this was part of Hitler's scheme, part of his strategy to take our dignity away. Because how could one family live in one room? They'll fight. And they'll kill each other. That's exactly what they wanted. And that's exactly what happened. 

We had relatives. So we-- we were s-- dispersed. One sister went to one person and I went to another person. My mother and father went to another. Later, we got a room because the Polacks were beginning to leave. Here it shows pictures of people-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold that up? Can you hold up the book showing the pictures? 

HANNAH FOX: How people are moving. Will that be all right? 

INTERVIEWER: Those pictures were taken at the-- at that-- in 1939. 

HANNAH FOX: They-- those pictures were taken by a-- in-- starting in 1940, by 1939, this-- at the-- by a survivor. He was a official photographer. 

It says here history about it. Official photographer for the Nazi documents. And he took secret pictures, which were later discovered. They were hiding those pictures-- and unfortunately several thousand, but he could rescue about 160-- in a can buried in the ground. After 1945, after the war, they uncovered, and that was put-- that album shows pictures of the five years of hell we lived in in Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were-- you moved-- 

HANNAH FOX: I would like to show a few. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. You will continue to show pictures. But keep telling us what happened to you, exactly. What-- what do you re-- how old were you then? 

HANNAH FOX: I was 22 when the war broke out. 

INTERVIEWER: You were 22. And you were-- you moved into whose house and exactly how did it happen? 

HANNAH FOX: I moved into a friend. She invited me. And I lived there. And we just had nothing to do. We were hiding. 

Because going out in the street mean-- meant to go to work, meant to be caught-- caught by the Nazis and to work or to Radogoszcz prison Prison. That says something here about it too. There was a prison. And from that prison they took people to Auschwitz. They had established Auschwitz already. 

We didn't know anything. Because there were no paper, no newspapers, no radio, no news from the outside world. We were just locked in. Later, we learned that the people that were caught in the streets were taken later to-- 

MR. FOX: Put it away. 

HANNAH FOX: Radogoszcz Prison. So we were just hiding, hiding, trying to get a piece of bread. And there was also a curfew. 5 o'clock. You had to be in from 5 o'clock. 

No-- nothing in the world could happen. If somebody was sick, had to die. There was no ambulance. There was no calling a doctor. There-- there-- there was no normal living. There was no normal living anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you say that people were caught. Did you have a window that looked out so you could see what happened when people were caught? 

HANNAH FOX: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe what you saw? 

HANNAH FOX: Well, the-- simply the Germans, the soldiers to-- took people, walkers in the street, and just, come, come, come. And everybody knew already where-- where to. 

INTERVIEWER: Suppose-- 

HANNAH FOX: To work, to do-- 

INTERVIEWER: --someone didn't come with them. 

HANNAH FOX: They shot them. Oh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

HANNAH FOX: I didn't see it. But we knew, we learned later. I didn't see anybody shot. I saw my broth- brother beaten. I don't know what he did wrong. He came home. He could hardly talk. 

He went to work. He was working all day. His whole back was without skin, just one big sore. We had-- for-- fortunately, we had in the house some ointments, which my mother put on. 

And a lot of people were just taken away, never to be heard from. We never heard from them. We knew that they were taken away by the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any idea where they were going? 

HANNAH FOX: They were going first to Radogoszcz and then to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew about Auschwitz? 

HANNAH FOX: Later-- no, not then. Not yet. Oh, it took us quite a while-- 

INTERVIEWER: What el-- 

HANNAH FOX: --until we learned about Auschwitz. I would like to go a little forward. Speaking of Auschwitz, there was also a concentration camp where they burned-- gassed people, called Treblinka. Five years, my mother died. My father died. My sisters were dispersed, taken away with the children. 

Later, when my youngest sister went-- and they promised you the-- the-- they-- you go to work, you go to Germany, you're gonna have it good. 'Cause they wanted the people to come without protest. Later, when my youngest sister-- we were the only two left. Everybody was gone already-- was taken to Treblinka-- I didn't know at the time it was Treblinka. 

Because I was hiding her. I would rather shoot her, I would rather poison her, than give her to the Nazis. They were putting coffee-- wat-- water, pails of water in the trains where she went. And somebody said that went with them and came back that the water and the trains came back without the people. 

And they went to Treblinka. And in Treblinka, they're burning. They-- she went just straight to the gas chamber. This was in 1942, about. 

So wasn't only Auschwitz they took the people to. They took to Buchenwald. They took to Treblinka. Some people, maybe, they needed, if they had any profession that was needed for the Nazi for a while, they gave them work. 

INTERVIEWER: Let-- let's go back to the ghetto and what was happening there. Mr. Fox, what was happening in the ghetto, to you? 

MR. FOX: When they took my-- arrested our mother, after that, we-- my father and older brothers-- we were five brothers and a sister. We went to Warsaw in December. When I say we went, we thought it will be better than staying in Lodz. 

HANNAH FOX: People went. 

MR. FOX: So we went to-- we walked, we hijacked, we-- we take trains-- 

INTERVIEWER: You mean you hitchhiked? 

MR. FOX: --to get to-- to hitchhike, yeah-- to get to Warsaw was only 120 kilometer. But then it was not easy, we didn't have-- nobody has cars or like this to go and-- 

HANNAH FOX: We had to surrender all that. 

MR. FOX: Anyway, we came to Warsaw. And then we got the news that our mother will be freed in January. Somehow we got the news. 

We went back, my father and myself one of my brothers, we went back to Lodz, because the ghetto was not enclosed yet. It was no ghetto yet. 

And two brothers and the sister with her baby were staying-- were left in Warsaw. They didn't-- they didn't survive from-- when the Warsaw ghetto was closed, they were sent do Treblinki like all the other Jews from the Warsaw ghetto. 

We came back in January. We came back from Warsaw to Lodz. And then by the end of January, my mother came home from prison. And then to make it short is they enclosed the ghetto in 1940, in the middle of 19-- in May, I think it was, in 1940-- 

HANNAH FOX: so it closed 

MR. FOX: --they enclosed-- or-- more or less-- they enclosed the ghetto. 

HANNAH FOX: That means not only in nor out 

MR. FOX: Then it started-- 

HANNAH FOX: No in, no out. 

MR. FOX: In-- not-- no out. 

HANNAH FOX: No in, no out. Barbed wire. 

MR. FOX: Nobody can in and out. Barbed wire, guards, yeah. 

HANNAH FOX: Approaching the gate would be shooting. 

MR. FOX: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- how was the ghetto closed? What did they have around it? 

HANNAH FOX: Barbed wire. 

MR. FOX: Barbed wire. 

INTERVIEWER: You could see the outside, though. 

HANNAH FOX: Oh, yeah. 

MR. FOX: That's right, yeah. You can see it. But you cannot-- you couldn't approach it. The barbed wire-- 

HANNAH FOX: [INAUDIBLE] 

MR. FOX: If you approached the barbed wire, you would get-- 

HANNAH FOX: It was electrified. 

MR. FOX: --el-- but the guards outside will shoot you. 

HANNAH FOX: Nobody did. 

MR. FOX: So it was no use to-- to approach it. 

INTERVIEWER: That means the people living outside could see inside, too. 

MR. FOX: That's right. It-- there was normal streets, it was-- streets, and buildings, and people, and-- so you could see each other. But you cannot talk to each other anymore. 

HANNAH FOX: Couldn't. The outside people couldn't talk to us either. Some-- 

MR. FOX: The outside were not-- excuse me. No Jews were outside anymore. All-- all the Jews were already inside. All the Jews were with-- 

HANNAH FOX: Only the gentiles were outside. 

MR. FOX: All the Jews who lived in-- in-- in the city, spread all over the city, were already living inside. 

HANNAH FOX: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what I'm asking you is, could the Polish population on the outside see what was happening to the Jewish people inside? 

HANNAH FOX: Oh, yeah. 

MR. FOX: They could see, but they could-- they couldn't see everything. Because there were-- they-- 

HANNAH FOX: They saw people. They saw houses. 

MR. FOX: They saw people. They saw houses. 

HANNAH FOX: But they didn't know that we are starving. 

MR. FOX: But they couldn't see-- they didn't-- 

HANNAH FOX: They didn't know that we are not getting any food. They didn't know that they're taking people away to concentration camps. They didn't know anything of that. Nobody told them. 

MR. FOX: Now, they-- they installed in the ghetto-- they-- they made-- the Germans erected shops-- 

HANNAH FOX: To-- 

MR. FOX: --working shops. So we people who lived-- the Jewish people lived in the ghetto, we worked for them. 

HANNAH FOX: Sewed uniforms-- 

MR. FOX: Hat maker, shoe makers, or uniforms for them, hats f-- 

HANNAH FOX: Underwear because [INAUDIBLE]-- 

MR. FOX: All kind of outer-- 

HANNAH FOX: --five years. 

MR. FOX: --and underwear for them, shoes, everything. So everybody worked. Let's say we made about-- then the-- we had-- we were paid with ghetto marks. 

HANNAH FOX: Here. It's here. 

MR. FOX: Ghetto marks. Not German marks, but Ghetto marks. 

HANNAH FOX: They printed money, special money-- 

MR. FOX: Special marks-- 

HANNAH FOX: --printed in the ghetto. 

MR. FOX: Marks are money, you know. 

HANNAH FOX: They thought-- they established a ghetto. They thought it's going to be forever. That's going-- where people are-- that's gonna be a ghetto. And the Jews are gonna live in the ghetto. So they printed money. They printed stamps. 

INTERVIEWER: Who's they? 

HANNAH FOX: The Jewish population-- the Germans, of course, brought in. 

MR. FOX: The Germans ordered the Jews-- 

HANNAH FOX: They ordered it-- 

MR. FOX: --to establish a government. Let's say, let's put it this way. 

HANNAH FOX: Yeah. Right. 

MR. FOX: A Jewish government-- 

HANNAH FOX: A Jewish government, right. 

MR. FOX: --with a chairman or president. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. 

MR. FOX: So we-- we had Jewish police. We have a Jewish so-called government. It was not a gov-- but the orders-- the German gave the orders what to do, how much food they-- they supplied the food to the ghetto. 

HANNAH FOX: Want to see the Ghetto money? 

MR. FOX: They rationed-- they rationed the goods-- the food. We-- let's say we got the-- the rations-- for seven days' ration is as much in calories as you-- you and me eat now, today, in a one day. 

HANNAH FOX: And we had to divide it 

MR. FOX: We have to divide it in seven days. 

HANNAH FOX: Or else you starved. And people did. 

MR. FOX: There was starvation, a starvation diet. Then we have to work in those shops. We made about, each one, between 15 and 20 mark a week. That's 

the-- the salary, supposedly. To-- in order to-- for the marks to buy in the co-op, in the stores, special established stores, this food. But there were also a black market. When I say a black market-- 

HANNAH FOX: Uh-- 

MR. FOX: The ba-- excuse me. The bakeries, let's say, baked for us under-- 

HANNAH FOX: The amount 

MR. FOX: --what the Germans told us the ration-- 

The amount. --the amount of bread has-- so the bakers, the Jewish bakers who worked in the bakery, somebody stole our bread. And sold it. And sold it for 1,000 mark. He made only 15 or 20 marks. You have to buy a bread for 1,000 marks. But if they will catch him stealing a bread, he will be sent to Auschwitz with his family. 

HANNAH FOX: But some risked it. 

MR. FOX: So, now, let's say we were three brothers. 

HANNAH FOX: Some risked it. They did it. 

MR. FOX: Three-- 

HANNAH FOX: Some even risked-- may I interrupt for a minute. Some even risked to go through the barbed wire out, uh, to the Polish side and bring in a little butter or sugar and sold it. They got away met-- with it once. But we didn't hear from them later. That means they got caught. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you thinking? What were you feeling? 

HANNAH FOX: We didn't think. We didn't think. We didn't feel. 

MR. FOX: So let me explain to you. My two-- we three brothers, we worked different shops, working shops. I worked in a kitchen where we-- people from the outside gues- guest kitchens to-- in order to-- to cook their meals. 

My brother worked in a shoe shop. Another brother worked in a hat-- ladies' hat shop. So he stole a piece of leather and a few nails. He brought it home and I sold it to shoemakers like on a black market. But if they will catch him with a piece of-- of leather or nails, they will send all of us to Auschwitz. They hanged the one, they caught one before. And they hanged him in the square. 

HANNAH FOX: He describes an execution in this book 

MR. FOX: Yeah. In the square to show-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did-- did you see that? 

HANNAH FOX: No. 

MR. FOX: We didn't see it. 

HANNAH FOX: We didn't see it. 

MR. FOX: But we knew about it. 

HANNAH FOX: Len 

MR. FOX: We wouldn't go in-- 

INTERVIEWER: Are you out of tape? We have to change tape? 

CREW: Yeah. Yeah. But I didn't-- I didn't want to interrupt. 

INTERVIEWER: No, that's all right. Always interrupt. Don't-- you know, as soon as you have to change tape. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Now let-- let-- let me have-- it gives me a chance to speak to you a minute. 

CREW: OK. All right. 

HANNAH FOX: And I want you to look-- 

MR. FOX: No, wait, wait, wait. 

INTERVIEWER: This is obviously a very strong interview. 

CREW: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: And they are reacting to one another. So I'm only hoping that you are being able to re-- very tight, and then getting both-- 

CREW: Tight and two shots, both, --and back, and all-- 

HANNAH FOX: Right. OK. All right. Well, you know, I have to ask. 

CREW: Yes. I know. 

HANNAH FOX: It's important that you look through the book. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. We will, we'll look through the book. But you-- 