INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --can with whatever you can remember. So let's just start by your telling us your name and when you were born. 

HELA SAENDER: My name is Hela Saender. And I was born in Bendzin. They called that [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And I was one of 12 children. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was in Poland? 

HELA SAENDER: In Poland. And I-- when the war started that we were 11 in the town. And from the nearest family with the grandfather, we were 63 together. And from those 63, we survived 11. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year were you born? 

HELA SAENDER: I was born 1911, in April, the 14th. And I went to private school-- I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of your family, where were you in the children? Were you the-- 

HELA SAENDER: I was sixth, I think. I can tell you the names if you want the names. The oldest of us, this brother, his name was-- we were very religious people. My great-grandfather was a rabbi, all the rabbis. And the other uncle, he was the owner of the Hotel [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And later, he was a owner of Hotel [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Later, he was an owner from a coal mine. The name of the coal mine was Hela. But it has nothing to do with my name. No. And this was the oldest brother. His name was Moishe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold that up? 

HELA SAENDER: This was the oldest brother. And the second-- but he was in Israel. I wouldn't show his picture. This way, this was the oldest. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, they just don't want you to hold it in front of your face, that's all. 

HELA SAENDER: And we were 12 children. After every summer, summer, we used to go when we had a vacation, we gots to go to the country. And that's why this, for me, this picture-- my mother had 14, 15 grandchildren, and one survived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember about the early days growing up in Poland, when you were a little girl? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, we had a hard. Was hard. Because I wasn't a poor girl, but the poverty was big. Every morning I remember the poor people knocking on the door for a piece of bread. Was a lot of people were out of work. And I consider us as orphans. I always used to say, I grew, was born in a jail, and grew up in a closet. Because we were very religious, very. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were separated from the other people, because or your religion. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, very much. Because, and I went, after the public school, I went to a private school. And over there, I was mixed with the Polacks, because this was a private school. And I have a very close friend, a very close friend, a Polish girl. She was very nice. And when the war started, we were very close, I remember she was visiting me and a Nazi, a soldier asked her, what were you doing here? And she says, I was visiting a friend. I thought that-- I thought that they're going to do something to her. 

And when they put us in the ghetto, this was the only house that-- Wanda was her name-- it was next to our ghetto. And I saw that's it's terrible, that's none of us will survive. I went to the garden to her house. I wanted her to save one of my children, of my sister's children. Because the child was a girl and had blue eyes and doesn't look like a Jewish kid. I figure, go and-- I went to her and I says, Wanchu, take this-- she was a very close friend to the whole family-- take this child. We have jewelry. And you go to the priest-- I remember this priest, he used to come to teach the Catholics their religion-- and tell him that this is my child. And after the war, you know my brother lives in Israel. You will give the child to my brother. And she said, if I will be alone, I will know how to help you. But she promised she will come. And on the Friday, they took this child away. And she never come, she never showed up. 

Fine and later, they took-- you know if you are in danger, you do all foolish things. We made a big-- we were living in the ghetto. And all together, we make a wall. In the ghetto, we make a wall. We separated the house, see? We made the wall and we put the-- and we-- and that night, we went into to sleep there. But one day, we left all the men outside to protect us, the children. There was-- and they took every man away, my brother-in-laws, every man so only the children were there. 

And I remember when they came and they took five children. And I, I wanted to throw something on there from a neighbor. I wanted to throw something in their head. But I figured it was no solution. We were big machines, but was no solution. And later we made the brown kid in the cellar. And I remember when they took everybody away and I was down with my mother and my younger brother. And we went to the cellar. This youngest sister who survived, she's now in Israel, she says, I will to go. And she survived in a concentration camp in Peterswaldau. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mrs. SAENDER, could we go back, back in time, and talk about when you were a little girl what you remembered when you were a little girl. And the name of the town and the places and all the people. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. I remem-- I think I'm punished with a very good memory. This is sometimes a punishment not really a blessing. I remember when the-- he wasn't a priest, he was, let's say, a bishop came to town. And I was a young girl. And I went out to look to. I remember the rabbi came with bread and water, and how he pushed him away, the bishop. And then janitor's boy killed-- hit me. I didn't know on this. My mother didn't tell us. I remember my, the janitor, a woman, she came up very religious. She-- fire, she made on Saturday. And Saturday, Friday night she blew up the candles, not to get all the electricity. And she used to say that we are safe in her life because we gave her a lot of food. 

And she had a young girl. Her name is Lotka. I said once to her, when I fed her, I says, Lodju, do you like the Jews? She says, no, they killed our God. And then I went to my dear friend Wanda. After Pesach, we made matzos. And we didn't sell matzos in the store. And my friend liked very much matzos. And she ate. And I was there. And her sisters saw me. Vladik, he was maybe three years old. And he saw them eating the matzo, he said, are you not ashamed to eat Christian blood? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The three-year-old child? 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, the three years old child. And when we were running away from the town when Hitler came, I looked at my youngest brother and he was all pale. I says, don't you feel good? He says, no, I need a drink of water. And we went by a village. And I said to our boy, I wanted to ask him for a little water. The mother came out and says, Yashu, Yashu. He says, Mother, don't worry. The Jews went by and they didn't kill me. That's the way they were. That's why you have to excuse them. Because if I raise my child this way, she will be the same way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were a little girl, you lived in an apartment house? 

HELA SAENDER: No. My grandfather was a very wealthy man. And he had a three-family house. Had two daughters. My mother and this cousin who survive who died in the United States. His name was Joseph Rosenzauf. The two daughters lived with my grandfather. And I did not have any power, maybe because the uncles were very clever. 

I remember the mother told us about my grandfather. He had eight children. They called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He has eight brothers adopted because they run away from Russian. They want-- the Russian, they put them through to the army. And the mothers fight to protect their children like we like to protect ours. And my grandfather was a very wealthy Jew, and good one, too. He had them all along. I met only one of his brothers. He came from Israel. And I remember how my mother used to say, oh, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. This is my life. 

It's why the Holocaust is nothing new to me. I remember a lot of thing what [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] did to the Jews in Ukraine after the war. He did the same-- you probably know it. After the war, because I was born in 1911, I must be a clever girl. And what he did to the Jews, the same thing what Hitler did to us. He didn't have this technology. He put all the children. He said, where's the tenth? Every ten got killed. It's nothing new, the Holocaust. And nothing new, the lies that this is wasn't such a thing like the Holocaust. Nothing can surprise me. I'm used to it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were a little girl, what did your father do? 

HELA SAENDER: My father had a scrap metal store. This was not a store, but was a lot. And this uncle, what I showed you this, it was Moses Spiro. 

I remember when the Nazis-- this is my uncle, my youngest brother, my mother's youngest brother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold it still? That's right. That's right. 

HELA SAENDER: He owns-- or this is what I like to have tell a story about this, too. He owned the big factory. It was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Did for thousands of-- I don't remember. I was a kid. I remember only when I was at the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], they ask me, what does Moses [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]? They always ask me, the children. He was a famous man. 

And he was very wealthy, and that's why we survived. He probably helped my father to open big lot, iron, metal. And when the war started, we were all alive. Nobody died. And I went to [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] for my checkup, the doctor asked me, was there any sickness in your family? I says, we didn't have a chance to be sick because everybody got killed. That's the truth. 

And when the teacher for my daughter, when she went first, her first year to school, ask me who did it? I said, whoever had the chance. And that's the truth, too. You cannot go around and hide things. We have to come out with the truth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said that you went first to the public school. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then you went to the private school. 

HELA SAENDER: Gymnasium. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you when you left the public school and went to the gymnasium? 

HELA SAENDER: I cannot remember. But I know when I-- when I finished gymnasium that I was 19 years old. And I had very close friends. And one of them was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. We were sitting on the same bench. We had geography. And the teacher said, we have 58% Polacks, so many percent white-- white Russian, yellow Russian. 

INTERVIEWER 2: White Russians. 

HELA SAENDER: And 9% Jews. She says, oh, my, I'm sorry. It was my close, close friend. She's sorry that we had-- that they had so many Jews. Next to you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were only a few Jewish girls. 

HELA SAENDER: No, we were a lot of Jewish girls. We were paying a lot of money. And I don't remember exactly how many Jewish girls. I remember they were bright. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the other students associate with you? Did they separate? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, sure. We were close. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They didn't make a thing about the fact that you were Jewish. 

HELA SAENDER: No. We didn't talk. But I remember this girl, this [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], this was my closest friend. She said to me that she knows the situation. And one day she says, what will you say and I would turn Jewish? I says-- and I remember what I told her-- I says, be a nice Catholic, and this can help us, too. She said, look at me, I am-- she made 400. And Emily [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], this was our friend, married to my friend. And he was a very bright professor. And he had 250 because he was a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So they differentiated in the salaries that people earned. 

HELA SAENDER: No, because she had another job, too. She had-- she was-- she-- she went for [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. This is like a-- here an accountant, to University [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] in Russ-- in Krakow. And they gave her-- she had a job in the school. They both were working in a Jewish gymnasium. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How large was the town or the city you lived in? 

HELA SAENDER: I never knew. But when we went to-- they called this the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. There were 28,000 Jews when they took us all out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The name of the town that you-- 

HELA SAENDER: Bendzin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: They took us out, 28,000 Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you spell the name of the town and say where it was near? 

HELA SAENDER: It's Dabrowa Gornicza near. It was not far from Katowice, Sosowiec, Dabrowa, and Czeladz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you grew up there. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, I was always there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you experience anti-Jewish feelings as a child? 

HELA SAENDER: Sure. On every-- they let us know. They said, for instance, the same [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. They went to bake matzos for the-- we didn't have such factories like here. They went to the baker. But they told her that we are taking Jewish blood, Christian blood. And she didn't say anything. When she went to the priest and told him, he said she should look closer. She said, I went in where they making these, and I never saw any blood. She asked the priest if she can-- if she's allowed to help the Jews on Sabbath. And the priest said, as long they pay you good, you can do it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do after you finished, you graduated from the gymnasium? 

HELA SAENDER: I never went to the university. Because by this time, was in pogroms in [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And the famous was the priest [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And at the universities, they were hurt-- I don't know what they did to the girls. One girl said that they almost killed her at the university. Was one-- I remember, was one professor. His name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He asked them to stop. And they throw an-- this was a Polack, too. But he asked them to stop all these things. They throw on him rotten eggs and everything. 

And I remember when my cousin came home-- it was a brother of this. And he said, what happened to them in winter? It was a very hard winter in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was this? 

HELA SAENDER: It was-- I don't remember the years, maybe 1930. And he had a four. They had four on the knee. And he says he went with his friend, and somebody took a razor blade and cut his-- on the back, cut his coat. Like when he was talking about him, he didn't see that his coat was cut too. It was a hard life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You're holding pictures. Can you hold that picture up and tell us about it? 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. This was the-- it was seven girls. One, we were seven girls. This is the two sisters. I think, did you made the picture of this? This is the only picture what we had. We had a picture. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You have it upside-- 

HELA SAENDER: Oh. oh. It's only because my brother was in Israel, one brother was in Israel. And the rest, 11 children were in-- one brother was in Warsaw. He came to us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was that picture taken? 

HELA SAENDER: This was taken in-- I think it was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. We were in the country in the summer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And who were the people in the picture? 

HELA SAENDER: It's two of my sisters. I will take a look, what I will see. This is one, yeah, the two sisters. The two sisters and the five, four grandchildren. The rest, the two sisters, they got killed with the children. And I am on the picture, the youngest sister, she survived. And this is the, this is the other two sisters. They are not on the picture, is four. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were the sisters then? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, they were young. I cannot remember the age. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In that picture they were? They look like-- 

HELA SAENDER: I know. I know. But she had two children. The other was married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was taken in a big city. What city was that? 

HELA SAENDER: No, this is in Bendzin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, that was in Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: This was on the country. And this is my brother. And he lived in Warsaw. He came with his five children to us. And one survived of the children. That is-- we were 12 children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So in the 19th-- you graduated from the gymnasium in 1930. 

HELA SAENDER: 1930. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then you didn't go to the university. What did you do? 

HELA SAENDER: No. I was a tutor. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were a tutor? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, yeah. Oh, this is a nice story, too. I was a tutor. I was good in Latin and good in mathematics. And once my girl friend, her name was, she was married to this teacher, what I said to this professor of mathematic. Her name was Manya [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. She said, I'm going back to university. You will take over this girl. Her name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Because she was-- her father was in the police at [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

And I went to her, and I was her tutor. I went, I think, was in the wintertime. And the summer, from before the vacation, she went to a school, it was from the city, from the-- and the mother told me that they had test from Latin. And the teacher was amazed with her success she had on, this is a two. It's like a F. And now she has an A. I said, did you tell the priest who was the teacher? Did you tell the priest who was the teacher? And Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] says, oh, no, five, he will hear a Jewish name, he will lower her the mark, and he wouldn't like it. 

It is true stories. It's not fairy tales what I'm telling you. And everybody is amazed that I'm so healthy and I'm so-- and some people, they have nightmares. Not me. I rem-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When the war started, where were you? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, I was in-- we were all In Bendzin. But I'd like to tell something, a story to my daughter says don't forget to tell the story. 

We're all of own business. We were religious. And you know, I never know that you can lie. No. But my sister's husband, he was a very good businessman. And he had a man who was taking care for the building, his name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a very educated Jewish man, poor, hungry when he came too. And when the war started, and we were in the ghetto, he saw like a German soldier, took up small kid and put it in two. And he said to me, I have a feeling that you will survive the war. And you will be the one who will tell the world what a German soldier is like. 

My daughter told me in the morning, please don't forget to tell this story. It's unbelievable, how can anybody believe it? I cannot believe it. That's not even in fine. And I went to all the concentration camps that you can imagine. And how what a concentration camp is, you can know. But nothing was as bad as in if you can only survive if you know the mentality of your enemy. 

When-- this was in [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. When they came, this was in the middle of the night, I think. They told me later, this is the 18th of April. Before I tell this story, I have to tell something else. 

I was walking in outside, on the street. Blizzard, not blizzard. It was so cold one day, I went in to [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], and there were tools. And I was waiting they will kill me because I couldn't take it anymore. They didn't come in. They didn't kill me. And I went home. 

And a girl from our town, her name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. She said, you know what? I am working in a-- they were working in a factory. They made tools for the ammunition something. And they put-- ever the Germans were practical on the top two. They had bags, sack, like you have a sack [INAUDIBLE]. Bags, big bags, they were four layers of paper. And she took her life. And then [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] told me lay a bag for me. And before I went to work, I put myself-- we had overalls. I put all over paper. I never felt any cold. And she saved my life. We were saving our lives. 

But a lot of people, they were committing suicide. One of them was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I remember her. We had a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. It was four stories. I don't know how. And was very easy to commit suicide, to run up and throw herself down. 

Next to me was a girl. She says, how about committing suicide? I says, you have all this time. She says, no, I don't. She went for her break for 10 minutes. And 10 minutes later, she was dead. She committed suicide. I wanted to commit suicide too. But I didn't know how. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did the Germans come to Poland? 

HELA SAENDER: The 1939. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what were you doing before they came? You were tutoring, you living at home with your family. 

HELA SAENDER: With the family. We were all together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your mother and your uncles and brothers. 

HELA SAENDER: Brothers, sisters. No, they were married. They were in the same town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your parents were both alive? Your father was still alive. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, father, mother, everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were about, you were 28 years old then, in 1939. 

HELA SAENDER: I think so, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember about when the Germans came through your town? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, what I remember that this cousin, what, a neighbor, he had horses in a barn. And this banker was a very good man. And he gave him the place for the horses for years and years. This is [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And he didn't charge him, really, when the war came. And one day, he paid us back. You couldn't get a buggy and a horse for no money. He took us, everybody who were running. And we were running so far to Slaskie. 

And I want to tell what the Germans did. We were staying there. And the man, they went farther. And they throw everybody. They threw everybody to the river. They throw everybody to the river, the Germans. I remember the men from our town, where they killed them and threw him to the river. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was in Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: This was in Slaskie. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. So the Germans came. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. We run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you fled. And this is where the man who your uncle had-- 

HELA SAENDER: This was uncle fled and my father fled, and all the children, my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So your whole family then fled to escape-- 

HELA SAENDER: And we left everything behind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You left everything behind and you fled to escape from the Germans. 

HELA SAENDER: From the Germans, everybody was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now the Germans attacked Poland and they were bombing, and they were, it was war. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, Warsaw. Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember when you first realized that there was a war, where were you? What did you see? And did you do? Were you at home? Were you at somebody else's home? Where were you? 

HELA SAENDER: No, I was at home. Oh, I was at home. And one sister took the-- we were running, we were know where. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no. Before the Germans came, before they came. 

HELA SAENDER: I was home with my mother, my father. We're over there. We were peaceful and quiet. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And then how did you hear that the Germans had come? 

HELA SAENDER: The Polacks, they saw the bunker is good. They said, our bunker is the best. And they said not to have any food in the house. And we make sure that we obey the order, because we know how quick we can get killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the order? 

HELA SAENDER: The order was not to have any food in the house. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

HELA SAENDER: Because they said the Germans had-- this what they said-- the problem would be, I don't know, I don't remember why. They said we're going to have [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] in the food for the Polacks. 

I remember the Polacks, they didn't know whether-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Polish were afraid that the Germans would use the food that they found to supply their army. 

HELA SAENDER: Could be. I don't know that. I know that we were starving right away. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you were home. And did you see the Germans come into your town? 

HELA SAENDER: No. We fled. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You left before? 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. Later, when I was the one who went back the first, and the town was empty. And I went into the house and everything was empty. But wasn't-- we came back. And a short time later, before we fled, my one sister took the other sister's children and her children. She run away, farther from the border. And this was on Saturday night. I was in my sister's house. And another sister was there, and my brother-in-law. And we were sitting, the whole day was hard. And we were very religious. We wouldn't cook a little coffee or tea on Saturday. And I said to my brother-in-law, now we're gonna -- I will put something, they had, they said to have it, you have to have something in our windows. Because, because I don't know what. Anyways, I said I'm going to put something on the window and make a little tea. And my brother-in-law said, it's five minutes before the Sabbath to end. Wait another five minutes. And three minutes later, we have [INAUDIBLE], because [INAUDIBLE]. They took out all the men from their rooms, and they killed them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was not in Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: Nein, this was in Bendzin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was in Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: In Bendzin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was before you fled. 

HELA SAENDER: Then we came back from-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you came back. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You fled how far, when you fled? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, not far. Slaskie maybe was-- and it's-- I don't know how many. We were gone a day only. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You only went for a day. 

HELA SAENDER: One. No, we were fled. When we came to Slaskie, that was the same day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. 

HELA SAENDER: And I remember, there was 200 Jews in the Slaskie. And nobody could have a place. But a lady came out, and she recognized us. And she says, I remember your grandmother, and she gave us her room. She took in my father and the uncle and the cousins. And she gave-- and she said she will sleep on the floor and gave the bed to the men. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long were you there? 

HELA SAENDER: A few days. We had the jewelry with us. And they took the jewelry and put it in-- we had in Poland, we had big ovens. And from the, I don't know, the bricks, he saved our jewelry to this. And we went back without anything. Back after two weeks or three weeks, I went back with our little cousin, and we brought back everything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So when you went back, you went back to your house. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. 

HELA SAENDER: And when you got there, what did you see? Did you see soldiers in the street? 

HELA SAENDER: No. It was quiet. When I went back, I didn't see anybody, was all quiet. The people wasn't around. The soldiers wasn't around. At night, we heard them running, running. They were probably afraid too. I don't know. I don't know their mentality. I know that was man, sad. 

I remember when I went back for the jewelry, I brought back five bread. We were standing in the line. And when I came back, they didn't ask about the jewelry when we said with the cousin, we have five bread. This uncle took two. And I had bread. And they gave it away to the people because everybody was hungry. 

Later, we were standing in the line for bread. And the Polacks were standing probably, too, but there was this German soldiers. And the Polacks was showing, this is a Jew, this is a Jew because you couldn't recognize a Jewish girl. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did the Germans do when the Polacks pointed out the Jews? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, whatever they-- once the Polacks beat up a Jew and the Germans were mad. And they said to beat up right here. This is their pleasure. They cannot give away the pleasure for this. 

And I started to talk about this uncle with the factories. I forgot to tell, when the war started, this uncle had business, quite a lot of metal and this. It was a-- this-- this is the other uncle that I show already the picture, Moses [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He had-- I don't remember. The cousin came into me. I had to be the hero because my cousin's there, peyoses, and they were religious. See? 

And they ask me, there was-- they called this a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] on the street. That's every bit of metal has to be reported and give it away to them. I went to the city hall, and I had itemized everything. When I stood in the line, the Polacks stood in the line, too. They came for the-- they came for handouts for the Jewish, the house, and you know. They almost killed me in this line. See a Jew? The other said, how do you know she's a Jew? No, look at her. She has peyoses. She had a beard. 

Finally, I came up to the city hall and gave him the list. There was a Polack, and he was-- I think it was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He was a lawyer. He asked me, where did you read this-- where did you read this order? I said, I didn't. My cousin told me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the order? 

HELA SAENDER: The order was every bit of metal to give away, give back. Later, they wanted two, a certain amount of gold in the town. We gave away our wedding rings. But we couldn't save the amount of gold. And they took-- they called geisels. And one of the geisels was my brother-in-law, my oldest brother-in-law. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What's a geisel? 

HELA SAENDER: A geisel, it was, you give me-- that just like if you give me-- if you wouldn't give-- like they say, a hostage. Right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Gave them a hostage if you didn't give them the gold. 

HELA SAENDER: They beat him up. Oh, brother. He came one day, the same brother-in-law, I don't have his picture, had a mother in Krakow. They came in. One man came in, oh, he wants to send something to his mother. He said, no. He said, just give me $50, I will give him. My brother-in-law said 50. He gave him the $50. Later they came in, I remember in the morning. They came in and they took this brother-in-law and the other brother-in-law and they put him in jail. The other brother-in-law that left, they put him in jail in Krakow. What they didn't do to my brother-in-law. Mother, did they beat him. I can never get over when he came out. It's hard to describe anything-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you talk about the geisel, how was that person selected? 

HELA SAENDER: No, they just-- it wasn't selected. They just came in and took him. They opened the door. And that was-- somebody's had locked, and somebody. And he had this lock, that whenever they could, they took him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So they didn't have enough gold to give them, so they took him. 

HELA SAENDER: But we gave everything away. I remember this later, I show the picture, one of, they took him, they took us to the camps. They took this boy first, before they took me. They took [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] to a labor camp. And they came, they said if we give them $15,000, they will bring him back. Now you can imagine, $15,000 is when somebody is out of work, you don't have any. But I don't know why, how we got together the $15,000. We gave him. They took the money. We believed it. 

Then my brother-in-law went up in the morning, they took, they made a Jewish community. Everything they did to the Jewish community. I never blamed the Jewish community. Because they took, they told, we always told, whatever you will give to save a life, maybe somebody will come and rescue. Maybe you had hopes. Then we gave him the 15, and my brother-in-law went out for the $15,000. One of them said, why are you giving this money? Save it. And my brother-in-law said, no, I wouldn't. I give everything to save my child. We never saw a penny. We never saw a child. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened right after you came back from where the gold was hidden? You came back home. And what happened then? 

HELA SAENDER: No, I didn't come back [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] home. After the war-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no, not after the war. During the war. 

HELA SAENDER: Ah, during the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You fled and you were away for three days, or two days, and then you came back home. 

HELA SAENDER: I think we were more than four, five days. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Four or five days. Then you came home. And then what happened? 

HELA SAENDER: We started from the beginning. We saw. We knew that we had-- they rationed. They gave food. They gave you for a week what you can use a day. We were hungry. I remember my cousin, that is his eldest daughter, we were, we had potatoes, I don't know where she got the potatoes, and we were cooking soup with dark oil. And whoever went for a piece of bread to stay in the line, we were giving him a little soup to keep him going. 

And later, we were in town and it was hot, they were killing every day somebody else. Was a famous killer in our town. His name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I think he was a-- we call him the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He was killing. Everybody who-- he was-- he killed. There wasn't a day without killing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They would just go into the house and drag people out. 

HELA SAENDER: Go into-- and they didn't go, they shouldn't come. I remember him coming to our house. What did they do? They ask-- or one day they came in-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who is they? 

HELA SAENDER: They-- the sol-- no, it was the police. The police came in one day and he said that they saw a little light outside, that we didn't put enough protection on the windows. That was just not true. He said, who did it? I says, I did it. And my brother, this brother, came and he said he did it. The other sister said she did it. Because we know when he will take you, he will kill you. And everybody wanted to be the first. 

Finally, he said, come tomorrow to the police station. I was the one who went. And he said, pay me only $2 or 3 marks, five marks, because I like the way you behave. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was a Polish policeman? 

HELA SAENDER: No, this was a German. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, a German. 

HELA SAENDER: The Polish had nothing to do. I remember the Polack, how I remember when I went to my sister and we had a trolley car in Poland. Yeah, this was a trolley car. And I remember this Polish, a Jew peyos, a hunched back. And this Polack-- nobody's in the trolley car. And the Polack says, call the police. I went in the first. 

I hear the police. To call a German police, they kill you right away. I says, this is my cousin. What did you do? He said, he said he gave me 20 mark. And he wants change. I says, don't mind him. No, I have to call the police. I says, you are intelligent Polack. And I remember, just kissed his hand, thought, oh, I feel so upset. I kissed his hand, and I begged him not to call the police. He let him go. And the man says, I gave him 20 mark. 20 mark was a lot of money for every-- I said, but you should know better. 

They did to us whatever they want. They took whatever they want. We were without, without protection. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long were you living at home during this time? 

HELA SAENDER: They put us in the ghetto, all together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did that happen? 

HELA SAENDER: I don't remember any dates. It's terrible. The dates-- we didn't know the day, the date. We didn't know the day, the hour. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But were you living at home for like a year or two years, or not that long? 

HELA SAENDER: No, not two years. Maybe a year. I remember when we was not allowed to go out, was a curfew until 6 o'clock, let's say. And whoever went out, they killed him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had to wear a yellow star? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, yeah. First, we had-- no, first we had a white, a white band. Later we have yellow stars. And you don't have a yellow star, they kill you. They ask you to, they show you the way you cross a street. And if you didn't cross the street the proper way, they killed you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did anyone work? How did you get food? 

HELA SAENDER: No. We had to work, yeah. Not everybody-- I was working in my heart. My husband, this Mr. Cooper gave him this job to work for the government. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't tell us you had gotten married. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, sure. This is, my husband was liberated in Dachau, and he died in 1977. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you get married? 

HELA SAENDER: In 1940-- in, we were, I think in the beginning of the war, we got married. And we were married in the 20th of January. And in March, they took him to the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you living in your house, in your father's house, when you were married? 

HELA SAENDER: No, we were married, we were living in another house. And we had one room. 

And later they took my husband, they came in and they took him from the house. And later we went to the ghetto. And my father, before we went to the ghetto, my father died. I don't know how. We had very little food. And I think that's-- we were saving, one of us saving for the other this piece of bread. My father was very skinny. And I think he died from hunger. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you moved to the ghetto, where was the ghetto? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is that another town? 

HELA SAENDER: No, this was Bendzin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was still in Bendzin. 

HELA SAENDER: Like [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] I think. And this was when my ghetto friends, the only Polish house, it was her garden, even was in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many people were in the ghetto, about, approximately? 

HELA SAENDER: I cannot-- all these, they-- they took together from all-- they brought from Slaskie the Jews to-- to Bendzin. That made it in from [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], from all the towns. Later I don't-- can't-- I never knew how many. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But it was a big ghetto. 

HELA SAENDER: This was a ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Large. There were thousands of people. 

HELA SAENDER: I think. I don't know anything. We were, we wouldn't count the people. We were so-- we knew that we were waiting for the death. And they called this [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. They were counting. Not the daytime, but at the nighttime, before we went to the ghetto. They were hunting. And we found out, that's let's say this day, they will take, they will look in the the houses and take the people. 

First, they took the men. And this day, I was, I don't know why, but I said, let me go and relax the day. When that night comes, I will have, I will be alert. Where do you go to relax? To my girlfriend's house, to my dear, to this Polack. I went there and she wasn't there. She was living upstairs. And downstairs were living this daughter, her sister with her husband, and this two children she had, this boy was maybe by this time maybe six years old. What said why are eating the Christian blood? 

When I came in, they know me their whole life. And I was such a dear friend. Was sitting, I remember she said to me, hello, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] is not home. You can wait here. I was a lady there. Her son was working for this, my girlfriend. They had a lot of [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And she came to collect the money. 

Well, she didn't talk about the Jews. And the sister said-- my girlfriend's sister says, Hela is a Jew. She says, I know and I don't care. Then she stop. This brother-in-law of my girlfriend, he was a Latin teacher in a Jewish gymnasium. He was a friend all the life. Oh, I can never get over what he didn't talk about the Jews. I was sitting there. I didn't open my mouth. And the same, the wife was such a dear friend and never, that the Polacks we alcoholics. It was, and the Jews are responsible. 

I cannot, I cannot remember. I didn't open my mouth. I went until the last minute. I went out. Never went back to them. But after the war, when we said, whoever will survive, come to the town. I went to the town. But I never went up to her house. I met a girl, our neighbor's child. She survived. And she asked me, where are you going? She had a piece of bread. And had a little place to sleep. They made a kibbutz. I didn't want to take away her bed. I didn't tell her where I'm going. I went to the poor house to sleep there. And the next day, I went to meet this girl. She says, you know, when you went away, Wanda start to crying. She-- that you survived and where you are, and she wants to talk. And I was glad I didn't tell her. That's the story of my life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened after you were in the ghetto for a while? You were in the ghetto, and then what happened? 

HELA SAENDER: We were very-- it's what we were waiting every day [INAUDIBLE] in the ghetto when we built this-- this wall. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who built the wall? 

HELA SAENDER: We took somebody, I remember we paid 200. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who built the wall? 

HELA SAENDER: Probably another Jew who built the wall. And we had one hole. At night, we went in. In the daytime, we went out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The wall was in your apartment where you were living. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, it was for that. This was our, I don't know if this was someplace and, our ghetto wasn't a house. A ghetto, we didn't [INAUDIBLE] on a house. This was like-- there were, let's say, 15 people in one room, 18 people in one room. And I don't remember any-- the old wall, it wasn't like here, painted or anything. But we built a wall. It was very easy to build it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you build it out of? 

HELA SAENDER: Bricks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Out of bricks. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. They couldn't recognize it. Because the everything was bricks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was a false wall so you could hide behind it. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, yeah. We were hiding inside. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have a kitchen in the building? 

HELA SAENDER: No, we did nothing. Yeah, we had a stove. We had a stove. Food, we were always hungry. Very hungry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many of your family members went to the ghetto? How many of your family were in this? 

HELA SAENDER: We all went to the ghetto by this time. Or one brother was already taken away. And my sister with two children were taking away. One brother with his five children had gone away from Warsaw, on the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were living together. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, all together in that terrible conditions. And we didn't-- I will tell you one thing, the way we found, and they caught me, and I was already in their hands, I was glad. I couldn't take it anymore. I says, now we knew that we will die. We know that we were sentenced to death. We didn't know where to run. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you said you were almost glad because-- 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, because I couldn't take it anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What could you not take? Living in that-- 

HELA SAENDER: No, waiting every day they gonna take me. I remember they call this [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Then after such a hunting in the ghetto. It wasn't-- I remember the first-- before we went to the ghetto, when they let us ate, there were 28,000. I don't know how many survived. But I remember when I came home, wasn't one house that you wouldn't hear the screaming. That's one wasn't taking away or two wouldn't taking away. I remember when the Germans came, and the first [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] they called this, they ask for 500. And they didn't tell. We didn't know where we are going. 

I remember the teacher who taught me how to pray, how to say the prayers, Hebrew. And she was always dreaming about that trip. Who can afford that trip in Poland? Now she was so glad she's going for a trip. 

I remember this mother with the five children in this carriage. And I remember [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] schlepping the Jew by the beard. He's screaming. A Jew by the beard is allowed to schlep the-- it's a very hard life. 

And I'm glad you invited me here. Because I wasn't-- I remember my husband went like that. My cousin went like that. They weren't sick. They just-- I mean, my cousin was in London and called up home that he's coming. And a minute later, they called her up that he's dead. My husband said, we would invite somebody. We're going to make the supper. He fell down, and he was dead. And it can happen to me, too. It's why I'm glad, I said, you invited me to live it. 

HELA SAENDER: Mrs. SAENDER, Mrs. SAENDER, I would like you to talk some more, if you will, about the ghetto. And when you left the ghetto, where did you go? 

HELA SAENDER: When we were in the ghetto and we were-- and I remember this girl, she was a kindergarten teacher. Her name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. She says, do you think we will live? I knew that we're not. But I didn't want to-- I says, certainly we will. Yeah. I told things what I didn't believe. I wanted to make everybody happy. I says, certainly we will. 

Later, was, they were hunting and they hunted me. And they took me to the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? How did they-- how did they find you? 

HELA SAENDER: Oh, they just came in and out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They just came into the house. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --in the ghetto. And they just-- how many did they take? 

HELA SAENDER: I don't remember. We were a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But they left some of you there. And they just came in and said, you come. And where did they take you? 

HELA SAENDER: They took me to a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. They called it this. This was in Sosnowiec. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is that? 

HELA SAENDER: They was before they were-- they-- later, I found out, they had orders, let's say. Somebody needs so many horses. Somebody needs so many, this company and this company. And they had it for nothing, fine. 

And when I was in the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], I hear that, say, they are sending people to Gliwice. And over there was my husband. I just would there, I think-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you know he was in Gliwice? 

HELA SAENDER: Because he once wrote a letter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you got the letter. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, I got the letter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So how did you get to Gliwice? 

HELA SAENDER: They send me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

HELA SAENDER: They-- this was on a hot day, I remember. And when they were driving us to the railroad, the children, the German children ask them-- you can imagine how we looked. And what the German children ask who are they and what they're doing. And he said-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why were there German children? Weren't you still in Poland when you-- 

HELA SAENDER: They were probably in Germany, I think so. Because maybe the Germans came, too. The Germans came into to cover the business. They took over the business. 

Oh, I forgot to tell this story. When they took over the-- when we remind just the women. And we didn't know. We never were in business. We didn't know how to have a penny to buy this little food. My sister, she's here on the-- she knew the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] who took over her business. 

We took all the silver what we got. And we went with this, I think this was a trolley, or a bus, must have been. I don't remember exactly. And we said we're going to go to [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] then. We're going to handling out the silver, and maybe he will give us a few pennies to buy food. He took the silver, and he start to holler at my sister. She says, they took my husband. What kind of a wife are you that you allowed them to take your husband? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who was this person? 

HELA SAENDER: This the [INAUDIBLE] German, who took over the business. They called him the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He took all the silver. Was a lot, a lot. We didn't care. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They made you work in the business after they took over? 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah, they took all over. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they made you work. 

HELA SAENDER: And he walked in the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. That was-- wasn't our business. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And so you were like-- 

HELA SAENDER: Slave. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Slave labor. 

HELA SAENDER: Yeah. They took over the houses. And then they came into my-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm sorry, we have to change the tape. So Mrs. Saender, while we're changing-- 