INTERVIEWER 1: Usually, you conduct it. You have no points where-- and I come in when I hear something, whether it's something stuck or repetitive Then I come in 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

CREW: We will fill our 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's-- exactly. We'll carry on. 

CREW: You just start from having her identify herself? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Identify where she came from. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Her name when she was born, and a little bit about her past life, which she would probably be willing to talk. Usually, it's short. 

CREW: Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ready? 

CREW: Yeah, I'm ready. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, I'll be back in one second. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: We do it here, it can be here. 

CREW: OK. But not tight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. But you can hear. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What's your name? 

INTERVIEWER 1: If-- where born. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Right. Well, my name is Julia Altholz. I was born in Sherszeniowce-- which is a very small hamlet, I would say, not too far from Lviv and Zaleszczyki-- on August 18, 1932. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was this hamlet like? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Well, I think I call it a hamlet because it was smaller than the village, I think. It was-- I remember it as a very large farm, which was owned by my father. And further on, a small church and maybe a few little houses. And there were no streets. There was not no pavement. 

And I think there was-- I don't remember if there was a school. There might've been a school, but I don't remember. There might have been a small school, maybe the church school or something. And my grandma lived there, further down from the farm. And she had a small tobacco shop. And in the back, there was, I think, some cows. It was a tiny farm. Used to be a tiny farm. 

And then, by the time I remember it, it was just a tobacco place-- tobacco shop. And I mostly remembered our farm. There might have been other things in the village or in the hamlet, but I really don't remember it. Because I was mostly at the farm, you know. Or away from it, in-- visiting. 

We also had a small apartment in Lviv, which is Lemberg. It is now Russia, but it was Poland till 1944 or '45. The Russians divided Poland, and that became Russian. So I don't remember much about the village or hamlet itself. I remember more about where I lived, where I spent most of my time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where-- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: It was the farm, my father's farm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And-- and who lived there with you? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: My mother, my father. Assorted people, probably taking care of the farm, working for the farm. But just three of us lived there, as far as families were concerned. Because my grandmother and her younger son lived away-- a bit away from us. I mean, in Sherszeniowce but not-- it seems to me that the farm must've been-- there was a small hamlet. You know, that little village. 

And then a while-- I don't know, maybe 15 minutes away from it-- was a farm. So I think that they lived in the small village. I don't remember much about where they lived. But I know they were family, because my uncle would come to the farm, too. He worked it as well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your home life? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: My home life? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Memories from the family. You'll ask us a bit louder, because the microphone is hitting you. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: OK, well as far as my home life, what I remember-- it was wonderful. I had-- we had beautiful gardens. And I was running around free. I had a lot of play children. They were children of the peasants that lived either on the farm or on small villages around it. 

There was a lot of-- a lot of love and a lot of fun. And I remember good things, very good things. Lots of family come visiting. And I remember one aunt in particular, who was an ardent kayak person. She loved going on a kayak. And we did live on a small river. And I don't remember the name of it, it wasn't a very important river. It was just a small river. 

And when she came, there was a lot of people who had prepared for her coming. And they were trying to get the kayaks out of the shacks. And she also liked riding horses, so she was always-- picked the nicest horse and the horse was groomed for her. I remember that as a big thing in my childhood, her coming. 

Her name is Fanny and she lives in Lakewood now, New Jersey. I remember that as a very important time in my childhood, her coming. She was an orthopedic-- she was not a doctor but she was an orthopedic technician. And she and my uncle both did this in a town called Chortkiv, which was not too far from where we lived. 

And they would come on vacation to us. And so all the horses were there for them to choose which horse they wanted to ride. And the kayaks were there for them to go on the river. And she was-- I remember her as very beautiful and very outgoing and fun. 

And the one thing I hated is to have my nails cut. And so, I waited till she came, because I would let her cut my nails. So there was another ceremonious thing, me getting the scissors and her cutting my nails. I remember these things. 

I remember Pesach in our family, where, of course, there was no bread. There was no bread, only matzos. But I loved bread. So I remember there was an unwritten law, nobody told me I could eat bread. There was no bread in the house, but I understood that if I were to disappear and go, maybe, to some of the peasant households, that I might have some bread. 

I remember that being very-- I thought it was bad of me, but I did it anyway. I would go and have bread on Pesach. I remember also changing wonderful, white, delicious rolls that were baked for stale, bad, black bread, you know, with kids. I mean, these kind of things I remember. I remember only good, the best. 

I remember winters where we had a big sled and horses. And they were-- when it was very cold, we would get dressed and we would go into the sled-- sleighs, right? Sleighs that would get driven by horses. And my father had-- it was called [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] And [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] is a cover made out of rabbit or fox, any fur. 

And they would-- sort of like a coverlet. And they would cover us with the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] You know, we were sitting in the sleigh. I have a picture of it, as a matter of fact. And they would cover us with this. And I remember the smell of it, you know. This-- this slightly molded smell of fur. And I loved that very much. 

So I really remember, I suppose, as any happy child, wherever they might have been before the war. I don't remember very much, because I was born in '32, and in '39, the Russians invaded Poland. And Hitler didn't come till 1940. So we had almost a year with the Russians. 

But our home, as it was, was finished at that time, in 1939. Because my father was called a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] These are the rich-- rich, whatever. Land owners. And my-- the people that worked for my father-- with my father-- came to him. And they said that we better disappear, because they are rounding up all of these people and sending them to Siberia. 

So at night, we left everything. Really, we had nothing with us. I guess my mother might have had some jewelry. I don't even know exactly if she did. And we ran to Lemberg, to Lviv, where we did have an apartment from-- I didn't quite remember why we had it or how we had it. We had it, I remember going there. 

But the time that I remember the place was during the Russian occupation. I don't remember it as much before the war. I remember being in a place, which was the apartment. But I don't remember living in it. Or I don't remember anything significant about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what happened as you ran-- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: We ran-- we ran from Sherszeniowce, which is, of course, where we stayed. And we-- my father thought that in the big city, he will not be recognized. And he will not be held responsible for owning land. 

And we lived there for a while. And then, my father got some sort of a job with, I think, a big hospital. And I think he was either a bookkeeper there or something-- something to do in the bookkeeping department in this hospital. 

And I went to-- and I went to school for a little while. For the first time in my life, as a matter of fact. Because I never went to Polish school, since I was not-- you know, I guess about the time that I was going to go to school, the Russians came. So I did go to Russian school for a while. 

I don't remember that too well as anything special. I don't remember any terrific things about the time. And I also don't remember anything terribly bad. We had things to eat, I remember. As I said, I went to school. It was exciting for me, because it was Russian. They taught Russian rather than Polish. 

And then, what I do remember is that when Hitler came, it seemed to be not a full year. It probably might not have been a full year. Maybe it was the end of '39 that the Russians came. And the middle of '40 that the Germans came. I don't-- don't know the dates exactly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When was the first time that you heard that the Germans were-- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: The first time, I don't remember hearing that the Germans are coming. The first inkling that I had, I had come back from somewhere. And my mother and father in a tremendous rush. And for the first time-- rather abrupt with me, and really frightened-- stuck me into a closet. 

And I remember this particular closet-- whether it was done before I came home or whether the closet was always hidden behind the curtain, that I don't remember. There was a closet, there was a curtain covering the closet. And they shoved me in the closet. The curtain was pulled. 

And I remember hearing something being pushed against the closet. And I was petrified. I remember that moment. I-- it was-- I remember my mouth being totally dry. I had no saliva. And it didn't last too long. Or maybe it lasted a long time. I don't remember. 

And then they got me out of the closet. And then, they told me that the reason they did this is that the Germans have entered. And-- and they were killing Jews in the streets. And the fact that Jews were something other than anybody else came for the first time. 

I mean, I never-- I knew that we were Jewish, that we were not like some of the-- like the peasants, because we observed different holidays. I knew that. But I never knew that I'm different. I-- I was never-- I thought I was a little different. But I thought I was sort of a little better, you know? 

Not better, but I felt that I had, for instance, white bread and I had shoes. And I had-- and I know that I was bringing the candy to the kids. And I gave them dolls to play with. So I never thought that I was sort of bad. But that was the first time when I realized that because we were something-- and that something was called Jews-- that we were-- that I was supposed to hide. 

And my father explained to me that they put me in there because they expected a door-to-door akcja. You know, a-- a kind of a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Search. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Search. And those people who were found were taken-- taken to [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] which is a street in Lemberg. And they were shot and they were taken away. And very shortly after that-- and again, I don't remember how long it was. 

My father and my mother-- and I think maybe my mother's brother, one of my mother's brothers who also lived in Lemberg, but he always lived in Lemberg, it wasn't just during the-- we went to where my mother was born, which was Jezierzany. Tiny place. And we stayed with my grandmother on my mother's side. 

And I remember one wonderful thing out of that time is that-- and again, I had no trauma. I don't remember anything traumatic. I remember going to Grandma. I remember having food. But I remember spending more time with her. And I don't know where my parents were. For the most time, I saw them, I didn't see them. But I was more with my grandmother. 

And for my amusement, I remember she was a very wonderful woman. She had a lot of hair, I remember. And all the hair piled up on her head. And she would spit in her hands. And then, with the spit, you know, sort of make her hair very smooth in the back. 

And I loved her hair. So for amusement, she would drop her hair and I would comb her hair. And then-- then I liked to wash her back. So I remember standing in her kitchen and taking a little stool, to stand on the stool and to be able to wash her back. I mean, I remember that was something significant of that time. 

And then I remember one day hearing shots and a great commotion again. She took me by her hand-- by the hand. We ran. We ran for a while, then she pushed me down a cellar. Now, some of the people, next to their house, there was a cellar. You went down-- down the steps. And they had potatoes there or other things. I don't know exactly what. 

But this particular cellar was a potato cellar, with no potatoes at that time. And the door was really not a door that you could open. It was like a-- a flat door which sort of folded open. And she folded one of these doors open. She practically pushed me down. And she told me to hide in the corner. That was the last I saw of my grandmother. 

She was killed then, because that was an akcja. I don't know where my parents were at that time. She was-- they were-- a lot of Jews were rounded up-- I heard that later-- and were shot. And I-- I was in a nightgown. That I remember. And I also remember a moment where I-- you know, I just went to the bathroom. I-- I-- that was fright. And I remember that moment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the cellar? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: In the cellar. And I think throughout my life later, this moment-- and another moment much later on-- were the moments that I-- lucky, I must say with the horror moments. I'm sure there were people-- my husband, for instance-- who had much more traumatic moments. That was a very traumatic moment for me, because I was 7 and 1/2 years old, maybe I was 8 almost. And I had that happen to me. 

How I got out of there, or whether I got out myself, or whether someone took me out, I don't remember that. I found myself with my parents. And probably a few days later, I found myself with my parents in a German's [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] or some such guy-- some German official-- hidden in a room. 

And my father told me that this is someone that my father did something for. I think he was-- either went with him to some horses or something. And that the man was extremely nice. He had children of his own. He was from Danzig or some place like that. And he gave us 24 hours, in which I suppose to-- to run or hide or something. 

But we stayed in that room. I never saw the German. But my father told me, this is someone who is German, who is incredibly kind, apparently. And gave us shelter for 24 hours. In those 24 hours, my mother washed my hair. I had very long braids. And she told me that I am to know about certain things. 

And the one thing that she wants me to know is that whatever happens, wherever we'll be, that both my parents love me and that I'm the most important thing in their lives. And because they don't know what's going to happen to all of us, they must send me away with people who will love me, take care of me, and save me from probably death. 

And that she told me. She also told me that I'm a girl, and that I might know something. I might-- I have to know something very important. That if I suddenly find myself bleeding, that I should know that it's nothing special, that I'm becoming a woman. I was eight years old. 

And that-- that was always a great-- I think that one thing showed me that my mother suddenly felt that I'm an equal to her. Because she talked-- she talked to me quite differently from all the other times that I remember her talking to me. Always as a child. And always petting me or kissing me or doing something very sweet with me. 

And there, she sat me down and very-- not sternly, but very seriously told me that, at that point, if I'm near a man, not to say anything. Get to the nearest woman, tell her about it. And it's called period. You know, she told me what it is called. And that I should try to get something and put it-- you know, my personal hygiene. 

She told me about that. And she told me how to wash my hair. And about that might happen to me. And that I shouldn't get frightened, I shouldn't run any place. It's perfectly normal. And that I will be soon taken by my father to a wonderful family. And his name is Mr. Surowice. 

She told me the name of the man that I'm going to go to. And I'll live with them and they'll take good care of me. And I had no idea what she was talking about. I listened to her. I sort of was bewildered. I didn't ask any questions. And indeed, about I think two nights later-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did not view it as a farewell? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: No, I didn't. I-- I listened to it as if it was a story of some sort. The only thing that made great impact on me is that sudden talk of-- and I can only know it now. I don't-- didn't know it then. 

When I close my eyes and I remember the situation, the way she told me, look, you're a girl. Of course, you know that. But someday, you'll be a woman and you'll bear children. And she told me about the menstrual cycle and this whole thing. So I was concentrating on that more, because it was something so personal, something that I almost sort of looked forward to. And not about what else she was telling me about. 

And then, my father took me. And I said goodbye to my mother. I cried, but not terribly much. And he said, look, I'm going to take you to these people. And we have to separate, because together, we have no chance. And we don't want to go to ghettos. And we don't want to go to be killed. 

And again, he was talking and I was listening. And I kind of-- I don't remember. Or maybe I'm trying not to remember some very traumatic experience-- I mean, feeling I had at that moment. I just listened. He did tell me that I must concentrate on something very important, that he will take me only to a certain part of the journey. Then someone else will take me. 

And when I arrive at this family, I must remember that they will be lined up in a row. And that I will-- I must run to only one of the people. Because the story was that I was a-- I think a niece of the man with whom I'm supposed to stay. And the-- this niece is supposed to only have known the uncle. 

The other part of the family, I was not to have known. Because much later, I found out my status in that family. So-- and he said, there will be a dog-- whom you also supposed to have known-- and Mr. Surowice. So you just run to Mr. Surowice, remember his name. Remember to kiss and hug him and say, hello, Uncle. 

And this-- and I began to be very interested in it. Because it was sort of a game, I thought. And it was very important, because not to-- to make the other people of this little-- because it was another farm, as a matter of fact-- suspicious. 

I arrived during the day, on the very up and up. You know, very ceremoniously. Because they didn't want me to appear suddenly out of nowhere. So the people made this was called Gleboczek, another little place. The people made a big fuss about it, that I was coming from Pomorze, a part of Poland which was very hard hit by war and there was a lot of trouble. 

And the family in Pomorze sent the child to Surowices, because at this part of Poland, it was better. And they had no children, they could take care of me. And the story went that I was an illegitimate child of another niece living in Pomorze. So the child came to live with the Surowice family. 

And the story was talked about in the village. And I finally arrived, so that was a big deal in the village as well. So I had to play act, because the villagers knew that I couldn't possibly have known Eva and Marisha, which are the two other nieces that lived with this man, because they were much older. They were in their 20s at that time. 

So I arrived. And I ran to Surowice. But the dog kept barking at me. And that was bad, because the dog supposedly was a dog whom-- but that was true. The family from Pomorze did bring to Surowice for the same reason, more food and it was a farm. 

But apparently, that didn't make much of an impression. But it made an impression on me. Because I was supposed to love the dog and love Surowice. And here I begin to love Surowice and about to pet the dog, and the dog, you know, jumps it. 

And it took me several weeks to realize what had happened. I didn't. It was a game. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said your father left you off? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: He left me off. He left me off somewhere on the road. And someone else picked me up, because he could not bring me to Surowice. And Surowice was someone who my father knew a long time ago. And apparently, of all the people that he had known who worked for him or with him, he seemed to be the one who my father trusted most. 

And I think that it was because he was an older gentleman who had no children. Had a very young wife and was a wonderful, loving husband. And she died suddenly. And he was a-- he needed someone small, someone to take care of, someone to love. 

Because although he provided and was very good for his nieces, but they were young women. And he-- maybe he imparted that to my father, that he really would take good care of me and my father believed him. And he certainly did take very good care of me. So it took several weeks for me to realize that, you know, I was left alone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To realize what, in your mind? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: To realize, number one, that I was alone. When initially, all of the fun I thought went out. That I was alone. And that's when I began to have bad times. I was afraid. I was wondering what happened. I asked him whether I will ever see my parents. And he said that I probably will some day. 

But he was very sensitive, I think. Because again, as an adult, one views These things differently. He was devoted. He was really devoted to me. He was taking care of me. He was kind to me. He played games with me. He-- he was very good. And he tried to-- whenever I cried, whenever I had questions, he tried to make me feel good. 

But then, he decided that I needed to go to church. Because apparently, my father and he had an agreement that if anyone survives from the family-- that is mother, father first, then my uncles and aunts-- then of course, you know, I'll go with them. 

But if no one survives from the immediate family, my father wanted him not to give me to a-- away to any agencies or any Jewish orphan places. He decided that it was more important to stay loved, even in a Catholic environment, than to be alone in a Jewish environment. 

And I think that my father was brilliant-- I'm sorry-- in that respect. Because I have known children who grew up in Jewish, you know, what do you call it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Orphanage. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Orphanages. And they were really worse off, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you cry, what's saddening you at this moment. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: It's a little bit of the problem of those kids, having children myself. And I'm not saddened, but I'm-- my father, I'm just so-- I feel that it was incredible to have had this kind of feeling for his child. To know that to be loved in any kind of community or with any people is essentially the most important thing in life. To really have had that sensitivity. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you miss him? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes, I miss him. But he died here in the United States. He survived, had quite a wonderful life, I think. But he died. He was 71 years old. And that was a thing which I also couldn't come to terms with. Because I thought that since he survived Hitler-- and he didn't survive in the way I did, in fairly good-- under good conditions. 

You know, nobody threatened my life every day. I was threatened by things, but nobody-- you know, I was not in the concentration camp. And my father survived such terrible things. I'm sorry, do you have a tissue? I have one-- oh, well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Will a handkerchief do? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Sure, if you don't mind. So, he survived all of these things. And he died of arteriosclerosis, you know? I mean, it's really-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: He survived what? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: He survived Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what? What-- what did he go through? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Well, he went through-- I don't know exactly what he went through. Collectively, I know that he was hunted like an animal in the woods. And he was beaten. He was not in a concentration camp. He was in a ghetto for a while, which he escaped. 

So he was not-- he-- again, he wasn't threatened. He wasn't a passive object that was, you know, hunted. He was always in charge of himself, because he hid and he ran and he did all kinds of things. But he survived the war. He survived all of these moments of great danger. And he came to the United States, you know, and he had a good life. And he died of natural causes. 

And it's strange, I think, that many of the survivors begin to believe-- maybe-- that they are infallible or that they're so strong that, you know, they're not really going to die. At least I-- in my-- I don't know what to call it, I guess. That one part of it, I really believed as an adult even, when he was sick, that somehow he's going to escape this. 

No, so when I cry, it's mostly for the tenderness that this man-- and-- and also the great love, you know to be-- we all-- you have children. I have children. I don't know. Those of us that have children, to love them that deeply as to deny yourself the child. And I think it's probably one of the most difficult thing to do, too. 

There were some people who said, whatever will happen will happen together. That's another great, you know, feeling. Some people that feel this way. And he just thought that-- I talked to him about it after the war, how he could do that. And he said, by shutting off all emotion and only thinking with my head. Because had I thought for a moment, he said, it's like a water faucet. 

Even if I just opened it a little bit, one drip and I would have kept you with-- you know, we would have-- who knows what would have happened. But I shut all of that out. And I said, well, my head tells me that this kid will have a chance if she is away from Jews, and from us, and from everybody. So anyway, this is what happened. 

So I went to live with the Surowice family. And I think that you couldn't possibly have asked for a more caring person, with not being related to you, as Mr. Surowice was for me. He was really very good to me. But trouble, there was a lot of trouble, because this was just in the beginning. 

Then this farm was taken over by Germans. And everything that was grown on the farm had to be given to the Germans. Because they came, I think, once a week, to collect everything. We had potatoes and tomatoes. And I actually-- and onion and corn. But we only could have the onion and the tomatoes, because everything else was taken away from us. 

So there was some trouble, as far as the food is concerned. We began, as the war went on, began to have very little food. But again, I never had pain in my stomach of hunger. I had a lot of tomatoes. I had diarrhea a lot. But I had no pain in my stomach. So that was one of the things that I must say was unique. Because very-- most people did have hunger. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it a-- or was it not a double life, though? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: For me? It was not a double life, I don't think. I think that-- I began especially-- oh, I have to go back for a moment. Tell me if I'm too long in any section, because I don't know what-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have about another 35, 30 minutes. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Would you like me to-- I don't know what-- you know, it's a very discombobulated story, to go back a little bit about the business with the church. So as I told you before, my father told Mr. Surowice that this is how it should be. If I should be left on my own, totally without any family, he should do as he pleases. 

So Surowice, very early in the game, decided that if that should happen, I should really be a proper Catholic girl. And the only other person who knew that I was a Jewish child was a priest. No one else knew. The two nieces knew. But even some other relatives didn't, because there was such a child as I was supposed to be. But that child died. And no one knew about it, because it was an illegitimate child. And to begin with they-- they didn't want to know too much about it. 

So anyway, the priest knew. And they began to teach me Catholicism. And they-- I went three times a day. Early in the morning, midday, and then [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] which is at 5 o'clock. Which I began to like, the 5 o'clock services. I hated all the other services. But the 5 o'clock services, I liked. 

And they began to teach me. And I never, for a moment-- and I don't know why-- had a feeling, any feeling, for Catholicism. I liked the services at 5 o'clock, because there were a lot of singing, and there were a lot of children. And I knew it. 

But I never-- for instance, when I-- I was supposed to cross myself, of course, every time I prayed. And in church, I did. But then at night, he would ask me if I would like to say a prayer. And I would say, no. I mean, you know I'm Jewish. And I-- so he wanted to know if I wanted to say my Jewish prayers. 

But unfortunately, I didn't know any Jewish prayers. Because what baffled me, actually, was the fact that I was not brought up in a very Jewish environment. And I think that's because they were very-- there were no Jews. I did know the holidays. And my father, Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, he put on his black hat. I mean, it was rather typical, I think. 

But whatever there was, there was enough of it-- and I can't name it, I don't know what it was-- where I felt that that is one thing. That they're teaching me this thing. And I'm sort of viewing myself in this role. That was a little bit double life. 

Not my life with Surowice. That was the way I lived. But that-- when you asked me about-- that felt that I was play acting. And that I was what I was. Not knowing exactly what I was, but I was not that. So I remember this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No fear when the Germans came, for example? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: The first time only. The Germans came very often then. And one of them took me on his horse and gave me chocolate. But that was the very last time that I was around when the Germans came, because that, Surowice could not take. He was-- he was afraid. 

So I was-- I wasn't hidden. But he said to me, I don't want you out of the house when they come. Just stay in the house. But that was-- I was-- the other two nieces, who were in their 20s, were told the same thing. So I didn't feel-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thoughts about your parents at night? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Not only at night. All the time. During the day and at night, I was wondering where they are. I was-- but I remember pushing it away. I remember thinking about it, wanting to cry, and then pushing it away. I just must tell you one thing. 

A second cousin of mine, it's a cousin of my father's who lives in the Bronx. His name is Carter Waldman. He came to Surowice one day with his now wife. Then, she was just someone he was with. Because Mr. Surowice not only had me there, but for a few weeks in the pantry, hid four Jews. 

And Carter Waldman-- now, I don't know how he came to him. He didn't know that I was there. He just was wandering from farm to farm. And when he found that I was there, he didn't want to stay. Because he was afraid that, you know, they would endanger me. But he did stay there for a very short time. 

And I remember asking him if he knows what happened to my mother or my father. And he told me, they're perfectly fine. Of course, it was-- he had no idea. That they are wonderfully fine. They're safe. And that soon this will be over. And that I'll be together. I have nothing to worry about. He just saw them. He told me a real big story. 

And then, he, of course, left. And I was left for another two years. But I remember-- we called him Chaina. His name is Carter, but I guess that's his Jewish name. And another thing he said to me, he said that whenever I have any problems, just to think that my father is very big and very tall. And he was, he was six foot. Very tall. He says, can you imagine that anybody would do something to your father? I mean, he's so strong, you know. 

So I asked him, what about my mother? My mother was skinny and small. And he says, first, they have to get through your father. They will never pass through your father. So the mother is in the back, you know. But I was already old enough not really to believe this story. But I remember kind of saying, Must it must be true. 

So that, I remember wanting to believe it. And knowing that it's probably a little story. But he survived. He's alive. he's lives in the Bronx. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did happen with your mother? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: My mother was killed. Um, my father and my mother, apparently-- and a cousin-- found a place. Another peasant who worked for my father, they found a place. The peasant hid him-- hid them in a potato hole. 

Some of the peasants didn't have cellars. They dug a very huge hole, put hay in the hole, put the potatoes on the hay, put some more hay on top of the potatoes. That's how they wintered the potatoes. Well, instead of the potatoes, that's where my mother, my father, and a cousin were hidden by a peasant in such a way. 

And then something happened. And the peasant told my father that there is-- somebody is suspecting him of hiding Jews. Maybe somebody saw food that he was bringing to this shack, whatever. And that he suggests that my parents-- that my father finds another place for a few days to hide. 

Because he has a feeling that the Ukrainian helpers of the Germans will come and search. They will come, they won't find anything. Then the peasant will send word to my father and mother to come back. So they took his suggestions. And my father decided that he's not going to take the women along with him to look for another place. 

So he left the women there, left during the night to make some new contacts. Told them he has to wait all day and come back next night to look. You know, to-- to-- to hopefully bring them to the new place. And indeed, he did find another place with another peasant, whom he knew. 

And he said, look, I'm not going to stay long with you. I have a place, but I need a place for a few nights. And the man said, OK. My father waited all day. And in the evening, he came back and both women were killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He found them that way? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: He found them dead. Because the peasant ran away. He was afraid to-- you know, what would happen. He did come back then. He was lucky that the peasant wasn't killed, because they were known to get rid of the peasants that-- that were hiding Jews. Not always, but some did lose their lives as well. 

And this is how my mother and the cousin died. And then, my father was in the woods. And he was by himself. Then he was with his older brother, who now lives in Israel. They met up somehow. I really don't know how. And they were, for a time, together. So my mother was just killed that way. 

Indeed it was-- as they say in Yiddish-- bashert, I guess. Where they-- which means it's destiny, I suppose, that he-- as a matter of fact, my father was telling me that both women were wanting so much to go with him. Because they were afraid that he won't come back. He was the one who's getting out of the hiding place. And they said, don't go. So what happens will happen, you know? 

And again, my father, he was not-- he was trying to do something, not sit there and wait. And he-- he went and he found another place. But he did not go back to that place. He just-- he didn't quite ever tell me about exactly the feelings he had at that time. But that's how my mother was killed. 

And I stayed with the-- with this family throughout the war. Of course, at the end of the war, we had a terrible thing happen. One of the nieces had a boyfriend who was in the Polish underground, a young man. And he was killed by the Ukrainian collaborators and brought, at night, in front of our little hut, placed right on the doorstep. 

And in the morning, we walked out and he was wounded. He was wounded in the throat and in the stomach. And that was something that we saw. And I-- Surowice and I and one of the-- we-- we all got out. Because we went to the water well. And that was another incredible thing. And I remember Surowice, when he saw it, he-- you know, he pushed me into the house and he covered my eyes. And there was wailing. And a terrible thing. 

That was really close to the end of the war. Then we had to run with the Surowice family, because they were-- Katyushas were flying. You know, the Russians were coming. And they was bombarding and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was the other traumatic moment you-- or did it come before? You said there were two. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: No. There was another one that was before that. There was once an akcja in Gleboczek, in this place. Because there were some Jews working on this farm that was not owned by Surowice. He was just living there as parceled up with the land. And then the big farm was owned by many other people. But now, all of them were put into one farm working for the Germans. 

And some Jews did work in this farm. But Surowice was not too keen for me to have any kind of dealings. There was a young girl. And she was in the tomato-- what do you call it? By the tomato grove. Tomato grove or whatever, patch. She was gathering tomatoes and onions, apparently for the Germans. 

And there was an akcja suddenly. a search. And they got people together and started shooting them. And they shot her. And she fell and I saw that. She was not much older. If I was then eight or nine, she might've been 12 or 13. And he yelled at me. Surowice, yelling, says, come into the house! They're shooting the Jews! 

And he ramped me into the house, you know. Very-- pushed me, actually. One of the first and last times that he really was very rough, rough with me. Pushed me into the house. And I saw her shot. 

Now, she was shot in the leg. She was not killed. And she was, of course, smart enough at that time. And she just laid there. And they never came to get her, because they were leaving the dead Jews. And I don't know who collected them. Because it was fairly arbitrary, I suppose. They just did it. And I don't know how they collected the dead bodies. 

But then Surowice went into the potato-- the tomato patch or whatever, and dragged her out. And I saw her leg all, you know-- that was before I saw all of that blood and this Stash, who was the boyfriend of Marisha, this other niece. It was a terrible sight, but it was a very brief sight, because he wouldn't let me look at it. 

And I saw that leg. And Surowice did not want to bring her into the house because of me. But he came in. And I saw his face very pale, crying. He was very moved, because again, I think he was very touched by children. And it was a young girl. 

So I asked him, what did you do with her? And he says, I did what I supposed-- what I had to do. And I said, why didn't you bring her into our house? He said, no I cannot bring her to our house. I cannot bring her to our house. And don't ask me such questions. 

That was a terrible moment for me, because I identified. I knew she was bigger. She was bigger. She was older. But she was a child. And those were the two moments where I remember being in a state of fear and shock and bewilderment and all these feelings. To see that leg and that girl. Now, she is alive and she lives in Israel. 

I don't know her. But people-- the Jews that stayed in Gleboczek-- some of them that survived-- as a matter of fact, this second cousin of mine, they knew who the child was. You know, people knew it. I was totally separated from that group. And after the war, many years after the war, when we were talking about it, someone told me that she is alive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You passed the war there. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're already not eight or nine, but as the years went on-- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: I was 11 years old when the war finished. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were born in '32? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when the war finished-- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: In '44 or '45, I was more. I was 12, right? How old was I? 

INTERVIEWER 1: 12, 13? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes, 12, 13. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have a sense of what was going on about the war and who was winning and when the Russians were coming? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes, but only in this-- you see, it wasn't discussed, actually. But I had a sense that we are going to be liberated. So the word itself implied, of course. And I knew that it would be the end of war. Hopefully, I'll get together with my parents. 

But by that time, I did not want to leave them. By that time, my fantasy was that my father and mother and Surowice and Marisha and Eva, we'll all live together. So by the time-- I guess it probably was two or three years after living within them, that I really felt that. 

And I do have a letter that I wrote to them, from after I was-- oh, gosh, I hope I didn't lose it. I think I might have-- what did I do with it? Here it is. I wrote them a letter from-- because when the war ended, my father came to pick me up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: I called him [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] I called him Mr. Waldman. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the encounter with him? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: The encounter was I remember him being very pale and biting his lips and really shaking. And I remember wanting to go to him, but really not knowing what I should do. So I looked at Surowice. And Surowice cried. And first, Surowice and-- and my father embraced. And then I ran to my father. And I-- I remember crying, crying, crying. 

But I don't-- it was a little ambivalence there. I know that I wanted to go to him. And I-- I didn't know what to do. There was a moment of hesitance. I, of course, recognized him. And there's no question that I knew who the father was. 

But before, when I was thinking about it, I thought, well, the minute I see my mother and my father, I'll just run to them and I'll kiss them and I'll hug them. And I'll just squeeze them so tight. And I did that, but I didn't do it in the moment that I saw him. I remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The way you remember this image of a big-- the big man. When he came, was it that image or different? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: It was that image. It was the image of this big man coming to get me. But I remember-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you saw him, was he-- did he live up to the image? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: He was big and strong in my eyes. And he was not that strong. He was, you know-- it was big. Yes, I remember-- I think I remember. Well, he was very tall. So, you know, and I was not too-- although I was 12 or 13 by then, I wasn't too tall. So I guess-- and all the other people around me weren't that tall. 

So the image of somebody tall conjured up, you know, that feeling, I think, that he was-- that came to get me. But the fact is that he came to get me, but I wasn't ready to go. And we stayed together for a while. Of course, then, he told me that my mother died. 

And. I do remember one time-- it was probably less than a year after I was with Surowice-- that I had a dream. And I didn't know whether I had a dream or whether I thought it, that I was just lying in bed and thinking it. And I was saying-- and I said, dear God. I hope that maybe at least one of my parents will survive. 

And many years after the war-- I was married already-- I spoke to my dad, my father, and I was telling him these things. Because we would talk to each other, it was bits and pieces. You know, we didn't sit down to tell each other everything at one time. And I said to him, you know, I had this kind of a dream. And he tried to pinpoint when it was. 

So I-- I tried to remember when it was. Obviously-- obviously, it couldn't be very exacting. I don't know whether he told me that to make me feel particularly-- to comfort me. But he said, you know, your mother did die around this time. I never asked him why he said it. I think he said it for me to comfort me. He felt, maybe, that that would somehow place her in time for me. And place her death in time for me. I never talked to him about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have-- you said you never talked to each other about the whole thing, it was sort of bits and pieces. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What stopped you? Or was there an urge to--- 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Nothing-- no. I can tell you what stopped-- I don't think that it stopped me. In the beginning, when we got together-- and we finally separated from Surowice, and father and I lived together-- he and I wanted to steal back almost all kinds of times together. 

So this was during the Russian occupation for the second time. It was Lviv again, in Lemberg. And we decided, I think, without speaking, to just have fun. And we were doing things together. He would drag me here and drag me there. And he would buy me-- I remember the Russians had a-- what we would call a delicatessen store. And they call it gastronom, which was a big food store. 

And they had these marvelous, huge barrels of caviar, and white bread and butter. This was when they came to Lemberg and they liberated us from Germany. And he went to the gastronom with me. And he would buy me whatever there was. You know, I remember the caviar and the white bread. And I adore caviar. And everybody in my family since then. 

And, I mean, there was something-- I don't know. It's stuck to me that he was buying me these white rolls. And it was spread with caviar for whatever pennies, whatever they charged. And so we didn't talk about it this time. Then he began to try to find a school for me. 

I did not want him to, for instance, give our laundry away. For me, the great significance of taking care of my father was to wash his shirts by hand and iron them. It was as if this would show to him that I must take care of him. This is-- I didn't cook. I didn't-- I don't know how we lived, actually. Probably, he must've been cooking. I don't even remember. Or maybe we didn't cook. 

But the taking care, in all the things he did with me and for me, I kind of needed to do it. So I washed his shirts. And his shirts were always dirty. And I cried myself to sleep every night, because I saw these shirts dirty. And I didn't know what to do. So my biggest preoccupation was to wash the shirts for my father and iron them. And I used to iron the dirt right into it. 

I mean, these are some of the things that I remember as being extremely important. And so, we didn't talk about anything in the past. We sort of were catching up. I mean, I'm just viewing it now as what it was. It wasn't a predetermined behavior. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said you hesitated to go with your father. 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: I did. I did hesitate, because by that time, I wanted all of us to be together. I get-- I mean, I loved these people. But when my father explained to me that we must go away-- because my future is not here, that I must go to school. And then we will-- we will try to maybe find some family and we have to go back to our life. And that these people love me enough to do that for me. 

Except it wasn't quite true. Surowice never said goodbye to me. Never said goodbye to my father. He locked himself up. And he said, I know you must take her away from me, but I cannot face it. So it wasn't quite as peaceful and wonderful. I mean, he obviously got attached to me. 

This was-- but we kept in touch. We always kept in touch. I continue to keep in touch. I keep in touch now. And one of the nieces-- he died many years ago. One of the nieces just died. And I have-- I don't know if you are interested, but it's-- I have a-- this came to me. It is an announcement of her death. Now, it came in June of 1982. 

And this is the announcement of her death. It is in Polish. These things were in the newspaper. And it mentions her as being, um, one of the righteous in Yad Vashem in Jerusalem. I found that incredible, that in Russia-- this is Russia-- that they would not object. As a matter of fact, that this family would find it safe enough to-- to parade this kind of thing. 

And she just died. Now, we saw her. I saw her about five, six years ago. We took our children, my husband and I. And we went back to Poland. And we saw her. So I always kept in touch with them. But, you know, I wanted to stay with them for a while. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you want to read the letter? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: The letter is in Polish, but I could kind of translate it, yes. Yes. It says-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And it was written? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: It was written probably in about-- in 1944 or the beginning of '45. Probably the end of '44. I don't remember the dates/ 

INTERVIEWER 1: Seven months after you left them? 

JULIA ALTHOLZ: Yes. And I was now living in Lemberg, or Lviv with my father. And I write to them, we-- we arrived in Lviv. And I find it very bad here. I find it extremely boring. And I miss you very much. 

But I hope that soon, after things will settle down, I might go back to school. And then, it will be better for me. I want to know how everybody's health is. And I still couldn't find out about Bapcha's coat. There must've been something I was supposed to find out about a coat. I don't know. I don't remember what it was. 

I'm sending this letter with my father. Apparently, my father had gone back to them. I want to-- best regards to Aunt Evonya, who was the other niece. I just write a few words, because as I'm telling-- as I told you, I'm bored. I have nothing else to write. I love you. I sort of-- I hug you. 

