SUBJECT: Yes. [INAUDIBLE]. Well, for instance here is something that I don't know if you ever saw. 

My name-- oh, sorry. My name is Murray Calm I was born in Ober-Gleen Wetzlar in Germany in November, 1916. I attended public school-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was a village? 

SUBJECT: Yes, it was a village between 500 to 1,000 inhabitants. My family on my mother's side was the only Jewish family in that particular community. You could trace it back till 1633 in the church archives, which were destroyed in 1633 during the 30-year war, and no further records are available. Chances are, they were there already before that. 

Ober-Gleen was one of the small villages, where within a certain circle there were four or five other small villages that each had one Jewish family. This is a picture of Ober-Gleen. This is a picture of Ober-Gleen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you hold it a little longer, sir, and tell us when it was taken, approximately? 

SUBJECT: This picture was taken-- I must have taken that on one of my visits home. I would say 1935, '36. Here is a picture of the house that I was born in, which belonged to my grandfather. In the front room on the second floor is the room that I was born in. That picture shows my daughter and I. We were there in 1972. 

This is the house that my parents lived in and my father conducted his business upholstering. Also, had a small farm. We grew all our own vegetables, our own food-- potatoes, rye. We had two cows. We had a number of chicken, geese. And while my father primarily took care of business, my mother and us, the children and neighbors, ran the farm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many children? 

SUBJECT: We were of three. Actually, I had an older sister who was born in September of 1914 and died in July, 1915. My father never saw her, because he was called out as a German soldier on August 1, 1914, Mobilization Day. And he got his first leave after my sister passed away, so he never saw her. I was the oldest of the other three. I was born in '16. My sister was born in 1918, and my younger brother in 1920. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your father was wounded in the war, in the first war? 

SUBJECT: My father had his eye shot out in-- one eye shot out in 1917. But he went back to the front till the last day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he-- what appreciation? 

SUBJECT: He received-- I don't know the exact amount, but he received a government rent which stopped during the Nazi years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he decorated? 

SUBJECT: Yes. He had the Iron Cross First Class, and he took that with him to Buchenwald. And on the strength of it, he was released. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said your family had been in that town since the 1600s, is that correct? 

SUBJECT: Or before. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Or before. What was the nature of their work in that town? 

My grandfather and his father were farmers and cattle dealers. And that's as much as I know, but I assume that the generations before were the same. My father was actually born in Frankfurt am Mein and he learned his trade not too far from our village. And after he served his army career, when he was discharged he married my mother on January 1, 1914. And as I said earlier, he was called into active service the first day of World War I. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For the Germans? 

SUBJECT: For the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like for you to grow up as the only Jewish family in a German village? 

SUBJECT: I would think that the relationship was rather pleasant. We were very orthodox. My father-- none of us ever worked on Saturday. We had a neighbor who tended to our stove, tended to some of our animals. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A shabbos goy. 

SUBJECT: A shabbos goy. And turned the light off Friday nights, turned the stove on Saturday. And for services, we had to walk an hour and 20 minutes to another village which was the center of this entire group. In this particular village there were about five or six families living, and some of the neighboring villages had two or three. Some of them had only one. 

As far as their relationship was concerned with the other children and the other people, I would think it was on a very, very friendly basis. Everybody knew each other. And I don't think we had any personal enemies until the Germans just were not allowed to communicate, or the majority of them were not allowed to communicate with my folks anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the attitude-- was there any attitude of the larger population toward you as you walked to services an hour and 20 minutes each way? Was there any exchange? Did they greet you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Jokefully, they even offered us rides. They knew very well that we would not accept them, which was by horse and wagon at that time. Cars were a rarity. But the communication was rather good. 

Now, in the German school system, religious lessons were rendered in the public schools. The village was predominantly, or practically all, Lutheran. We were the only Jewish family, and there was one Catholic family. The Protestant or a northern minister came in two or three times a week, gave religious lessons. And I had my options of either going home, play in the schoolyard, or stay in the class, do my homework or listen in if I wished, as long as I was not disturbing. And I must say, I probably had more Protestant formal lessons in my early years than I had Jewish lessons. 

In turn, we had to go to this neighboring town of Polenz where a Jewish teacher gave classes for all the kids from that particular area, and three times a week-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You walked? 

SUBJECT: --in the afternoon. Walked, or later on when we were older, used our bicycles. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You walked no matter what the weather? 

SUBJECT: We had to walk no matter what the weather, or when you get older, we used a bicycle. When I was 10 years old, I attended the oberrealschule in Putzbach in Hessen, which was about 10 to 12 kilometers away from Ober-Gleen. Of course, in Europe the oberrealschule are any high school. And oberrealschule started after the fourth elementary grade. It had to be paid for. 

Again, I was the only Jewish student in that particular class. I had one Jewish professor, [INAUDIBLE] Steinhart, who was about the only Jewish teacher in this particular school. The relationship between myself and the other students was excellent. For instance, I have a picture here of myself in 1931 with a student cap. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold it up a little longer, sir? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And here are some classmates of mine. I don't know if you recognize me. I think I'm the second one from the left, sitting-- or from your right. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: These are German and Jewish children? 

SUBJECT: I'm the only Jewish boy on there. The rest are all German, some of them who I later saw in SS-- or SA uniforms. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were the circumstances when that picture was taken? 

SUBJECT: I think we were on a class trip in 1932. This was at a railroad station in Friedberg, which is between Bad Nauheim and Frankfurt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were 15 years old, you said? 

SUBJECT: 15 and a half, I would say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have friends amongst the German children? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They all-- I was friends with them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Close friends? 

SUBJECT: Yes. As long as you ask that question, I had one friend with whom I really was as close as one could be. We would spend our vacations bicycling, youth hosteling together. We played on the same soccer team. And I slept on the weekends at his house. Or if his mother prepared a meal for me, she made sure that I wouldn't eat anything that was [? treif-- ?] usually eggs, boiled eggs, or cheese. Bread and butter. But no cooked meal. And he spent time in our home. 

I left-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: May I ask, were your parents friendly with his parents? 

SUBJECT: Well, yes. They knew each other. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they socialize? Did they entertain one another? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: They were from a different-- he was from a different village. But my parents were friendly with everybody. My father played cards with the two schoolteachers in town, and he would socialize. And if there were dances, we would attend, or anything else that went on in the village. Yet, there was never an intermarriage in our family ever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you explain that interaction yet separation when it came to close exchanges, the fact that there was no intimacy between members of your family and anyone else in the village? There was no intermarriage, as you say. 

SUBJECT: There was no intermarriage, but there was close friendship among them until they were estranged from doing so or exposed themselves to danger of communicating. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there a consciousness? I guess what I'm asking you, was there a consciousness present all the time that you were different? 

SUBJECT: Different to the point from a religious aspect, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But no other way? 

SUBJECT: Culturally or socially, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not more different than the Protestant girls, than the Catholic girls? 

SUBJECT: That's right. I would say there was no-- really no difference at all, that I remember. Of course, I left home in 1933. I attended the oberrealschule till two years before matriculation to go to university. After the Nazis came to power on January 30, 1933, one of their first edicts was no more Jewish students in the higher schools of education. At first, for a few months they made exceptions for children of Jewish war veterans. But that was scrapped within a few months. 

The school year in Germany started from Easter to Easter. My last day of school would have been April 1. This was the day of my brother's bar mitzvah. And after we came home from the services, there was a storm trooper parading in front of our house because that was the first official boycott of all Jewish businesses. 

He was from a different village. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mr. Calm prior to 1933 and the actual takeover of the Nazi party of the German government, there were symptoms of what was to come. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What I would like you to try to remember is conversations that your parents had that you heard, discussions within the family about what they knew about the Nazi party-- attitudes towards Jews, concerns. 

SUBJECT: I don't think this was ever subject to much discussion, because we didn't really feel it. Or at least, I didn't. I was rather young. And I participated in sports with the others-- played soccer, played handball, and what other athletic events took place. True, the growth of Nazism was evident. But they didn't bother us. Economic conditions in Germany after the war, especially during the inflation, were rather difficult, as you know. In the history of Germany, they had changing governments from in the later '20s, early '30s-- practically a new government almost every month. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. But you had a teacher in high school. 

SUBJECT: In high school, I had a teacher-- off and on, because he was elected to the Reichstag. And he was the first Nazi party member in the Reichstag, Professor Werner 

INTERVIEWER 1: And it was what year? 

SUBJECT: He was in the Reichstag from 1930 on, I believe. And he was the only member of the German Reichstag until the elections of 1932, I believe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was he like? 

SUBJECT: This is something that I have never been able to figure out, a regular Dr. Jekyll and Hyde. As I was one, I would almost say favorite student-- I tried to achieve, and I was good a good achiever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: Somewhere between 1929 and '32. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From your village? This man was in the village? 

SUBJECT: No. He was in the oberrealschule in Putzbach And of course, he was absent a lot. But he graded me as well as all the other students. And some of the other students felt that he almost showed favoritism towards me. 

And when I said Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde-- when I read this man's political speeches, when he was out on the stump for a re-election, they were full of anti-Semitism and full of hatred. And yet, to me in class he treated me as well as any person could. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Never a political remark in class? 

SUBJECT: No, not towards me in any form. And I only got the best marks possibly that I could get from him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Or a remark about Jews? 

SUBJECT: No, none whatsoever. And this is the thing that I never was able to figure out up to this date. He later on became the first governor of the state of Hesse, later on Reichstadt holder of the state of Hesse. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is he alive? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I imagine probably not, because at this point I imagine the man would be too old. And I also have a feeling that if he had been alive at the end of the war, he probably might have been tried during the prosecutions of the Nazi war criminals. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When the regime changed in '33, what changes did you observe in school? Did anything happen overnight? 

SUBJECT: No, nothing happened overnight, except the only thing that I happened to see is the very next day, all the boys who, unknown to me, were in the Hitler Youth, which had been forbidden up till then in school, appeared was black neckties. That was the first visible sign. They were, however, friendly to me and with me to the last day. I had no personal consequences among my classmates. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many came to class in the morning? 

SUBJECT: We were a class of approximately 25 to 28. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how many wore black neckties? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many wore the black neckties? 

SUBJECT: I would think 90% of the boys, if not more. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know what the Hitler Youth was? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you know about it? 

SUBJECT: Well, that they were working for the Hitler movement. And they were organized among the Pathfinders officially, but actually it was only a coverup for the Hitler Youth. But Pathfinder-- I think you would compare it to Boy Scouts. That was a coverup for the Hitler Youth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you saw 90% of the class belong to the Hitler movement, what did you think-- about yourself, about them, about your future? 

SUBJECT: I was surprised to see that many appeared with a black necktie. As far as myself, I was concerned. I still did not know what to make of it, because the personal relationship was good to the last day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said that they identified with something called the Pathfinders. Can you explain that? 

SUBJECT: Well, the Pathfinders was a name-- it's an organization similar to Boy Scouts. They called it Pathfinders, but it was primarily a group of boys or girls would go out on hikes, socialize. But primarily it was nature study and hiking, and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you said it had something to do with Hitler Youth. 

SUBJECT: It turned out that-- Hitler Youth movement was not allowed in school, so they officially declared themselves Pathfinders, and covered up and organized that way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it discussed about why the Hitler Youth wasn't allowed in school? How was it explained? 

SUBJECT: I really do not recall this particular idea anymore. I don't think-- since it has no visible effect on me personally, I wasn't even aware of it. I noticed that something secretive was going on, but what it was I didn't know. And of course, it was made compulsory to read Mein Kampf. But that was towards the end of my school career. 

And I remember vividly the day before-- on March 31, I met the Steinhardt the only Jewish professor at that school. And he said to me, well, I guess this is our last day together. I happened to meet him in 1939 in Frankfurt. He was in charge of a Jewish children's home, and he took all the children that were in that home to England. Then I lost track of him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Reading Mein Kampf as a boy of 15-- 

SUBJECT: 16 years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --16. What did you think? What effect did it have on you? 

SUBJECT: I was terrified, because in Mein Kampf, exactly he spelled out the annihilation of Jews and that they are the root of all evil and of all the economic disaster that had befallen upon Germany. And of course, then when you heard the storm troopers marching through the streets and sing wenn das Judenblut vom Messer spritzt, the Jewish blood floods from the knives that'll be the greatest thing that can happen to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your friends, your schoolmates were reading the book too? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yet, no tension? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were discussing it together in class? 

SUBJECT: In class. No, in the oberrealschule-- I'm sorry, I mixed that up. In the oberrealschule it never came to that. Later on in Bretten Baden when I had to attend three times a week the handelsschule which was a commercial school while I was an apprentice, then that was part of it. I'm sorry if I've mixed up the reading of Mein Kampf. And the oberrealschule was compared to the Handelsschule in Bretten Baden 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which was 1930--? 

SUBJECT: From 1933 till 1936. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, that time, the book was discussed in class. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was it, and what did you feel? 

SUBJECT: Well, first of all, [INAUDIBLE] chronologically first finished it in April 1 was the last day of my school. And my boyhood dream of becoming a Studienrat or professor-- a teacher at a higher school of education or university-- became shattered. 

And my father advised me the best thing to do, since I have to emigrate, learn a trade. And since as a boy I had to help out many, many times after school and after my homework was done, he found it logical that I would follow his particular trade. 

And he sent me-- I found an apprenticeship available in Bretten Baden which is approximately 200 kilometers south of where I was born. And I worked for a firm where I served as an apprentice in the upholstery trade. And at the same time, I had to attend the Handelsschule three or four times weekly to learn bookkeeping and everything that's connected with business. 

And in that particular school, Mein Kampf came up. And we even had to write essays on it. However, the teacher excused me from writing on that altogether. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your father told you you were going to have to leave the country? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: After hundreds and hundreds of years in Germany, he made that decision? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Early. 

SUBJECT: He made it early. Well, he knew there was no academic future for me in Germany, and so he felt that I should learn a trade. And if the Nazism should blow over, I could resume school or I could follow his trade. He personally did not take the need for emigrating ever seriously at all. He felt he was secure, having been a German soldier and der Dank des Vaterlandes ist euch gewiss, "Thanks of the fatherland you can be assured of" was a slogan that he believed in. 

And I started the job in Bretten which was a larger town of approximately 5,000 to 10,000 inhabitants. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 193--? 

SUBJECT: End of '33. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever discuss reading the Mein Kampf with your family? Since they didn't think of leaving, did you ever talk about what you read in that book? Did you read it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my father read it. We also read the newspaper Volkischer Beobachter which was the official Nazi paper and later on the became the official paper. We also got our hands on copies of Streicher's paper. Die Stuermer believe it was, which was an out-and-out Jew-baiting paper-- published nothing else ever. And we discussed the necessity for leaving. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there any discussion of standing up against this Jew-baiting-- in other words, writing letters to the paper, resisting that idea? Was there ever any discussion about perhaps forming some kind of political group to resist the Nazi idea? 

SUBJECT: Well, as you probably know, the moment Hitler was given power and they burned the Reichstag, they dissolved all other political parties. And all other political parties were outlawed. 

My father was a member of the Jewish War Veterans, RIff RJF, Reichsbund Judischer Frontsoldaten which had a publication. However, the diffusion of that was strictly among Jews. And there had to be very, very careful what they wrote. The general public was silenced very, very quickly. If you had a contrary opinion some Germans were taken as early as 1933 to concentration camps, because if they belonged to the Communist Party or if they expressed feelings against the Nazis. So those who felt that they were anti-Nazi kept quiet and didn't discuss it anymore. A completely different atmosphere developed. 

I left home end of '33 in Bretten where I came into a Jewish community. And I had very little contact with the general public, except the boys and girls who attended the Handelsschule with me. And of course, since I had not grown up with them, there was a strained relationship all the way. Also, personally, again, they did not bother me in any form. But on the other hand, I never socialized with them. 

We formed-- mostly young people. And this was worked out by all Jewish organizations. They tried to get first the young people out. We tried everywhere in the world where we had possibilities to go. I had an uncle of mine who came to the United States in 1937 who dug up a distant relative-- very distant-- who was willing to give an affidavit for me and another first cousin who came here in 1938. 

In 1938, I had an appointment with the American consulate-- in April of '38, an appointment with the American consulate. And the passport was denied because the doctor found that I had an eye defect, and they needed some additional financial assurance that I would never be a charge to the community. And when I wrote for that additional paper, I never received an answer from these distant relatives of mine, because they were in the process of getting a divorce and the man who had the income no longer wanted to have anything to do with that matter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I want to take you back to before 1932, because you were a child but yet an early teenager, whereas when the Nazis took power, all opposition was squelched. Prior to that, however, were there not opportunities to take a position to stand up against them? Do you remember any of this-- any opportunity, any discussion, anything? 

SUBJECT: Yes, except that no one ever took them very seriously to the point that they would develop a dictatorial power. Everybody looked at them just like any other party, like the Zentral party, which was a party of von Papen. And when all these other governments finally failed they said, oh, why don't we give Hitler a chance and see what he can do? 

Economic conditions were bad. And they thought, if he isn't good or doesn't bring back social and economic order, we vote him out again and try another government. But the moment the Nazi party came to power, they actually had an organization which very few were aware of-- which was so repressive, this had never existed in Germany up to that point. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You're saying something very interesting, sir, about they had an organization no one was aware of. No one understood the nature of their organization? 

SUBJECT: That's correct. In other words, the Stormtrooper, SA, and the SS-- which the SA were the Sturmabteilung, SS was the Sturm--Sicherheitsstaffel the black uniform. The SA was a brown uniform. And that whole thing was built up so secretly that the majority of the people never knew about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How were they gathering without being known? How are they wearing uniforms without being seen? How were they practicing their-- their marches and their demonstra-- 

SUBJECT: Originally they did it without uniform. Only starting 1931, '32, '33 that they gained more publicity and they gained more popularity, and they came out more into the open. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see them in the open before they took over? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw? 

SUBJECT: Actually, not in my village. There weren't any at all that I know of. But for instance, in the town where I went to school, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw them walking in the uniforms, marching? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In other words for certain affairs or before elections, if there were any fairs or anything of that sort, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were they gathering? And they must have been gathering in large numbers. And yet, they weren't seen, you said. 

SUBJECT: Well, they had their own meeting halls. They rented storefronts under disguise of something else at first. Later on, they actually came out in the open with it. But no one had an idea that they were going to do what they really did. But even so, every word that was printed in Mein Kampf, which was their Bible, and they lived up to it. But no one took ever seriously that they were going to annihilate the Jewish people and that they were going to destruct other things. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever have a chance to talk to someone-- not yourself, but did you have a chance to talk to someone else who talked who knew what was going on, who perhaps heard what the Pathfinders were really all about, who knew that there were meetings, who knew that there were uniforms that they weren't wearing yet? Did you ever have a chance to talk to anyone who was in touch with what was happening? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I would say some of the boys. But again, they told me that they were out at marches, that they were out on nature hikes, that they were out map-reading and things of this nature. And of course, being from a different town, I could not participate. It didn't even strike me as strange that I didn't participate in that, because three days a week I had religious lessons after school. So I didn't see anything too unusual in that. 

Some of it was even under the sponsorship of Protestant Pathfinders. But how do you say, Pathfinders-- more like Boy Scouts. 

In this nature. And I didn't see anything too seriously wrong with that. The fact of the indoctrination against the Jews, they didn't tell me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you suspected that there were secret meetings? I mean, you heard that there were? 

SUBJECT: I really was not too much aware of it until January of '33, until the day after Hitler was actually given the chance to be chancellor of the German government. 

INTERVIEWER 1: However, '33 to '38, was clearly a more isolated life in the Jewish community, and it wasn't the same any longer. 

SUBJECT: That's correct. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, what was your experience of the Kristallnacht? Can you give the date? 

SUBJECT: Kristallnacht was November-- well actually, preceding Kristallnacht there were the Nuremberg laws of the Nuremberg Reichstag, which I believe was in 1935. There was a Reichstag in Nuremberg where they would meet, and this was staged. I'm sure you must have seen the Leni Riefenstahl film of the Reichstag, of the Nurnberger affairs. And then the Nuremberg laws, I believe, came out in the fall of 1935, or '36. I'm not sure which year it was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember what they said? 

SUBJECT: Yes, that no Jews could have any more German girls or German servants, female servants; that no Jews could associate with German girls socially, sexually, or marital or whatever form. So you had to avoid every contact. 

I had a furnished room with a family who had a daughter, and after the laws were passed my boss recommended to me that I find a different room so that I would not be suspect that I would be living with a German girl. Also, there was never at any instance anything going on between that girl and me other than common courtesy. Other than that, nothing whatsoever. And I changed my room. 

Then of course, the conditions became sharper and sharper, to a point that the SS paraded much more. The SS operated much more. The officials salutations were not good morning or good evening anymore. It was all heil Hitler. And in April of '38, I was denied the visa to come to America because they wanted additional security. 

Then the German consular official, Von Radt was killed by a Jew in Paris. All of a sudden, a so-called spontaneous reaction of the people against the Jews were started. And on November 10 or November 9 or 10-- which was called Kristallnacht, because as you may have seen in the Holocaust film, all window panes glass was destroyed. And that's where it got the name Kristallnacht, which I didn't know until I came here. In Germany, nobody knew that name. 

On the morning of November 10, in the northern part of Germany they started already destroying and burning some of the synagogues on November 9. On the morning of November 10, before I went to work I went to services at the synagogue. I wanted to go to services at the synagogue, as every morning, when two of the boys who were with me in the Handelsschule who I knew were members of the SS-- however, they were not in uniform-- approached me near where I lived and told me, come with me. Come with them. And they advised me to-- I didn't have an overcoat on-- advised me to get an overcoat, and went back with me to my room-- it was only a block away-- and let me take an overcoat. 

And I said, I have to go to work. He says, don't worry about it. Your boss knows about it or will be notified. They took me to the city jail together with all other Jewish males who were left in the community. That was about 7 o'clock in the morning. At about 11 o'clock, we heard sirens and fire engines going. And they called us out and marched us to a street which was overlooking the synagogue, which was aflame. 

I have here a picture of the ceiling of that synagogue, which only had been renovated in 1929. This was a picture of the big synagogue in Bretten and Baden And during the winter time to save fuel, services were attended in the small chapel, which was attached to a row of houses in which people lived. 

And they couldn't set that building on fire, so they grabbed me and another young fellow to take out all the Torahs, the taliesin prayer books that were in the small shul, at the point of a gun. Told us to throw them in the fire of the big synagogue, and told us sing while we were carrying that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sing in what? 

SUBJECT: In Hebrew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What songs? 

SUBJECT: The only song that we could think of was [INAUDIBLE]. It was the only song that we could sing. And they, of course, did not know the difference, as long as it sounded Hebrew. And then after we had emptied out the shul-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you prayed while burning--? 

SUBJECT: While throwing-- they made us sing in Hebrew, and we sang whatever Hebrew songs we knew. Although, you didn't feel like singing, I can assure you. Then, after we emptied out the small shul, we had to join the other men. And then they marched us through the town from one end to the other and took us back to the city jail. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see as the synagogue was burning and as you were emptying out the smaller chapel? What are the pictures? 

SUBJECT: First of all, you saw the flames. You didn't know what was going to happen to you. You saw your own people standing there. All the men-- were mostly older men. Most of the younger fellows had left already. You saw a lot of German-- none in uniform, except one or two. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean, the younger men had left? Where had they gone? 

SUBJECT: Most of the younger Jewish fellows had already emigrated to the United States, England-- wherever in the world one could get. And I was one of the few young people who still was in town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And civilians were watching? 

SUBJECT: Well, a lot of them were Stormtroopers. But none of them were in uniform. This was supposed to be a spontaneous action by the people, not by the stormtroopers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you know they were Stormtroopers? 

SUBJECT: When you're in a small town and live in the town for six years, you knew who they were. Just when those two fellows approached me, I knew they were members of the SS. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the crowd that was watching, did they do anything, say--? 

SUBJECT: They were just, as far as I remember, just standing there silent and looked on. They marched us through the town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any other feelings that you remember, having to burn the taliesin watching the synagogue burning? 

SUBJECT: Well, how can I describe it? It was one of the saddest things that I ever did. I took a Torah scroll and threw it into the burning fire. I don't know if I ever can convey to anybody that feeling, when you have to destroy something that's sacred to you. My own tallis and tallis beudel I had to throw into the fire. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did it flash through your mind not to do it? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because when you have a loaded gun behind you and people with leather whips behind you, you haven't got much choice. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did anybody not throw it with the leather whips used? 

SUBJECT: There was only two-- I myself and another boy, we were the only two who emptied out the small shul. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you know they would use the leather whips? Maybe they were just there as a threat. What made you know with certainty that if you didn't do what they asked you to do, that the punishment would be of that nature? 

SUBJECT: There was one man who had just been released from Dachau about two or three weeks before that. And he was told to do something, and he somehow made a remark. And they whipped him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where? 

SUBJECT: In Bretten 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before this? 

SUBJECT: No, the same day. They made him destroy with his bare hands some of the glass plates of the Jewish community leaders. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Some of the-- 

SUBJECT: Of the stores of the Jewish community leaders. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And he refused? 

SUBJECT: At first he did, and they whipped him. That was on the way to the synagogue. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is before he went to Dachau? 

SUBJECT: No. He was a prisoner in Dachau for about four or five years. And he was married to a German girl. And they finally got released, because he got his visa to go to America. As a matter of fact, I met him here in New Haven. His name was Albert Cobble He no longer lives here, and she came here too with their children. 

And when they refused-- when he at first was reluctant to do it, they hit him over the head with a leather whip. So you had no choice. You knew they meant business. When they set a building on fire which is sacred to you, you know they mean business. You don't argue with a gun that's pointed at you. 

They took us back to the city jail. They got orders from Karlsruhe which was the capital of the state of Baden, that the men could go home. But there was a misunderstanding. They thought the SS men could go home. And they let us go. About an hour later, they came and picked us up again because it was a misunderstanding. They took us back to city jail till it got dark. 

I would say about 6 o'clock, they loaded us on trucks and took us to the nearest bigger town, which was Bruchsal, to the railroad station by the tracks. And they waited for a train to come from Mannheim in Heidelberg, which were in the northern part of Baden, That particular train took us to Karlsruhe, which was the capital of the state of Baden, from which other trains came from the southern part of Baden-- Offenburg, Endingen and Freiberg, Baden-Baden, and so on. Pforzheim. 

And then after everybody was there, a special train was formed. I would say around midnight we boarded the train. We were guarded by normal, regular civilian policeman, or at least in the uniform of regular civilian policemen, with guns. And we were told that if we obey, nothing would happen to us. We noticed the train going south towards Stuttgart, past Stuttgart. 

About 6 o'clock in the morning, the train stopped in Ulm. So we had an idea that we were going to Dachau. In Munich, the train was switched in the railroad yards towards Ingolstadt. And Dachau is on the way between Munchen and Ingolstadt. And the train arrived at the railroad station in Dachau, I would say, approximately 11 o'clock in the morning, 12 o'clock noon-- somewhere around there. And the train was standing still, and we were sitting and sitting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's a passenger train in the town of Dachau. 

SUBJECT: That's correct. We were sitting for quite a while. We saw an express train go by. And the moment that express train went by, all of a sudden we saw outside men in uniforms that we had never seen before, which was the Waffen SS, the super Stormtroopers who were in charge of the concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they look like? 

SUBJECT: They had a gray uniform with black lapels, where the regular SS had black uniforms. And they had steel helmets on. They had, naturally, rifles on their shoulders. They had whips. And all of a sudden, as all hell broke loose, the policemen disappeared and they came in with whips, jumped on top of the passenger seats. Get out, you dirty Jews, and all kinds of epithets, and start looking at us. 

No sooner were we herding towards one end of the train, they came from the other side, flailing at us with these leather whips with gun butts. And everybody was for himself. They herded us across the railroad track into cattle cars. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was no provocation for this behavior on their part? They just entered the train and began yelling and whipping people? 

SUBJECT: That's correct. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Nobody was resisting anything? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Whoever didn't move fast and whoever they could get ahold of, they hit as hard as they could. I was very fortunate. I was not hit at the time. I had with me a briefcase which I had my lunch that I took to work. 

And we were herded into cattle cars. And we were herded in so tight that you couldn't-- even if you fainted, you couldn't fall. And then I guess after everybody was in these cars, the train started moving towards the camp. I would say it was about 10, 15 minute ride. I don't know exactly, because it seemed like eternity. And the moment the train stopped, they opened the cars. And again, that same hollering, whipping, and screaming started. 

They chased us, and we ran as fast as we could towards the camp. We saw the big iron gate with the sign Arbeit Macht Frei. While we were running towards that, they were old manhole covers. And while you were running, some people fell into it. And the moment they tried to climb out again, they were stepped on by others or trampled on. And some of them may have lost their life. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All men? All boys? 

SUBJECT: Only men. I was one of the youngest ones in the whole group. Had my 22nd birthday in Dachau. We got to the camp. They put us in one of the streets, and we saw-- 

[KNOCKING AT DOOR] 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have to change tapes. I'm sorry. It just happened. 