SUBJECT: And after we were in the camp, we saw other groups marching, uh, in the blue and gray, uh, uniforms, striped uniforms, all bald. And we were wondering whether we would be that way, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have a photo of yourself? 

SUBJECT: I have a photo of myself from the day after I-- the day after I was released from the camp. The day after I got back to my town, I had to turn in my driver's license. And I had to apply for the Juden Kennkarte which was an identification, and which I was not supposed to take out of the country, uh, which you had to show whether-- at any official transaction. As you can see, I was fingerprinted from both-- both hands. 

And, uh, no matter whether you went to the post office, or to buy postage stamps, or whether you went to a railroad station, went to the railroad station, or whether you went to a bank, or any official transaction, you had to show this identification, that if anybody else was in line, they pushed you-- depending on the clerk who waited on you, uh, had to, you had to step aside. And somebody else was taking care of. 

Once, I almost missed the train to go home because I was pushed aside so many times to buy a railroad ticket. In other places, in a bank, for instance, people who knew me, uh, they just ignored it, unless they saw that they were, uh, supervised. 

Coming back uh, to the day that I was admitted at Dachau, we had to stand on the same spot all night through. And Dachau was built on former moors. So it was very, very cold and damp. You could not leave the column for any purposes, whether you had to urinate or anything else. You had to stay right on the spot. 

And you could not fall out of ranks. If you sat down, they came right after you with, uh, sticks or whips, and got you up. And of course, the language, uh, wasn't really, uh, the nicest. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like what? 

SUBJECT: "Get up, you dirty Jews," and uh, "sons of bitches," translated Schwein hund which means, uh, dog of a pig, uh, combined, which might have been the worst swearing words that one could imagine. I was processed. In other words, they went by groups. I was processed on November-- the arrival time in Dachau was November 11th. On November 12th, I was processed, which meant they took all my identification, uh, name, and so on, with their questions, such as whether I had belonged to a political party ever, whether I had any criminal record, and so on. 

Then they took, uh, my briefcase and my clothes away. During the time-- night that I was standing, I had my tefillin and my, uh, winter coat, overcoat pocket. And I made a hole in the pocket, and they fell into the lining. 

They took everything else that was in my clothes' pockets. I had a prayer book in my pocket, which they threw away. Uh, they counted exactly how much money I had in my wallet and kept a thorough record of it. They gave me the wallet back with only 15 marks. Uh, after we-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you kept the film? 

SUBJECT: Well, the film stayed, and they overlooked that. Uh, any personal pictures or anything like that that I had in my coat pocket, I never saw again. Any religious items, uh, I never saw again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The briefcase? 

SUBJECT: The briefcase I got back. I still have it. Uh, it was a briefcase that my father made, uh, for me when I went to school. It had my school books in it. And I put it over my bicycle bar. 

Um, the processing took place. And that we were sent into a-- after that, we were sent into a room where we had to take the rest of our clothes off completely and put into a basket. And we were put under a shower-- and, uh, I don't know how many people at time, maybe 100, 150 at a time. And our hair was cut by electric and hand razors, completely shorn off us, indicated on the pictures. 

Then we were given uniforms, which were the blue and white striped uniforms with a prisoner number on it, a yellow star, uh, on it, and a pair of shoes, a pair of socks, and just these, uh, blue and white striped uniforms, nothing else. We were marched in groups to barracks. I wound up in Barrack Number-- Number 10. Each, uh, attempt to, uh-- I'll explain that to you later in one second. 

Um, the barracks were for-- each barrack was for approximately 800 people, uh, in two, uh, different, uh, rooms, 400 people to a room. We slept in double layers on straw. And each one got a blanket. 

Um, so I had nothing to eat from my breakfast on November 10th in the morning till the 13th, which was-- uh, I was processed-- on the 11th, we were on the way, and got into the camp. We were standing all night to be processed. And after we were processed and got into the barracks, it was too late for any meal. 

So the first meal that we got was the following morning, which was on the 13th. And the first meal consisted out of a cup, a tin cup of coffee, where four-- which four people had to share, and a piece of black Komisbread which they threw in the mud. And that was our first meal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They threw in the mud? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had to pick it up from the mud? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Everyone? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Unless you caught it, caught the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean, they dunked the bread? 

SUBJECT: They threw it at us, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: Uh, between the barracks, lined up between the barracks. They first marched out-- the routine actually was that, after they woke you up in the morning, you had about a half an hour-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What time? 

SUBJECT: Uh, normally, I would say about 5 o'clock, 5:00, 5:30, somewhere around there. You had about half an hour to take care of your toilet necessities and washing up. There were round spigots, and the toilet, uh, toilets were-- which 400 men had to share, um, a number of, uh, urinals, a number of toilet seats, everything completely open. A few men were assigned every day to keep these particular units clean. 

Um, the first thing they did in the morning, they marched us to the Appellblatz, which was a big square, main square of the camp, where they took a head count every single morning, make sure that no one was missing. Uh, also special orders of the day, uh, plus, if there were any personal infractions which were reported by the-- by anybody, people were punished in front of everybody assembled. 

Every single day, more people arrive by trains from further away-- Frankfurt, uh, Essen, Cologne, and further up, uh, also from Vienna. Uh, and, uh-- all of southern Germany was more or less assigned to, uh, Dachau. My father and brother were taken to Buchenwald at the same time. 

Uh, the routine was that after they had counted, and every-- and that everybody was there, and special orders were given out, some of which we didn't hear. But the stubenleider, which were trusty prisoners, some of them political prisoners, German who had been as a-- we had a young man from Munich who was in Dachau since 1933 as a political prisoner. He was in charge of our barracks. If anybody was reported for any personal infraction, there were lashes. 

They were trapped over, uh, wood blocks. And they were given, uh, so many lashes, which was done in the morning, first thing in the morning. Some of them were, uh, all depend where we were standing. Some of which we could not even see, we were far back. Others-- other days, we could see them do it. But we heard it. We heard the screams. 

Then after, uh, that, they marched us back to the barracks. And we were given our, uh-- stood in line, and were given our breakfast. [AUDIO OUT] --a postal card. And we were to write home, ich bin in Dachau und gesund, meine Addresse ist, my address is, uh, Dachau, such and such. You can send me 15 marks a week, and sign it. 

My mother's birthday happened to be on November 17th. So I added to the card, Happy Birthday, Mom, or-- in German, naturally. Next morning, which was November 14th, when right we were assembled after the Appellblatz rating, we were assembled in-- uh, for breakfast in front of the barracks. Uh, and SS men who stood on the sidewalk in front of the barracks, which was slightly elevated about four or five inches from the ground where we were, called out my name, front and center. And I had to stand in front of him at attention. 

And he said, did you write this post card? I said, yes. Uh, you only write what you are told. I give you Happy Birthday. And he let me have it with both fists from left and right, and tore up the card, the shredded card, and threw it in the mud-- I had to pick up the pieces later-- gave me a new card that, unless I write what they tell me, they-- I will not have any-- or anybody will not have any mailing privileges. 

My mother received that particular card, and immediately sent me 10 marks. And here is the trans-- middle slip from the post office. And in red ink, it says my name, and my birth date, and Barracks 10, Room 2. And my mother wrote on it, uh, my birthday was November 22nd, Zum gerburtsag, sende ich 10 mark, kannst du dort feierin which means, for your birthday, I sent you 10 marks. Buy-- and you can celebrate there. Love and kiss, your mother. This was the last communication that I had from my mother. 

Uh, she did one more thing. She applied to the American Council-- wrote to the American Council in Stuttgart. And apparently, outside organizations had advised her to do that, Jewish organizations advised her to do that, that anybody who had papers being processed, uh, and had no political record, eventually-- and no criminal record, was released from, uh, Dachau at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can we-- you said you had to pick up your breakfast from the mud. And I thought you might describe the process by which breakfast was distributed. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Uh, two men for each, uh, room and barracks had to go to the kitchen and pick up 50, I don't know, it's 50 liter, or whatever, pick, uh, two big cans with coffee in the morning, which, uh-- and one can of bread. And that was shown to us by, uh-- the coffee was given-- uh, we had laid it out. And one tin can for every four men. And the bread was just thrown-- thrown to us. And if you didn't catch it, you picked it up out of the mud. 

Our first-- we had noontime, the first meal we had was part-- was always only one dish, sometimes, uh, two dishes-- two things put-- a raw potato-- or burnt potatoes and herring. But most time, it was just, uh, like a stew. And the first one was, was pork. And a lot of people refused to eat it after, even after not eating in three days. We had a lot of rabbis in the group. And they advised us, eat it. You need your health more than observance of religion. 

Uh, usually, the meat that was in there-- well, mostly vegetable soup, potato soups-- was either horse meat or, uh, pork, or walrus. Uh, no beef, ever. Um, meals were-- we had a noon meal. And you had one evening meal around 5:00 o'clock. 

And it was one of my jobs, since I was one of the younger and healthier, uh, people there-- as I mentioned before, I was 22 years old. We were elected to march into the kitchen and, by barrack number, pick up, uh, the stuff-- if anyone ever spilled it, we had to wipe off the floor. And the entire-- that particular barrack went hungry, didn't get anything to eat. 

Um, there was a canteen that opened during lunch hour. You had about half an hour to an hour, uh, for lunch where people, if they wanted to or had the money, could buy coffee, if they could get to the counter. I never did. 

But one thing I did save, I saved-- they gave me $15. And about two weeks after I was there, they sold long flannel underwear. And whoever had 15 marks could buy-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How much was 15 marks? 

SUBJECT: 15 marks at that time was about $6. That was your weekly allowance from your own money, as a matter of fact. I had almost my full month's salary with me when I was taken to Dachau. Lost the 10 marks that my mother sent me. And when I was released, I got the entire balance of my money back, all my personal belongings, except the religious items and the tefillin that, uh, I-- they overlooked in my overcoat pocket. And I still use them every day, today. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long were you in Dachau? 

SUBJECT: I was released on Novem-- on December 21st, uh, '38. Uh, was, uh, speaking about these flan-- this is why I wanted to mention these flannel underpants. I never took them off from the day that I got them till the day I left the camp, because if you took them off at night, you sure were not to find them in the morning, because everybody was freezing. 

It-- Dachau was very, very cold. It was approximately 10 degrees in Munich, uh, 10 below Celsius. And in the moors in Dachau, it was much colder. 

One day, which I would say about the middle of December, apparently, they were missing one or two prisoners. And they let us stand-- stand on that same spot the entire day, uh, when it was really cold. 

One man in our group, who actually had-- was a converted Jew-- his parents already had been converted to Protestantism-- he was a mathematics professor at the University of Mannheim. He was very sick. And another young man and I more or less carried him to the Appellblatz. 

And after standing from 5:00-- I think it probably was about 8 or 9 o'clock in the morning, the man dropped. And we bent down to pick him up. There was snow on the ground, a little mushy snow on the ground. 

We tried to pick him up, and as I picked him up, I got a kick in the boot. It was an SS boot-- a kick in the rear end. It was an SS boot. "Let that dog die." And of course, he did die. 

And at night, at 5 o'clock, they went-- they marched us. We had no breakfast that day. We had no lunch that day, and only supper. When we marched back to the barracks, we had to take him back. And he had to stay in the barracks till the next morning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was he dead? 

SUBJECT: Yes. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned, in the meantime, your mother did some things to speed up your visa and-- 

SUBJECT: My mother wrote to the Council in Stuttgart, uh, and got a letter to certify that my papers were being processed, and-- which were forwarded to Dachau. And once they arrived at Dachau, since I had no political or criminal record, I was released. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you make any friends in Dachau that you-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: People you knew before, or met there? 

SUBJECT: Well, some people I knew, some that I met. I met one, uh, young man who was married on November 9th. And the night of his-- first night of his honeymoon, he was picked up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you speak to these people at all, these friends in Dachau, about the thought of someday meeting again? Was there a-- did you have a view of the future when you were there, or were you terrified there was no future? 

SUBJECT: At the time, you did not even know whether you had any future. But you said, well, everybody naturally, uh, had ideas of trying to get out. This particular young man who I've just mentioned to you was picked up on his honeymoon. Uh, he and his wife had a job to go to England. 

When I was released from Dachau, uh, at night, uh, of December 21st, uh, they let us march to the railroad station. And all of a sudden, we were without guards and our own clothes. And they told us, there are people here in this group who have money. Whoever has no money for the railroad fare, there are enough people among you who have enough money to pay for it. 

Uh, I'd like to bring back one incident that just occurred to me. Uh, this was the first night of Hanukkah in our room. And, uh, one of the rabbis said, we have no candles to light. We just say the brachah and sing the first stanza of Ma'oz Tzur. 

Well, we said the brachah for the lighting of the candles. And we sang not only the first stanza, but all five, uh, without fear. And there wasn't a dry eye in Dachau. And it was about the only time that I can remember that I cried in Dachau. But, uh, this was one of the saddest nights in the camp. 

I was released the last night of Hanukkah at a railroad station in Munich. Uh, the Jewish community of, uh, Munich had organized that everybody who came from Dachau was brought into a room. And they lit the candles for us and told us not to sing, because it was a public railroad station. And then we had to stay in that room till the train for that particular area that we had to go to arrived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have any thought at that point of seeing again-- of someday seeing again people that you had worked through such a struggle with over this few week period? 

SUBJECT: You made friends. You were in the boat. There was-- I think one thing that became, uh, aware-- that you became aware, from the moment you were chased out of the train when you arrived until the moment you got out of Dachau, the one thing that you had to be more concerned with was survival, survival for yourself. 

Everybody had to be-- for yourself, you did. As I just pointed out earlier, we tried to help that one man, and I got a kick in the rear. And I don't mean a touch. 

Uh, while you exchanged addresses, you couldn't write it down. Uh, you tried to remember. And uh, I don't think I had any contact-- yes, one contact, uh, that I will mention. 

Uh, I arrived in Britain at 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning. And I knocked at the, uh, window of my former boss, and they let me in. And, uh, this man had been blind. 

And, uh, I took a shower there. And they told me that my room was paid. And I got back to where I lived, uh, in the morning. 

And the very next day, I went to the Consulate in, uh, Stuttgart. I had assigned something in Dachau when they released us. What I signed, I don't know. Basically, they told us that we had to leave the country within a certain time, that we should not tell any cruel stories, and, uh, be very careful, and get out of the country as fast as we possibly could. 

So the next morning, the first thing I did, went to Stuttgart to, uh, to-- now, I'm sorry, the day after. The first thing I had to do that day was, uh, turn in my driver's license, and had to have my picture taken, uh, for the Juden Kennkarte And I called home, uh, to Obergleen And my father had just gotten home himself, and told me that, uh, my brother was still in Buchenwald, and my sister was not home. She was with relatives some distance away. And my mother was in a mental institution. 

And I told him that, uh, my mother, uh, was alone in the village, the only Jew-- Jewish person left. And this was during-- at the time, my mother was in her late-- middle-- late 50s. And this was during the-- her years of change of life. And she had a mental collapse. 

And some people told her cruel stories, what was going to happen to us, and worrying about, uh, my brother, my father, myself, and my sister. I can easily understand that something like that could happen. And when I mentioned before, where she wrote about, uh, she wish she could bake some bread, or send me bread, indicated to me already that this was not quite normal, uh, for her. Um, I told my father that I was going to the Consulate in Stuttgart-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: She was how long in the-- hospitalized? 

SUBJECT: I don't know exactly when she was hospitalized. Uh, she was moved from Giesen to Herborn, uh, which was near Wetzlar. And, oh, dear, I believe I showed you a picture earlier where I visited her in the mental institution. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you hold-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, can you hold that up, please? 

SUBJECT: And to show you, uh-- this is a picture of my mother when-- of my parents when they were in their prime. And here, you can see where she was sick, how much weight she lost. That's me with her. 

And later on, during the summer of '39, she came home again. And you can see how much weight she had lost during that time. She got electric and insulin shock treatments. And uh, on Christmas day of '38, my father and I visit her-- visited her. She did not recognize my father, but she recognized me. Um, but she-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe what you saw, visiting her? What you found? 

SUBJECT: Well, first of all, let me mention one incident of this, uh, friend of mine, uh, with whom I was very, very close, and I mentioned earlier. And of course, after I went to Baden I lost contact with him. Uh, in order to go from Obergleen to Giessen, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: To the hospital? 

SUBJECT: --to the hospital, my father and I had to walk to Kerschgens, which is a small town where we ended a train. And in that compartment, this close friend of mine, whom I hadn't seen in about five years, uh, was in that particular compartment with a buddy. And he was on leave, uh, from the army from Vienna, uh, which was at that time occupied by, uh, the Germans. 

And since he had his buddy with him, I didn't-- my father and I didn't make a move. And he looked at me, but he didn't talk to me-- except that after everybody else out of the compartment, including his buddy and my father had left the train. If you're familiar with the European trains, there are approximately 8 to 10 people in a compartment. And then he shook my hands and he said, I'm sorry what happened to you, and wished me a lot of luck, told me that he was on furlough from Vienna. So we only had a few fur-- uh, furtive seconds to talk to each other. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he in a regular army-- 

SUBJECT: Regular army uniform. I, uh-- and we were the closest friends that you could ever imagine all through the years. I saw him again in 1975-- or '72, we stopped when we were in Germany again the first time. Uh, I looked up his, uh, house, and he was not home-- only his wife, whom I had not known, and his mother, who was just overjoyed to see me. And she just was a woman in her late 80s. But I think I'm getting ahead of myself. 

Uh, after we got to Giessen, uh, and we had to take a streetcar to go to the, uh, sanatorium, or mental institution, whichever-- and we visited my mother. And she recognized me, but she did not recognize my father. She spoke very incoherent. Uh, spoke of certain things that were a long time back, others that she did not-- that she did remember. 

She seemed to be in a different world in her-- uh, sort of happy, but not knowing what was on, or where she was, or what happened to us. And uh, we are-- we're limited to a two hour visit, I believe. Then we took the train back. And I stayed with my father another day or two. Uh, over in Europe, Christmas is two-- two days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was she ever herself again when you saw her? 

SUBJECT: Yes, after-- uh, on this picture where I was with her in the hospital, she was already better. And about a month later, she was released when I was home the last time. She was better-- never fully, uh, recovered, but enough that she was, uh, able to be released from the institution. 

Um, I went back to Britain to work on my immigration. And when I wrote to my relatives again, who had sponsored me and got an answer, I got a letter from a friend of mine here in New Haven, who was a close friend on the other side, who knew what had been going on. And she inquired, how are you doing with your immigration papers? 

So I wrote her back that I wrote him-- her son and his mother back that I had still the same problems. And she asked a relative, uh, who was a very close friend of your parents and his flock, Mr. Louis Rosenfeld, who signed a paper for me, gave another affidavit. And uh, under strength of that, I finally got my visa on August 11th of 1939. 

In the meantime, the Gestapo was hunting me because I had a valid passport. And they asked me why I was still around? I was supposed to be out. And uh, if I don't get out soon, they'll take me back. And I explained to them, uh, what happened, that I read the labels, and I was really waiting for my papers. Well, if you're not here-- if you're still here the next time, you go back where you were. 

That fear of going back to Dachau was worse than actually being there. I might add, the night that I was released, and you saw these poor souls who were still in uniform marching around, there was no-- not one bit of gladness or joy that you got out. You felt sorry for these people who were still left behind. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have you ever seen again the man, the young-- the fellow who was holding up the mathematics professor with you? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What would you feel if you knew you could see him again? Would there be a desire on your part to see-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. I have no idea where he wound up. He was from a completely different town. And I don't know what happened to him, whether he got out of the country or not. I do not know. I know-- all I know, his name was Fritz Erlebacher But I-- he was about the same age. But uh, whatever happened to him, I really do not know. 

Um, of course, in the meantime, I lost my job. Uh, but I supported myself, uh, working secretly in Karlsruhe, which was a big city, for a German who had taken over a Jewish business uh, and who needed help that I was able to give him in getting certain supplies that were all under restriction. I also taught English to, uh, people in the community who wanted to emigrate. I taught some French, which I had learned in school, and lived close to the French border. And I kept up my education by myself as much as I possibly could. 

Uh, But I finally got the final papers. And I was at the Consulate in Stuttgart. I had arranged already for my passage to go to United States. And uh, I got my visa on August 11th in Stuttgart. 

I called a German shipping line and called through that I had the visa, and that I had to get onto the next boat. They told me, the next boat is on August 17th. However, it was overbooked because most of the Americans had been advised to leave Germany at the time. 

Uh, I said, well, I'm not going to wait till a week later. And they told me, the only thing that I could do was take a chance, go to Hamburg and see that there might be a cancellation. And I called my father that I would take the next night train to go to Hamburg. And he and my brother met me in Frankfurt at the railroad station. Uh, next morning, I arrived in Hamburg about 6:00 o'clock-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you parted at that station? 

SUBJECT: We parted at the station. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you ever see them again? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was the last time. 

SUBJECT: It was the last time, only for about an hour at the railroad station in Frankfurt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have a feeling you might not see them again? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You did? 

SUBJECT: Yes. As I passed-- uh, passed my hometown more or less in the middle of the night. And I had a feeling that I might not see them again. After having the experience of Dachau, I didn't think that matters would get any better. 

Also, after I arrived here, I made every effort to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your coming to the-- to Hamburg? 

SUBJECT: Uh, in Hamburg, I arrived at 6 o'clock in the morning. And I went to a hotel that was assigned to me by the Hapag uh, people. Uh, all hotels, all restrooms at that time had signs on Juden unerwunscht. But I was booked there anyway. 

And I shared a room, by coincidence, with a young man who was born the same day, uh, that I was born in, uh, Germany. And, uh, at 9 o'clock, when the office of the Hapag opened, I went-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The shipping company? 

SUBJECT: --shipping company, Hapag Nordeustcher Lloyd uh, I went there and I told them that I got to get on the boat, on-- and I show him the receipt that I had paid for the trip already. And I asked whether they had a vacancy for the SS New York, which left on August 17th. They told me yes, they did. And I was assigned a cabin. 

And, uh, irony had it that it was a cabin of four, which I had for the entire trip by myself. Not one-- not another person. Yes, the first night, there was a passenger in there who got off at England the next morning. But I never saw the man. 

Uh, but, uh, the rest of the trip, I had the cabin all by myself, even though I had been told that the book-- uh, the ship was overbooked. This-- while we were mid-ocean, or close to New York, on August 24th, 25th, Germany and Russia signed a non-aggression pact, uh, which indicated that war with Poland was inevitable. And more or less, they divided Poland among themselves. 

And the boat slowed down, waiting for orders from Germany. And they got orders, uh, considering that the majority of passengers were American citizens, to proceed to New York at full steam, discharge all passengers, uh, refuel and uh, get supplies, not take on passengers, and return to Germany as quickly as they could. The boat-- this boat and the SS Bremon, which were the last two passenger boats to arrive in the United States direct from Germany, uh, returned. 

And then, war started, I believe, September 1st. And they got through with the British blockade to the Russian port of Murmansk, and later on, made their way back through the Norwegian fjords back to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And there were no more ships from Germany to the United States after the one that you took? 

SUBJECT: Except the Bremon, which arrived one day later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But had you waited another week-- 

SUBJECT: If I had waited till, uh, that boat which was to leave on August 24th, I would never have arrived here. My sister and brother, for whom I had secured a job in England to work as a couple, had their visa. And they had their passage booked to leave on September 3rd. 

When I met my father and brother in Frankfurt, uh, I told them not to wait till September 3rd, to get out immediately. Uh, my father felt, oh, what's another week? They had no idea that war was imminent. I, having been living in Britain, I was able to listen to Radio, uh, Strasbourg, Radio Luxembourg in French. 

And that's the only way that I knew how urgent this whole thing was. And unfortunately, my, uh, sister and brother, uh, did not heed my advice. And since the war started September 1st, they never got out of-- got to England. 

Uh, I arrived in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened to-- 

SUBJECT: They were finally-- my sister and brother were finally, uh, picked up in the summer of '42. And the last message that I had from home, through the Red Cross, uh, from my parents, uh, which was dated 17th of June, 1942. These Red Cross messages were only limited to 25 words. 

And my father, uh, uh, wrote, we are all, uh, healthy. Johanna-- that's my sister-- and Rudy-- which her husband she married in the meantime-- since I am involved and her eyes are gone for a few weeks, on the 10th of June, uh, Manfred-- my younger brother-- uh, is away for a longer period of time. Later on-- I later on found out that my brother was killed in Majdanek in July of 1942. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold that up? How did you know how your brother was killed? 

SUBJECT: I found that out later, uh, through, uh-- in legal proceedings, restitution and so on. I found out the exact date when he was killed. I do not know where my sister and brother-in-law were killed. 

Uh, from people who were with my parents in Theresienstadt at the time that I was on my honeymoon in California-- I got married in California in '43. My mother died in Theresienstadt. And these people who were at her funeral, uh, I met in New York told me that. 

My father, thereafter, was shipped to Auschwitz. And he wound up in the gas chambers. I do not have an exact date of his death, either. He was officially declared dead, uh, with the date of the armistice. Uh, all these things I found out in the process later on to restore, uh, what was coming, uh, to me. And finally-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you read the settlement paper about your Dachau-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. I'm just trying to see where I put that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Finally, what-- you were going to say, finally, something-- 

SUBJECT: Finally, on September 3rd, 1960, I received a check, uh, from Germany for the time that I was in Dachau, after having a lawyer in New York and a lawyer in Germany. And the check amounted to $29.22, which was after deduction of, uh, legal expenses, which were 8%. 

Uh, when I received that letter, I cried like a baby. As I said, in Dachau, I cried only once. It was the first night of Hanukkah. But when I received the check for $29.22, this was one of the worst slaps as bad as any slap that I could receive in Dachau. 

I endorsed the check, and I wrote to the New Haven Jewish Welfare Fund at 152 Temple Street, "Gentlemen, please find enclosed a check in the amount of $29.22 issued by the bank firm of George Houck & Son, Frankfurt, Germany, payable by the Manufactures Trust Company in New York with my endorsement on the back. This check represents compensation in full after deduction of legal expenses for the time I spent in Dachau Concentration Camp from November 10th, 1938 to December 21st, '38, and which I received after three years of legal fighting. 

Needless to say, that this "compensation"-- in quotation marks-- is ridiculous for six weeks of suffering, torment, and agony, the like of which only those can imagine who have lived through it. $29.22 compensation for six weeks of freezing, beatings, hunger, and pain, with our lives hang in a very-- on very fragile threads. I do not even want to think back at those hours, weeks of horror and uncertainty whether you would come out alive or not, whether your family had survived and how. Fortunately, I was released and found my way to New Haven. 

My family did not make it, and later on succumbed in the extermination camps of Auschwitz, Theresienstadt, and others. I found a new home, founded a new family. It would be impossible for me to enjoy any pleasure from the compensation that the enclosed check represents, except the hope that it may help you in a small way in your program. I am sure this is the hardest earned donation that you ever received. Sincerely, yours." 

Um, in getting this restitution, and other restitution, I found out certain dates, uh, about my parents' death, my brother's death. Uh, as I said, my sister's whereabouts, my brother's-- my father exact death, I never knew. In addition to my father, brother, sister, mother, there are about 60 immediate members in my family, uh, who did not survive. 

My grandmother, uh, a number of aunts, uncles, first cousins, second cousins, no further related than that. A few first cousins-- one went to Israel, at the US Aliyah. Uh, one went to South Africa. One other first cousin was in New York before I was there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you visited the village again in 1982, what went through your mind? 

SUBJECT: First of all, all through the years, I had said, I would never want to go back to Germany. And the only correspondence, communication, I had was through the restitution organization in New York, and their lawyers in Berlin, or Frankfurt, or Karlsruhe. Uh, I had a heart attack in December of, uh, '38-- uh, pardon me, December of, uh, 1971. And I was laid up for almost six months. 

And during that time, my wife tried to run my business. I worried about four children and my health. So we had decided that, as soon as the doctor would permit me, that we would go somewhere to relax for a-- a week or so. And of course, all we had in mind was maybe somewhere in the Catskills or something like that. 

At the time, my daughter was in Switzerland after a trip to Africa. Um, and while I was recovering, I saw in the paper an ad, thrive and fly to Switzerland, uh-- or, fly and drive to Switzerland for $283. And I said, where-- where in the world can I go in the United States for a week for $560 for the two of us, and at the same time, see my daughter? 

So I made all the-- inquired whether this was bona fide. I found out from the travel agency this was in between seasons, and they had this come-on trip. And when I got the OK to go back to my-- back to work, and my doctor OK-ed my trip to Switzerland, I called from his office the travel agency, and asked us for the booking. And the only hitch was to be out of the country before the end of April. 

While we were in Switzerland, and had a car to our disposal, my daughter expressed a desire-- she was teaching at a girls' school-- expressed a desire to see my hometown. And since it was only about a 400 mile round trip, uh, we felt it was better if I showed it to her than if she went to the town, and possibly ran into an old Nazi, and it would paint a different picture. I believe I showed you earlier a picture of the home which I was born in, where I was in the room that I was born in. 

We were in the house. We saw our Shabbos Goy who lived next door. And when I told her who I was, she said, oh my god, where did you come from? Because she knew that my parents were not alive anymore. 

And she gave me, out of her Bible, a postcard that my father had sent her from Theresienstadt asking for his razor, and a few toilet necessities. I have been looking, since last night, and I have not located that card. I would have liked to show it to you. Uh, but it's somewhere in my home. 

Um, and within a few minutes that I was-- I was only for two hours in the village, people came from all directions, please stay, please stay. And they were all friendly and apologetic. And of course, no one had anything to do with-- they told me that all my-- most of my classmates had been killed during the war. And, uh, I couldn't get out fast enough. Only one family, with whom I still correspond, a very religious family who were very helpful to my parents, my brother, while they were in need-- and I still correspond, uh, with them to this day, faithfully. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the reaction of your daughter? 

SUBJECT: Uh, my daughter, uh, she was keenly aware, wanted to find out the background. Uh, she was at the Jung Institute in Zurich at the time. And she wanted to find out about the background, where we came from, and so on. 

And she was favorably impressed by the village. She was favorably impressed by the reception that I got. But, uh, to this day, she has taken it very, very-- even though she is in Germany now, she has taken it to heart very, very much. 

I might add that my youngest boy, who studied at Wesleyan, uh, took it more to heart than any-- anybody else. He wrote his thesis, uh, on Ahad Ha'am, in Jewish studies, and he-- after he graduated from Wesleyan, made-- went to Israel and studied there, and last year made Aliyah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you go to your wife's hometown? Your wife is also a survivor. 

SUBJECT: At-- at another-- in 1975, we were in Hamburg, at my wife's hometown. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did she lose everyone, too? 

SUBJECT: No, she and her entire family got out, uh, in December of '38. They went to California. And, uh, her entire family got out as a unit. So they went to California. Uh, later, of course, her parents have passed on since. And her brother has passed on. But, uh, her younger sister, uh, after living several years in Virginia, made emigration to Israel, and lives there now. And her other sister lives in Virginia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: One-- one last question, I-- I'm persisting in this, but in 1936, they took away your father's means of working. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he not want to leave Germany then? 

SUBJECT: Uh, he still felt this-- as I explained earlier, this might-- might blow over, it couldn't last forever. It-- it was not ever conceivable to him. Up till then, I think he was collecting, still, his German, uh, rent for losing his, uh, eye. 

Uh, and he still did a certain amount of work, but he could not-- had to do it by himself. Uh, then, of course, they wanted to leave. But it was almost impossible for not having any connections anywhere else in the world to live. 

The United States had only a quota of 33,000 German-born. That include Jews and everybody. And you had to be sponsored. No country in the world wanted us. Israel didn't exist. And what everybody tried to do is tried to get the young people out, such as myself, my sister, and my brother. 

After I got here, I made all kinds of efforts. I had no financial-- I was only allowed to take out $4. Uh, I made every effort to secure papers for my sister and brother, uh, first, without success. And of course, in the meantime, we ended the war. And all communication stopped. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When they took away your father's papers for work, what did that mean? He had no way of making any money? 

SUBJECT: Uh, that meant that-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And was this an edict that came through? 

SUBJECT: That was an edict that, uh, no Jew could own a business-- in other words, you were-- he was given a certain length of time to, uh, liquidate, uh, the firm that I worked for. For instance, was, uh, Jewish-owned. In '38, it was sold, force-sold, to a former employee, uh, who took on a financial partner. I was the only Jewish employee who was taken over. 

Uh, and I worked for them until November 10th, '38. My father, uh, still did some limited work. But he couldn't call himself anymore a master of his trade. He was not allowed to hire any help, any apprentices, and all that. 

He could not be a member of the guild anymore. It didn't mean that he couldn't work. We still had our farm. In other words, they still could grow their vegetables, their livelihoods, their certain needs that they needed. 

[KNOCKING] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sorry I did that. I'm-- OK. Thank you. 