[BEEPING] SUBJECT: That in-- 

INTERVIEWER: Maybe. 

SUBJECT: OK. Now-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were developing-- no, no, you were developing-- 

SUBJECT: I had angina. I had high fever, and sore throat, and puff. And the doctor come, and my husband, the poor dear, said, my wife gets always so out of herself with this bad news. He says, what bad news, he says, the Goyish doctor. 

He says that all these Jewish women who commit suicide because their children are deported. He said, what are you so upset about? They aren't even French. I said, Doctor, they are not French, they are human beings. They have children. Their children are taken from them. They are killed. 

And finally, I have known that we are useful in this way. Fine. That we are not put in work camps. The people was telling the Gentiles, were telling in French, that we are taught how to work. 

I said, they are taught how to work? They take them from one place to the other to teach them to work. Never mind they are killing them. They are making soap out of them. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know that? 

SUBJECT: I have-- sounds crazy. I have many times extra sense of perception. And I felt that the German, who are so positive people, not to waste time or money. They wouldn't waste their time to educate the Jews to be something else like they aren't. If they take four children and woman, who are able to do one thing, but then-- they just make, uh, something-- an object out of them. 

And then I told that to two people. They said that I am crazy. They said that it's-- I know so far back. It's 19-- that was said in 1933. We got-- he came back from Germany about 1941. 1942, we move in the farm. Well, he's had 12 months farm before he's arrested. And I know that he will be arrested, and I cannot do a thing to save him. 

I'd say, let's go. He said, go away. Wherever we go, we will be arrested because we use too much water. Because I wash the children, because I washed, and the French people don't wash. 

INTERVIEWER: So you are different? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you wash more? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Then once my husband said it, he cannot hide. He cannot hide me. 

INTERVIEWER: The difference. 

SUBJECT: I-- I blow my cork easier. I am not enough submissive. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: And I use water. He said will be detected immediately, that I am not-- I mean, I would have been detected anyhow because we were the only Jews in the Loire de cher. 

No, the people said. And somehow, I felt that he fought for France. He got the Croix de guerre because he was-- he was behind the Ligne Maginot, and he was defending, shooting, against the enemy. He was all-- he had shrapnels in his head, and he was still not going under. 

I said that he did his duty. Now they want him to farm, so he farmed. He made-- made-- he planted ble. He made a contract with the government to provide tobacco. I mean, everything. Nothing that we ever have known, everything from the books. 

The neighboring farmers laughed about us, that you are people who don't know anything from the Earth. What are you doing here? But the Earth didn't know that we don't know. And it grew. 

INTERVIEWER: It grew. 

SUBJECT: It grew. And death-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your husband must have been a genius. 

SUBJECT: He was a very bright person. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: He was extremely bright and extremely gentle. Like Jesus Christ, or like-- I don't know. There are not many of them. And happy. My older son he is absolutely-- his features as a person, as gentleness, and very successful. The younger has his looks and my lousy temper, and that doesn't help. 

[LAUGHING] 

INTERVIEWER: That could have. 

SUBJECT: I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back to France and your premonition that he's going to be arrested. You were talking about soap being made out of-- 

SUBJECT: Out of the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Before you knew anything about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes I do. 

INTERVIEWER: You said those words? 

SUBJECT: I said that they are making soap of them. And then later, it came out that they did. And I said that I hit the toenail again. That I did it some-- you know, there is something in my once brain, that it is me who is doing it, because I had the premonition. That they wouldn't have thought if I wouldn't have said so. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: But then, I mean, after it came out that they made lampshade. And I know that I have spoken to the head mayor. The le mayor, Mr. Le Mayor, the mayor of the city, who were Gentile people who were very nice to me, and who helped me. 

And then I told them, they said, no, no, no. Madame Davidovich, don't say so. That's impossible. I said that nothing can be done. They don't take people so far. For-- for what would they take them? To-- 

INTERVIEWER: Now, during the time you were on the farm, you had relationships with the other farmers? 

SUBJECT: Yes-- 

INTERVIEWER: And the people around? And your children, did they play with the other children? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you isolated? What was it like for you? 

SUBJECT: What it was like, until he was not arrested, they kept like-- dirty wolves their distance. They just said, he won't go, and then when he go, but then he got-- they were out to have him arrested. He got arrested, finally, because the Salembier, the first people that come over, they sent letters over letters to arrest him. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because he-- they hated-- you don't know why the Christians loathe the Jews? Because they felt that he's superior than they are. Because they didn't-- because-- because I thought they wanted him to do their errands, and I said that he doesn't have to do their errands. 

INTERVIEWER: Those were the people who employed him? 

SUBJECT: No, who rented there. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm-hm. 

SUBJECT: It was people there-- the people in the factory that was over-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: --I had no-- nothing to do. Then our friends in-- who are in Blois, were the relatives of them but they didn't interfere. There, it was the Salembier, who had a tremendous hate against him because he was young, he was clever, he was genius in many ways. And he was Jewish, and it was so cheap to hit a dead horse. 

The Jews are gone, so let's whoop on them. He-- we were in France with a family who leant him a hunting rifle. And he took his role as farmer so seriously that he had to-- there were pheasants coming in his field. And he employed in his-- he was a-- he had to help people. 

He had a Spanish revolutionary who was in France as prisoner, who you could get them to help you, farmwork. So this [INAUDIBLE] working with us at the farm. And he came, Patron-- that's boss-- there are pheasants in the garden. Not in the garden, the field. 

He went in the house, took the rifle, and went to shoot the pheasants. Before he got there, the pheasants are gone. He didn't take back the rifle. He left it on the board of the field. 

And [? Tovar ?] learns, he comes in, he says, what happened to it? I know him, the guard, there was a property of the mayor-- of the mayor, had a guard who was surveying if there's nothing wrongdoing in the fields. 

He passed by, and he picked up Madame Concoritz' rifle. I said, my god. What do you play with this rifle for? We are not farming just for to survive. There's a Pirandello play, six actor are looking for an author. I said, what are you looking, the author? We are here just to survive. 

Ho, ho. But I went there, and I picked up the rifle, and brought it back. I said, my god, you will have us killed with your things. And the guard, [INAUDIBLE], he came and he said that will denounce him, denounce it, to the komendator, to the police, that the Jew, who's an escaped prisoner, had a rifle. And he was not supposed to have a rifle. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: And then the Gestapo came three months later. They said, you are the Jew who had the rifle. And it wasn't. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Then he was arrested and taken? 

SUBJECT: He was. The Gestapo came and said, "Anziehen und mitkommen." And there was-- we played over this ruckus so many times, that if the Germans come to the farm, we do as if we wouldn't speak German. But if they come and arrest him, that he's Davidovich, escaped prisoner, and there's no-- no game. He has to go. He has to go. 

Not that the Jews can refuse. 

INTERVIEWER: On the farm, you were living under a different name? 

SUBJECT: It was-- no. On the farm, it was Davidovich. Etienne Davidovich. Farm, it was Davidovich. The dinner was for the [INAUDIBLE]. Here, we were acting that we were farmers. He made the contact with the French government to give them the tobacco. But it was Etienne Davidovich, which was the name. 

And the Gestapo came in the beginning of August 194-- '42. And Etienne met them coming, and there was nothing that one could do but answer and go. 

INTERVIEWER: You were there when they came? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. I was. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the event-- 

SUBJECT: And the day before-- the morning before, the kids were restless. And I asked him, so why don't you take them a little bit to the woods? And he took the kids, and he came back. I said, could you do what you wanted to do? 

He says, how can I, with the two little ones? We were picking berries. So they had the berries. And I didn't do anything. He was supposed to cut wood. In the afternoon, he was arrested. There was nothing to do. 

And I remember that I was running around. I said, what can I do? And he said, les carottes sont cuites. The carrots are cooked. That is a saying in French, that that's the end. That's the bottom line. 

And we didn't know. I mean, there was no way to escape. The Gestapo come with one car with two men and a chauffeur, a pulled gun, and a big dog. And I am here with the two little kiddies and the husband, who they said to get dressed and go. 

And I give him cheese, and I give him cigarettes. And-- and they search from top to the bottom for gold, gold, gold. I said, look, we have one [INAUDIBLE]. We don't gold. We don't have two [INAUDIBLE]. We've just one. 

And they says in German a joke that I don't remember now. It went something. One is even not German. He's an Italian guy who is just a helper to the Gestapo. And then they ask, whose bike is this? 

And I said that it's a helper's bike, most popular. And then to go to my husband, and they say, whose bike is the beche bike. And he said, that's my wife. 

Oh. The woman lied, she comes to. I was so happy. I wanted to go. I wanted to be with him. Didn't want to be left over. And then when they see that I'm ready to go, they said, no, you stay. But if you say one word, one word-- because they took the gold chain from the child and my pearl, and the fur coat, and the camera, everything they grabbed that they could. And they said, Jews are not supposed to have that. 

INTERVIEWER: And the Gestapo officers robbed this. 

SUBJECT: He took it, saying that if you say one word, we'll come and take you. We'll come and take you. So I don't have to tell you that I didn't peur-- The peur they planted. I didn't complain to nobody. About what happened that was that. 

When they-- when they-- when he was in the car, and they pulled out, I fell to the dust. I said, he was my eyes, my brain, and I have to live now without eyes and without brain. I can't. 

I don't-- a few days before he was arrested, I was sitting and I then ask him, what do I do with this piece of dirt over there? With this piece of the farm? He explained to me. He said, why? I said, I'm sorry, dear, I have to know when you won't be with us what I'll do. 

He says, what are you talking? I said, look, Leon Bloom was arrested last week. He says, how can you compare my low importance with the prominence of Leon Bloom. Yes, Leon Bloom came back, he did. 

The premonition. I mean, that is, I felt that it cannot go along-- you know, I don't know if you-- you-- you certainly meet people who are experts in premonition. But in premonition sometimes, it doesn't feel 100%, but it felt 80%. 

Now for the 20% that it doesn't work, it is a confusing thing. Am I just a pessimist, or it is a fact? So he was taken, and I was left. And the farmer came, so then he like wolves. Heh, your husband, he's dead already. I said, no, he's not dead. You just saw I got just a letter from him. 

He was in the beginning around in the neighborhood. There were the German work camps that he was. He could had escaped from there, but he was scared that if he escaped, then we are killed. Until he get to Drancy. 

You heard about Drancy? It was a big lager next to Paris. There, he wrote that he is-- he will be part of a transport there that is a person from-- a neighbor of ours from Paris. And he will try to do the same thing that he did from two years ago. 

That we should go, and he tells us where to go. The thing that he never has known that nobody wanted to talk to us with a 10-mile pole, pole, because we were known Jews with two small children. Who the heck wanted to be embarrassed with us? You cannot put us under the bed, because the kids will come out or something, so nobody wanted to. 

And he said that he will be in-- that we should go we immediately. Well, the first thing was that I bought what I could. I talked-- I had so few friends. The majority were enemies. There was a woman who came, and she stopped at a farm I was working, just like every new person. 

And she said, would you know where is the farm with the Jews with the large wreath? I said, that's me. She said, yes? How come? I says, how come what? I have-- I just look like all the other people. 

And she said, you are persecuted because your killed our Seigneur. I said, look, lady, I don't know what your-- what your-- how do you say "the people who live before you?" 

INTERVIEWER: Your ancestors. 

SUBJECT: Ancestors did, but mine were certainly not killers. And the killing of Jesus Christ was a political execution that I had nothing to do with. I mean, I had several discussions similar with people. But it didn't happen me. I couldn't convince them, and they couldn't-- I couldn't change the whole thing. 

So then I had to leave the farm, because he said that he will try to escape, we went to the social worker who placed the boy in our-- I told you that we had a young man helping us on the farm. And she used to come to supervise, and she was very full of honey, and Vaseline, and kindness. 

And so I said, I'll go there. She might help me. I arrived there with the two kids with a carriage. You know, with a little car with wheels like a car has-- horse and carriage. And we had no ride to go to leave the commune. And I go 50 miles away. I am so scared to death, and I slapped the kids because they asked me, my older son asked me, do you know where we are going, Mommy? 

Or we'll just go. We will get somewhere. We get there. In the meantime, we meet German soldiers, that I'm so scared that they will ask me for my papers. Everybody has to have road paper, and I have nothing. 

We get to the woman's place, and she sees us. She says, what the heck did you come here? I said, that you should help us. No help. Go away. I said, just let us sleep. So she let us sleep. And then I make a phone call to an other office with whom my husband had dealings to deliver to the government wheat, and tobacco, and beets. 

And I ask him, I tell him what happened, and how I am, where I am. Said you have two things that can be done. One, that you put the kids in a Gentile-- in the cloister, and you come to stay with us. Or you go in a farm domestic, and then we will place the kids around you. 

I said I'll go with farm domestic. And I go with farm domestic, where the woman-- you know, you are Jewish in 1942. You are good for-- for to be killed. It is now 1943 in the meantime. I think it got 1943. 

So nobody wants me with two children. Put the children wherever wherever you want to. So I put them-- in France there is an industry that you keep children and quiet, crazy-- you know, not people. In farming. You feed them, and they get some for money for that. Nourice it's called in French. 

And how you would say-- that doesn't exist easy in United States of America. That you give out people as they would be animals, or you give them in all these-- in nothing. You give them nothing. Old, crazy people of small children abandon children. My kids are not-- 

INTERVIEWER: Homes. 

SUBJECT: Yes, in home. But they are-- the full village of this industry. 

INTERVIEWER: Of children of crazy people? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yeah. I know that I remember that-- won't you get her sickness, Mommy? I said, no, I won't get her sickness. He thought that it's contagious what they have. 

So George, who is five-year-old, takes care of Danny, who is three-year-old. And I take care six cattle, and six pigs, and 12 domestic. And I have to clean and wash, and then I wash the whole darn place. She says, it's not clean enough. I said, it won't do for now? She says, no, do it over. 

I answered her that I used to employ people, but I never asked them to do things that I wouldn't do myself. That's almost above my animal strength. And then she'd say, it is the best thing-- a few days later. Things will be as they are. Why do we fight? Why do you fight? I said, because it cannot be as it is now. That has to change. 

In the meantime, I learned that the place that the kids are, a child died of hunger. So I have to find an other new lease, another nursing place. And I have the other nursing place, and then I call the doctor. And I jumped around so much in this place that I have nothing to jump. 

I mean, I am farm domestic, that I am called not by name, only by [KNOCKING]. Like this. I am knocked on the glass to come, because my name, Livia, is a name much too sophisticated to be a farm domestic. If it would be Mary or Cathy, they would call me. But who calls a farm domestic Livia? 

So there is a doctor from the village who is taking my kids, who said that how about that I be rather his domestic instead of farm domestic? And I said, it would be an improvement. But then the mayor from the little village where I had the farm let me know that I have to come back. Otherwise, everything is lost because he cannot keep the farm if I'm absent 

I have to take the risk and say, and what happened? He said, look, your husband said that he will escape. He didn't come back. Three months are over. You come back, and you'll be free. 

INTERVIEWER: To your old farm that you have to? 

SUBJECT: So I go back to the farm. In the meantime, the boy that I left there, nice Gentile boy, he had his whole family that plundered. Do you know what plundered means? 

INTERVIEWER: Robbed. 

SUBJECT: Robbed. They cleaned up. There was no more duck, no more chicken, no more nothing. The cattle had no more milk, and the horse was covered with-- 

INTERVIEWER: Wounds. 

SUBJECT: Wounds. Yeah. So I had to clean that up. And I had feed the cattle, that I don't know how you say it English. But the cattle got pregnant and got milk, and I could milk her 16 liters daily, and that saved our lives. 

INTERVIEWER: The children were with you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I went back with the kids, of course. Even better, the woman where I was working, she said, you said that you used to have a Maison de Couture in Paris. You will never have it again. You will be just lost. I said, yes, ma'am, I will have it again. You will see I will have it again. And I won't be lost. 

And many times, I said, my god, why can't I go and tell her that I didn't get lost, that I got back some parts, and that I actually did it, and I'm retired in America. And I live so good than anyone else from then. Because even here in free America, I've met people who said that I am poor pariah. Do you know what is a pariah? That is in Hindu. The pariah. 

INTERVIEWER: Pariah. Pariah, outcast. 

SUBJECT: OK. Yeah. That I have two little children. How did I make it? I said, they're two little children, one is my mink coat, and the other is my solid gold Cadillac. And I will make it. And I met these people in Europe in a nice place on vacation. And they said, what are you doing here? And I said, what are you doing here? I'm doing the same as you are doing? 

People think that you on one station, that you have to go down, and you cannot float up. I met people who said-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back to the farm in France. 

SUBJECT: So the farm in France, I worked it up, but it was heavy running with fate. And the war was over. The war was over. I was with my kids and we-- '43. It was '44. The Germans marched out of France. And as they went they-- 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't try to arrest you again as a Jew, to deport you? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because now, they had first ordered to arrest Davidovich. They arrested Davidovich, that they deported him. Now the woman, the copper, who was against us, their anger was rampant. 

The mayor defended me to a certain degree. There was nobody who denounced anymore. There were-- the Communist Part got high in France at that time, and George was made fun, that he's my older son. He was six-year-old, and the son of the chef Communist said, here is the yellow, and the three knives. Teacher put in the corner. In France, they put the children, when they are nasty, in the corner. 

That you shouldn't treat like that another human being. The Gestapo laid off. I was not an unknown person from then on. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did the mayor defend you? Do you-- 

SUBJECT: Just by human. 

INTERVIEWER: Just his humanity? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Just like human, his humanity. Not like you had alluded, I grew a lot in the meantime, from Davidovich and the books how to grow cantaloupes, how to grow cauliflower. And I don't have to tell you the most beautiful that I had to them. 

Now they had maybe gardeners. But even wealthy people, it doesn't work. It doesn't come out always like that, and they were touched of my good will. And she brought, the daughter of the mayor, she brought to me the first cherries that she had. They were so nice for me. She had a tremendous pity. 

I told them that I don't cry, only when people are nice to me, but happy there so few people who are nice to me that I have no reason to cry anymore. When they are nasty to me, then I don't cry. I just scream back. And I thought the war was over. The German marched out. We had the underground who came hiding to my place. George said it is a big danger if Captain Vanya comes here. 

I said I cannot tell him to go to hell. We have to endure him. Because the underground did the things in Paris. They came to you. They stayed there. They eat from the fat of what you had. And then when the Germans came, they run off, and you got burned. I got burned. 

But happily they went away. We have seen the Germans go away. I put the kids on the end of the farm. Nobody should see them, because it was enough for the German troops to go and see that you hang your laundry, that they shoot the whole people, only because they were happy to wash their linen. 

And I was ready to go in the woods. There's no Danny. Where is Danny? Danny went back to the farm. He got in a [INAUDIBLE]. And here, I run back, I see my little Danny, who was three years old, four years old, in the hand of a tall German guy. And Danny looks at me, he said, j'espere qu'ils ne sont pas Allemands, Mama. I hope they are not Germans, Mama. 

I said, no, no, that's over with. Because the Germans, if you call them boche, they killed even the children. 

INTERVIEWER: Boche? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So they ask me for, in German, for eggs and cheese. And I said, I don't have. They motion that I have-- I thought I have given. Then they wanted to pay me. I said, no, no money. I didn't want to go in any commercing, any business with them. 

They left, and in a little while, we learned that are they are-- that part after the other, cut off one German occupation. Then I started to search after my husband, to get back to Paris. To search after him, I had to go to Paris. There was no trains, no nothing. I rode with my bicycle to some countess who asked me, with whom did you come? I had to ride through three village. 

I just said nothing. I was dead of fear. I said, I came with my bike. And in Paris-- 

INTERVIEWER: How many miles to Paris? Do you know? 

SUBJECT: Do you know where is Paris here, and I was in Vierzon Bourges. Do you know where is Bourges. That is-- 

INTERVIEWER: In the middle? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. Lower middle. I don't-- 

INTERVIEWER: How long a trip did it take? How long did it take you by bike? 

SUBJECT: Bike. No, I didn't go to Paris by bike. I've went to this countess who rented a truck. I went-- my bike ride was a four-hour bike ride. And the truck ride was maybe a 12 hour truck ride. 

And then I came back by auto stop, and that was some other experience again. But nothing happened, it is just, I was not killed, and I was not raped. And I managed to get back the apartment. And the apartment, to get back with [INAUDIBLE] was that that the people said, but we invested here. We cannot let you in. 

I said, oh, you didn't know that I will survive? But I did. And I want to have the place back. And they said, we can give you one room. I said, no, I want the whole. And then someone told me, you tell them that you go in. And I go back, and I said, I go in. And they say, if you go in with your two kids, they will get out of there in no time. 

And I went in with the two kids. And then I'm escorting them, trying to take over, and they went away, and I had back the place without money, without furniture, and without customers. But I had a great [INAUDIBLE], Rue des Capucines. 

The war was over. I had to find what happened to my husband. And the first thing was that the person who was in the same convoy, his wife, had a very beautiful delicatessen, Rue des Capucines if you know it. You don't know it. 

And she said yes. There are 2,000 people who went. Five came back. Her husband died of typhoid in [? Vasile. ?] So I write. I write. The whole day, I write. And I learn the identity of the five. From them, there is only one with whom I can speak. The other are dead. Since they cannot talk. 

And he says, no, I had never seen your husband. I said, he said that he wants to escape. You don't know anything about it? He said, there was one-- that one that got burned right away. And in the meantime, I get from the association of the prison-- war prisoner-- that a chemin de fer, railroad worker, had his military book, livre militaire. 

INTERVIEWER: Your husband? 

SUBJECT: Yes. How did she find it? So I see the man who gives me the livre militaire. How do you say that in English? Livre militaire. 

INTERVIEWER: Service book. 

SUBJECT: Service book? You have here too? Said it-- that it's here somewhere on the end of my story. Yeah, here it is. 

[MUMBLING] 

He tried to escape. He tried to escape at Chateau-Thierry but it was signaled by the paid inhabitant to signal if anybody tried to escape, that they were stopped, and all the escapees were recaptured. They had to undress and get back-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why don't you tell us in your own words? 

SUBJECT: These were my words. I wrote it today. And he-- 

INTERVIEWER: You found this service book that's very-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: It's called military identification-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Military identification. And he said that this man of the rail, the railroad worker-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who found-- 

SUBJECT: He found by Chateau-Thierry. At Chateau-Thierry the deported train in August '43, September 1. And suddenly, it was signaled by the good French people that there are escapees. They stop the train They caught the escapees. They undressed them. They left their-- they had to leave their cloths on the voie, on the-- how do you say? The railroad. 

And he remembered the skinny face of my husband because of the photo, the picture, of him in the military book. That he was kidding around that, as skinny as he is, he can go through any railroad thing. And the train went. 

And the one who survived said that there was wagon right away burned. I said, then he was in the-- he was in this wagon, because nobody from the five that-- I have spoken to two or three-- one. I had to meet the man who came back, not only to find out about my husband, but I was in such a dear need, I had a life insurance that I wanted to collect. And I couldn't collect if I don't have a proof that he's dead. 

Now they said that that's not enough proof that he didn't come back. So I asked these men who came back, I said, you didn't see him. You didn't meet him. He says, no One, that one was burned. I said, would you say that he has a chance to come back? He said, no I wouldn't. I said, then sign me that you have seen him killed. And he did. 

And I got someone there that had me over. 

INTERVIEWER: They put the escapees back on the train? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Undressed them. 

INTERVIEWER: Undressed them. And then lit that wagon, or it just caught fire? 

SUBJECT: No. The wagon was pulled to Auschwitz, and these are gone then to the gas chamber without distinction. Because the others, there were a selection who shall and who shall die. But this wagon had no selection. The whole wagon went straight to the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. The wagon with the people who tried to escape. 

SUBJECT: He took with him more because he was only maybe 12 people who wanted to escape. Not the whole wagon wanted to escape. And the whole wagon was gassed. But from the 2,000, only five came back, and only one was in-- in motion. So the chances were minimum. 

I don't know. There was a time when I accuse myself that I didn't do right, that I did everything wrong, that I should have been able to keep him alive. Because I have known people in France whose son was deported, and that on the day that he was deported, she started to fast and sleep on the floor on straw, and he came back. I didn't do it. I don't know where I-- I mean, I misthought I didn't do the right thing. I couldn't do it. 

INTERVIEWER: You kept your family and your children alive. 

SUBJECT: I just-- I did kept the children alive. Yes. And my son-- I mean, I had to have my sanity to-- to raise them. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: I said-- I mean, there was time when I was cursing him, my God, why do you try to escape. Why do you do all the things? Why, why, why, did you need to survive? Why did you-- I mean, he didn't play by the rules. And that is about it. I got a cross again-- 

INTERVIEWER: Cross? A war cross? 

SUBJECT: War cross for him. 

INTERVIEWER: A decoration for him? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. And the kids were declared wards of the French nation. And then I got that, and I asked for all the papers to emigrate, because I was fed up over the head with France. That they told me-- I went to the consulate of police, and I asked for something. And I said after, I am sorry that I deserted you so many times. I was in Paris already. 

He said, yes, you come all the time, because you are the most irregular person. You are foreigner, you have children who are French. You have a husband who fought for France. Why the hell he needed to fight? I said, I wonder he would went on the black market. It would have been much more profitable for him and for us. But it's just one of these things. 

Sometimes to have ideals and to try to do the right thing, you put yourself in such a wrong place. And then, I wanted out from France, because I felt that it was enough. And then in Paris, I met other anti-Semitism. 

The landlord was very decent. He said, I have to do everything for these people to get back the apartment, because Davidovich did a lot of work in the apartment. He was a very decent person. I have-- he told me I have to pay him because we had a clause that during the war, you don't have to pay for your rent. He said, you said, if you want to come back, you have pay the back rent. 

So I needed always to make money to get the insurance money to pay the landlord. And to get that, then I needed fortune. I needed customers. I mean, it was overwhelming. Then the kids got scarlet fever. Then I then said that they have scarlet fever. Then I said, I don't care anything, I'll give scarlet fever for the whole work room. 

Not everybody got scarlet fever. I have had it as a child, and I had it again when they had it. But I didn't die then. Let them take that chance. 

INTERVIEWER: How's your life been changed since? What-- 

SUBJECT: My two kids are very different. They were very lovable. I have two grandchildren. My younger boy, Daniel, he married a Gentile girl. But the girl was a horrible person. She got out of his life. And then he has a little boy who is a dreamboat, lovely. He has the nature of Davidovich. It's a-- of his mother that's lovely. 

I emigrated in here-- as I said, with the person, when she made fun of me, that pariah with the two children. I said these children are, they are diamonds and they are. George has-- he has masters in engineering. He's very successful in real estate, and he's a very decent person. 

He has his father's nature. He's good to everybody. He can't help it, but that's not so easy for the people around. If you are a nice person, you have to be good with distinction. Not to everybody good, but that is his make up. 

INTERVIEWER: You said to us earlier that talking about it is both something you want and you don't want. It's painful. 

SUBJECT: The want and the don't want is that I try to be alive. Now I am-- I will be 72 in October. I know that five-- three quarters, or 5/7, of my life is gone. I want the boys to know exactly what and how. But it wears me to shreds to speak about, to go over, to have forgotten certain parts. 

I read so much about Anne Frank, about people in America, and people-- Roosevelt, I used to love with the man until I learned that he didn't let in the people. He was a dirty fraud that the Jews in America still don't realize even. 

Then in America, you have anti-Semitism all over. It bothers the hell out of me. Now, between the Jews, you have so many phonies. I cannot help it. In Hungary, where I go almost every year-- I went till now, the past 12, 15 years. I said to my sister, I don't come here anymore. 

And then I said for my old age, I'm getting granite. Me too. You know? Granite, granite, it's a stone. 

INTERVIEWER: Stone. Rigid? 

SUBJECT: Yes. But although, then why should I let myself bug even more. I have enough. I like to help people that I like to help. I don't have to-- I don't have to be victimized by everybody. 

I still feel when people are nice to me, then I get moved to tears. And I still say that, then, there are not so many people are nice to. 

[LAUGHING] 

I am up the whole thing. I enjoy to be alive. I am thankful to America for the possibility that I could come here with my two kids, with quite a bit of fraud. I don't know if you're to go or not. 

And that I could straighten out so good as I could get straightened out my life, to make a difference between right and wrong, and not to do the wrong that I feel wrong from the rules. rules. 

There are nice people in Gentiles. My little grandson is not Jewish. It annoys to death that I cannot make him Jewish. I mean, because my younger son, Daniel, when he was bar mitzvah, he embarrassed the teacher in asking him where was the Jewish God when his father was arrested and deported? 

And the teacher told me that, the religion teacher told me, it is quite embarrassing. I said, I agree with you, but it is a fact, that where was God? But then again? 

INTERVIEWER: You never remarried. 

SUBJECT: Yes I did. I married to emigrate. I had to marry an American. The people who wanted to marry me for good were impossible for the kids, so I married someone for a gentleman arrangement. Had nothing to do with. 

Then I divorced him then. I was forlorn as one can be. And finally, I get presented to a widower who said that he will carry me on this hands. I said, that would be great, because if you are nice to me, I will make all I can to make you happy. But if you are not nice, then I will make you just so unhappy as you make me. 

And he was horrible. He was so avare. What is avare? So stingy, so penny pincher, that I never have known that that exists. Only by Dickens, I thought. Then I felt absolutely lost. 

Then I said to George, I make all the-- on trips, he was portable. I could digest him. And I said always, I make the high insurance, that when the plane go down, that you have nice money. He said, my older son, are you crazy? What do you think we can get out of it? 

I said get out? I have abandoned-- I have give up my job, my apartment. I have nothing. That you will it over. So I started to work as designer in Philadelphia. He couldn't bear that I shouldn't prepared breakfast, lunch, and dinner. And in three months, I was out of the thing. 

I never have believed that there is such a bad marriage that there can so many misery. After that, I mean, loneliness-- I made-- I am quite handy with my-- I can make in sculpture. I made myself little things to remember if I am lonesome, to look on these things that I made myself, the devil and so on, that I should be never sorry that I left him. And I was never sorry that I left him. And that's that. 

INTERVIEWER: And so you think of Davidovich? 

SUBJECT: Davidovich is good. That-- of course, Davidovich is beautiful that he was, that he existed. He got cremated, and I will be cremated, because even that it is-- it interferes with the Jewish religions, but I feel that I-- I owe it to myself, that I should go like he went, and that I should have the freedom to float, instead to sit in a grave-- anybody comes or doesn't come. 

OK. Now I get mushy. So that's the whole story. I don't know if it has-- if it is any value that you invested your time with me, with my story. 

INTERVIEWER: Is it even a question? 

SUBJECT: I don't know if it is that pertinent to the Holocaust enough. 

INTERVIEWER: It's you. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: There is not Holocaust without people. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Right. I hope that I will do better in America, but after I realize that as life goes, even people, if they get very powerful, they die the same. Of course, that is very difficult. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: The only democratic. OK. Thank you for your patience, gentlemen. 