SUBJECT: I have to look in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, you look at me. 

SUBJECT: All right, I look at you. 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling? Yes? OK, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. My name is Rachel Reznik Before it was Ruchel. Well, you know, here it's Rachel. In Israel, it was "Ra-kel." 

[LAUGHS] 

And I am born in 1910, April, 1910, in Działoszyce My maiden name is Rebak And you know, our family, we was together. I got-- I was, you know, engaged to my husband. This is my first husband, thank God. 

And-- and the war broke out, 1939. This was September the 1st, when the German came to our town. And you know what's happened, with uh-- with airplanes, with everything. And we saw the German, real Didn't do nothing. 

We went through, you know, a lot of thing too. The-- they came after, you know, and they send us-- they send-- want to send us away, take us from the house, from the homes, and send us away. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your house like that you were living in before they sent you away? What was the town like? What was the house like? 

SUBJECT: This was in Działoszyce 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe Działoszyce 

SUBJECT: Describe, it was not a very big town in the time when the war was, was-- there was more people. Because came here from Krakow. Came from-- from Lodz. Came, you know. A matter of fact, mine husband's sister came with her mother-law, and with her husband and with her child to this town, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there a lot of Jewish people in this town? 

SUBJECT: A lot of Jewish people. Most Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And well, you know, we make a living. My husband is von beruf a baker. You know, from-- And after, you know, can't make a bakery, because it was difficult. 

He was you know, like a [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] He was buying grain. And he went some milk. And he was uh, milling, you know, flour. And he sold it. You know, this was-- and you know, we got married 1940. 

You know, this was 1940, before-- just Christmastime, you know? It was a very quiet wedding. Because the German wasn't over there. We went through a lot. You-- you know, they came and they looking, they find it. They find, even before I bought, you know, lots of things, you know, I got a couple thousand ruble. Was not ruble, just zlotys. 

And you know, because, you know, I was walking, I got-- I got-- I-- me and my sister wasn't-- uh, we was uh, dressmakers. We got a shop for ourself. Not to sell, just we got customers, good customers, and we was working. Like a salon. 

And this was in the same town, in the same house where we used to live. This was before I got married, you know? And we went to Krakow when, you know, the beginning. Arrived in the beginning. Because you know, I got a couple thousand zlotys. And I went to Krakow, and I bought lots of things. 

You know, uh, matter of fact, I bought coffee, the big coffees, you know? And tea. And leather. Soft leather, you know? And we hided this. But mine mother-law in the-- in the house, not where. 

We used to live just-- well, in her house. And you know, through this time, came somebody. They took off everything. We didn't got nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: The Germans came and took it? 

SUBJECT: No, no, not the Germans. This was not-- this-- the Germans wasn't already in the town. Oh yeah, this was only the beginning. You know? And this-- I got married-- I came in 1939. And I got married, 1940. 

And you know, another year, year and a half, I have a child, also. Till, you know, I got the child, I was together with my parents. You know, because it was not, this time, you know, to-- to rent the place and to go to see for them self. 

We were together. but after, uh, my sa-- younger daugh-- sister got married. And she was with her husband over there. And we have to rent the place. And uh, this was a little more not so right in this-- in this-- is-- in the front from the-- you know, in the nice places where we used to live. 

But after I bought a-- rent-- rented a place where my sister used to live, not too far. You know, but then I got one room, furnished, from the peoples, got a bed and I a trunk, and you know? And we-- we used to live over there. 

INTERVIEWER: And then what happened? 

SUBJECT: And then, what's happened? This was, you know, a couple times. This was uh, may-- maybe about 1942, uh, also September. Came, they wa-- they liquidate the whole town. The German uh, liq-- uh well, the-- they liquidate. Not they wanted, just they liquidate the town. 

INTERVIEWER: Meaning that they sent you away? 

SUBJECT: They didn't send me away. Because I run away before. They send away all my-- all my relatives, all people. The oldest-- the old people, they killed. They took all of them where the-- the Jewish cemetery was. And they make-- over there they have to make for them self a big, big hole, one big hole. And after they stand around, they shoot them. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: I don't see this, no. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- 

SUBJECT: I don't see this. 

INTERVIEWER: You ran away? 

SUBJECT: I run away, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you run to? 

SUBJECT: Where I run, my mother came and said, run away with the child. Because we was still, you know, uh, in-- in the town. The-- you know, the big shots, the wealthy people, they was in-- you know, in the gemeinde And they sent the people to give a contribution. And we was in thinking, you're going to give them money, it's gonna be better. You want to buy them up. Not say-- not to send away the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: But this doesn't help. Yeah, I and mine-- mine son, I got a son. He was about almost 17 months, 18 months-- about 17 1/2 months old, and my mother-law. And we run away in-- in a neighboring-- not, you know, uh, uh-- not a town. Just you know, a-- a suburb. Like, you know, not too far. Maybe 10 miles. 

INTERVIEWER: You had your husband with you too? 

SUBJECT: No. My-- I-- he came later. This was in a Wednesday, you know, afternoon, 'cause-- and I runned away, not too far. And I was waiting in the mi-- mil-- mill where my husband was over there, operating with them. I was waiting over there, with my child with my mother-law. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was this? On a farm? 

SUBJECT: Yes, in a farm. yeah. And he came. I was waiting. It was, uh, maybe a nice couple hours he-- he-- till he came. He-- when he went out from this-- from the city, from the town, was already all over, the German. And they wasn't taking the people, what are running away. But thank God, he-- he managed to come to this, you know. And we got together. And we went-- because the guy, you know, the bauer don't want to keep us. I got a child and you know, three, four people. He don't have a place, us all, in hiding. And was too close to the town-- to the city too. 

We went f-- a little farther, another place. Eh, because my mother-law got over there lots, you know, people, what that she know then. And she-- maybe we went all together. We went to a bauer. And he keeped us overnight. You know? We give him enough, don't worry, so to pass into m-- and uh-- uh, you know, in the morning, he said, I'm sorry. I can't keep us what-- what's here, because I'm afraid. 

Listen, I don't blame him. Everybody was afraid. And we went to the-- you know, to the um-- in the woods. With a child, you can stay in the woods with a child and not food, nothing. It was a terrible thing. 

Another-- we went to other-- another place. And he had a place, you know, where was he has a child too. He was not so scared to keep me with the child. Because he was afraid for those neighbors. 

And uh, maybe the child's going to cry and they're going to hear. He was afraid. And he kept me in the-- you know, I don't know how uh, you say, of a place. Not a-- a stable. Just he keep over there the food for the-- for the cows, in uh, like, such a place. You know, he don't live over there. It just was-- 

INTERVIEWER: The barn. 

SUBJECT: A barn, yes. And he could go in the night-- in the daytime over there, he'd bring me something to eat. And my husband met uh, his brother. He-- f-- uh, met with their brother too, a youngest from him. And we went to the-- you know, to the woods. For the whole day. He was not over there. Just me and my child. And my gr-- mother-law went another place, not together. 

This was a couple of days. We went uh, Wednesday, from our town, away, when they want to take-- send away. They send away lots of people. They send away mine whole family. My mother went with a neighbor another place, away. And mine daughters-- my sister and mine uh, youngest sister and her husband, they all send away. 

The younger people, you know, the mens, they took in the concentra-- in the concentration camp, where they-- they prepared the war for them. The older, they send another place. You know? The kids, , right away, away. 

Mine mm, uh, older sister, what I was walking with her, she went to hide in a place over there. Where she used to live was a bakery. And the men make some place to hide in for people, you know. They-- they was not thinking it's going to be so terrible. They were thinking it's going to be over. And after, they're going to go out. 

Meanwhile, my sister, she wanted to go home with me, away. She was crying. And her husband said, no, I have another place. And i-- oh, he don't want to take me over there. Because I have a child. I don't blame him. Everybody looks for them self. 

What happened, they-- uh-- they had three children, this time. And the youngest got sick in the nighttime. And my brother-law went out looking, how he can guy-- go for-- for a doctor. Because in this time, in this-- in our place was not all the places, uh, uh, telephones to call the doctor. You have to go and bring him. 

He went out looking. He was li-- they were living, you know, not in the front. Just a little more inside. And he was outside looking, so he can go, looking, bring a doctor. He set out-- right away, after him, somebody, and they shoot him right in his-- you know, just across from his-- from his uh, window. They shooting him. The first um, man fall in this state-- in this city, my-- mine brother-law. 

INTERVIEWER: Your f-- 

SUBJECT: What the poor daught-- uh, sister going to have to do uh, with-- with three kids? She went and made-- made-- and made the transport. You know? In there right away, they took her away, the kids in some other place. And my father, they right away, they killed. It was a terrible thing, what I can tell you. 

And we went, we was hiding till Saturday. Every day, another place. One day, my son-- my husband came to the bauer, in nighttime. And tomorrow-- in the morning he said, no way. You don't going to go away no place. You have to take your wife. Because I-- I can't keep her here with the child. 

We cannot do something. We went in the woods, you know? We went-- was over there the whole day. You can't stay in the woods. Was, you know, before the holidays. You know, the High Holidays. It was not this warm already, and you're with a child, how we can stay? 

[SIGHS] 

It was Saturday, in the afternoon. My brother-law went to our town and find out how is in the city, in the town, what's going on. Because we wasn't-- we don't-- we don't hear what's going on. He went, and they wasn't chasing him. They wasn't after him. He ran away. 

We-- me and mine husband and my child and my mother-law, we want to go to-- back to the-- our town. This was Saturday. You know, but when we went, you know, on the uh-- uh-- was in this time, they wasn't taking off the potatoes from the ground. It wasn't over there, lots of people. 

Was a young woman. She said, oy vey-- of course, you know, Polish-- uh, where you go? Where you going with your child? Well, I-- I tell her the story, we have to go back. Because I don't have where to hide. No way. We can't do it. 

She said, oy, don't go. Don't go. It's terrible. They send away the first transport. Now they-- they taking all people, what coming back, you know? And they putting in-- you know, in such a place. And they going to send away another transport. Don't go. Don't go. Where I can go? 

They saying over there was such a holes, big holes. You know, a little higher. Go over there. Over there, and people from your town. And she tell us the name, which people, where they are. 

And we said, you're going to go. Can't help it. Go over there and you're going to hear what's going on. Because they having contact with-- with the state-- with the town. 

We went. It was a lot of people that we knew them. And we wasn't maybe but 10, 15 people together, you know, mens, womens. We was in over there the whole afternoon Saturday. Later came a guy, you know, a man from another-- another uh, town. 

And he got a little, you know-- he was feeling so sorry for me, with the child, he said, my husband was not over there. Because he-- they went with his brother, and not together, because we can't stay together. It was too many people. 

And he-- he bring me a piece uh-- such uh, when he-- when they baking the bread he make such a-- you know, a flat one, like a pizza. He bring me a piece for-- for me, for my baby. And he got so-- he feel so sorry for me. 

He comes, you know, about eight o'clock. He came and he said-- he took me over there. He took me over there, me and my husband, and my child and my brother-law. No, the brother-in-law, no. He went before, find out what's going on. 

And we was in there a couple of days. He keep us, you know, in the kitchen. He don't got a very big place. He was very good to us, you know. He give us, uh, you know, milk and what he cooked, had-- 

INTERVIEWER: He was a Polish person? 

SUBJECT: A Polish person, yes. He got a married daughter, just one daughter, married-- that was uh, married, and a very nice son-in-law. Very nice people. 

INTERVIEWER: He was-- he didn't care that you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Oh, he knew. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: He knew. Oh, don't worry, I give him enough to keep me-- to keep me over there. Till one day, he went, pick up water from the-- from the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well? 

SUBJECT: From-- yes. And he came wa-- fa-- very fast, back. And he starts yelling, and "Run away! Run away!" Because you know, some people tell-- I don't know how it was, what it was. Some people tell he's keep-- he keep Jewish over there, to German. 

And he wasn't-- they ask his name, where he lives. His name was name? you know? And he came past back, and "Go! Run away! I don't-- I am afraid they're going to kill me!" 

We have to go. We went to the woods, you know? We went the whole-- the whole afternoon. We went-- went, then, far away. Until late in the night. We can't stay the night in the woods, with a child. What we doing? 

We went back to this bauer. And we don't-- we don't tell him we back. We don't even want to know him to be back. We went in the um-- [SIGHS] you know, it's such a shop what they-- where they're keeping the food for the-- for the cows, for the-- for the horses. And we was in hiding over there the whole night. 

In the morning, he-- my husband, and mine, he went away, you know, to the-- you know, to the woods. And I was hiding in that place where they are taking off the grain from the-- from the lawn. They making such a big, big, uh, things. And they is keeping this, still they're needing. And they're making this for the-- the grain. 

I was hiding between too, inside. And I was sitting over there, the whole day, Sunday. Without food, without nothing, with my child. Came the son-in-law. And he saw me. 

He said, "My God, you're here with your child?" I said, "Yes." "How long you here?" I said, I'm here, already, a whole day. "Without food, without nothing?" I said, yes. He went, and he tell his wife. And she bring me, right away, milk and a piece of bread. 

Later she-- they took us. My husband came ho-- back. And I was not in the house, because he was afraid to keep us in the house anymore. Just, you know, he can-- he can send us away. Because he got a little-- you know? 

And he took us in uh-- in the place where he keeps the-- the horses, over there. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Over there, he hide us for the whole night. 

INTERVIEWER: In the stables? 

SUBJECT: Stables. 

INTERVIEWER: In the stables? 

SUBJECT: And the nighttime came. Mine sister-law, a young-- a young girl, she looks like a-- a Polish girl, you know, blonde. And she came from Wieliczka This was a neighboring small town, you know? And over there, I had mine husband's sister. My mother was already over there. You know, because they runned away over there. 

INTERVIEWER: So how long was it that you were in hiding back and forth in the woods and-- and-- 

SUBJECT: It was, uh, around a couple of days, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, but how long before they took you to the concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: Oh, how long? Was uh-- till-- uh, I have-- a couple months. 

INTERVIEWER: A couple of months? 

SUBJECT: A couple months. Oh-- but-- ah-- we went, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Listen, you managed to hide for several months, back and forth between barns and-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no. We don't manage too mu-- too long. This same night, what we went to the stable, we was staying there overnight, middle of the night came mine sister-law, and knock in the door by the bauer. And she was telling him where she is. 

Because mine brother-law, what he left us, he want to go to our town and find out how is over there? What's going on? He went over there to this same town, what-- it was not-- you know, they-- they-- they don't concentrate over there, already, the people. Before, the bigger towns. After this was a smaller town. 

And he went over there. And over there he find his sister. And he send her over there to this bauer where he was in hiding. And she came over there in the nighttime. She was knocking the window. And she tell them the story, who she is. As-- sh-- she had to you know, ask, a brother and her sister-in-law and a child. He was afraid to open up. 

He was thinking somebody just make a joke from him or something. He came over there to the stable. He tell us this, how she look. And we was-- we tell him right away, let her in because this is my husband's sister. And they send her-- my brother-law send her, from over in other town, with horses, with a wagon, with a person. And we sit on this wagon. And we went to this t-- town, what over-- over there, this was Weisslitz 

This was after Rosh Hashanah, you know? The New Years, till Yom Kippur, this, the High Holiday. Yom Kippur, we was already over there in the other town, you know? And after uh, maybe two, three days, over there was mine's sister-law from Lodz, and my husband's brother. They was a big family. They wasn't but six brothers and three sisters. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were all together, and they-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, by my sister-in-law in Weisslitz You know? 

INTERVIEWER: And then how did the Germans catch you? 

SUBJECT: And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Or how did you-- 

SUBJECT: Listen. This was-- uh-- after we're here, uh, lots of people came back to our town. And the-- we go in home-- in the house-- in the-- in this-- in the apartments, back. And we staying over there, and it's quiet. You know? 

They took a chance, mine husband and my brother-law. And we went back to our town. You know? And mine fam-- relatives, a cousin was walking, you know, also like, uh, you know-- fra-- you know, um, uh, he was helping, then, the people coming back, to open up the houses. You know, because most was in the Polish uh, policemens, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Uh- uh-- uh-- it's-- do-- uh-- this, [INAUDIBLE], such a thing. Not the-- the German. The German, the bigger things. And they let us back in our house. And we was over there a couple-- a couple weeks. 

My husband was working. Because they saying the people, it's working going to be better. He went to work. And the guy, what hide us before, you know? He came all the time to us, and we giving him this, and we giving him this. 

And you know, this took maybe but five, six weeks, not more. And came the other-- uh, aussiedlung, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: The --? 

SUBJECT: The concentration-- what they sent-- 

INTERVIEWER: Relocation? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They uh-- the guy came. S-- this was Thursday, in the morning. He came with his uh, wagon, with the horses. And he took me. And he took-- and my mother came with me, back. And my sister-law from Lodz, with her child, came. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you go with him? 

SUBJECT: Because what i-- I have another chance. I have to-- I have to uh, go. He took us to h-- to him. To him. 

INTERVIEWER: To his house? 

SUBJECT: His house. And he keeped us over there a couple of days, not too long. This was Friday. This-- we went Thursday, a whole day. It was very good. He treat us good. He give us food and everything. Uh-- this-- till it's Friday, he start to be angry. And here is not good, and here is not good. 

Mine mother and mine sister-law went on the-- up you know, on the top, you know? From the-- from the apartment. 

INTERVIEWER: On the roof. 

SUBJECT: On the roof. And I was hiding behind the table with my child. Was terrible. He don't know what to doing. Why? Because he went to our town and he make up with the people what he wasn't working in the gemiende you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And he-- they pay him a good price, because the was wealthy people. And he took-- he promised them to br-- to bring them to him. And he's going to make a place to hide them. It was a lots of people. 

Saturday morning, my husband was not working. But the German, he was working with the German. And he took-- he came up there, to this town where I was, with my child. 

He came-- he came, ask-- ask, why? What's going on? And he said to him-- his name was Juscik. Where is my wife? Where is everybody? He tell him the story, what's going on, what happened. He was mad like anything. 

My husband started talking to him. You came, you took my child and my wife here. And now, you make him search your house time? What's going on, Juscik? He got a little-- little softer, you know? 

And was make up with the other people in this-- in this city, you know? So came Saturday night to pick him up, the old people. He don't went, their son-in-law. He don't went. He was a nice person. And what you think, the-- the people knew him, because they was working over there, and they knew him, what's going on. As they can't stay over there any-- any longer. 

INTERVIEWER: How was it that you were picked up for deportation? When did that happen? How did it happen? 

SUBJECT: Wait a minute. This was about-- uh, almost the end of 1942. You know? Not for mine-- from mine apartment, I was picked up. Because I ran, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. So where were you picked up? 

SUBJECT: Listen. I gonna come to th-- to this. We wasn't over there. The people couldn't wait any longer. Because they knew when the-- the-- the-- the transport going to go away. They know exactly what time. They went, they took what they could. And they went, you know? And his-- and the legs, because they could have another chance. 

He came. It was, uh- Mr. [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] with his wife, with two children, and another couple, and another couple. Was about eight people, eight, nine people, you know? A couple children. And wealthy-- weal-- very wealthy people. 

They came and warn, you know? Came behind his window. And he was knocking in the window. 

And he said, we open up. We went out. And we saw, who is it? This was the guy, what they make up every-- everybody with him, to come pick them up. And they don't came-- they ca-- they took up-- they took, you know, they wasn't working over there. It was a-- a very-- a very nice couple, [INAUDIBLE]. 

Middle of the night. And they tell him what is going on. And they came inside. And they saw us over there. And what they can do? They tell us the story. 

My husband want to go back Monday morning, back to work. He said, no, don't go. Because it is very, very dangerous. If you then go-- you're going to go, he's not going to come, anymore, back. 

He then went, and we was in a few days, all together, you know? This was impossible. He don't got so much food for us. He don't got the place where to keeping us. We was in all together, you know, in one place. And straw on the floor, all, you know, a whole bunch. 

In the morning we went out looking for food. Because he cannot supply so much food, so many people. This was a terrible thing. We were-- we knew uh, this-- this can long be this way. You go out on the town and looking for, uh, you know, uh, for food. The people knowing already, he ha-- he keeps Jewish people over there. 

Came-- uh, maybe it was about two days, three days. Came uh, his-- uh, his nephew, the guy's nephew. And he said, my husband, he was standing on the hallway. And he was here. He had a room and a kitchen. We was in the room. And they was in the kitchen, all. And he was there, the guy, the young guy, fellow, the nephew said, [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] you going to keep-- you know, "Uncle, you going to keep the Jewish people here?" 

"We rich people. We are going to-- are going to organize a few strong one. We're going to come with-- with-- uh, with, you know, axt You know what a axt is? 

INTERVIEWER: Axes. 

SUBJECT: Yes. "And we going to kill them. We going to take the money from them." That-- my husband hear this. He came, right away, back to the room where we was all con-- you know, together. 

And he said, you know, what uh, the guy, the oth-- the-- you know, a couple young fellas was-- a c-- uh, young couples. He said, you know, um-- uh, what I hear now, just now? The nephew's over there. And he be planning, us, to come to kill all of them. The guy was very-- and uh, he got a lots energy. And he was, right away, "You going to kill us? I'll going to kill you before." 

You know? He hear, and he said, "I'm sorry. It's not my fault. My nephew came and he's tell-- uh, say this, what I can do to him." We don't want to stay any longer over there. It was very danger to go away from over there. Because all over was the German people. 

And the even-- not the German, no, the-- the police, the-- the Polish police, they was also working with them. The-- the-- the-- uh, the-- tooking the people to give to the German. My husband and the other fellow, they went out, and their son-in-law, they have also uh-- uh-- carri-- you know a wagon and horses. And they took another one. Because was-- was too many people to go in on one wagon. 

In the nighttime we went away from him. We don't want to stay long over there. Well, it was a very danger time to go. Because arrived a few days before in Miechow maybe you hear, people coming here and telling you something, Miechów Was not too far from our town. And the uh, Jewish, you know, from-- our-- our people kill a German this time. 

Because you know, he make so terrible. And he said, "anyway they're going to kill me." He kill him. He put a knife in him. And he killed him. 

I'm telling you, the time was so terrible. There was no places stay in the German. And they was-- they saw uh, something. We went-- the-- uh, no, no. We went from the other place to a neighboring town. And they-- uh, over there was still not the concentration from the people to send them away. You know? 

And we was over there but a couple of days, and not in Weisslitz just another town. It was um-- how was the name? It doesn't where-- how the name was, from the town. Not a big town, a small town. And [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] how. 

And was very bad. The whole day, it as-- the men-- the mens had to run away, well, not to run, they took them to work, and this and this. And one day we hear-- we met over there and mine's uncle, with my cousins, with this, with that, you know, from our town, lots of people. We wasn't a few days over there, and we-- we hear it's no good. They're going to concentrate all-- all people, the rest. And they're going to send them away. 

They organized a truck, a big truck. They rent it. And people had money, you know? And nobody was without the money. Because they ran away. They had to take some money with them self. 

And everybody was paying, you know, so much, so much per person. And we went, you know, till we went over there, out the-- you know, the town. It was of the truck though, nighttime. Until we went over there with a child, with-- with mine's mother and the sister-law, and with a child. 

And we how pa-- how terrible it was to-- to-- to-- till we went, on then, truck. A big truck, like-- like, potato truck or coal truck, you know? And the people was already over there, came somebody. And they saying they starting to-- to organize the-- the guy from the truck. And I'm going to give you more money. And he took us, all of them together, and-- uh, uh-- make like they taking off coals. They-- they turn over the whole truck. And everybody was in a roof. 

INTERVIEWER: Like a dump truck? 

SUBJECT: That's right. What we can do? Lots of people who could, they run, and the truck took off. And the lots of people who could, who-- who made that, they run-- went on the truck, and they paying the price. And they went-- this was-- we went, the whole-- the whole-- we couldn't make it anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: You were holding your child? 

SUBJECT: I hold my child. My husband said, I'm sorry, I can't do it. I can't do anymore. We went back. We went back in the same place where we was staying. Was a big room and empty. And over there was people. but not too many. Lots went away. My whole family went away. [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

The old people, there's nobody here. Just we met one guy, what he wasn't together with the bauer. Um-- what was his name? He wa-- we were-- when we was in Israel, he was living in one uh, street. We met him over there. And he told us the story, what's happened to these people. 

The old people, there's nobody. Everybody, I know how and what happened to them, I don't remember so exactly. But nobody's there. Just mine's cousin ran from the train. You know? Because they send him away. They send them-- the people away from over there, with the trains. 

And who run away from the train, they got-- you know, they-- and they are still alive or [INAUDIBLE] not. Mine daugh-- my sister-law went with the child. And we not. We went back. And we hear the terrible-- there is very danger. What we can doing? Can't stay over there. Because they going to, anyway, kill us. 

We got over there, uh, from our town, uh, for-- uh, not a friend. Just we knew him. And he got some connection to rented a small uh, truck. A small truck. And he rented. And we was in a stable uh, couple hours, till late in the night. And the truck, the small truck came. And we went over there, you know? We went over there, to Pla-- not to Plaszow, just um-- uh-- uh, it's-- we supposed to go to Krakow. The truck have to take us to Krakow. 

You know, that was so terrible, you know? They-- they took us to uh, a ghetto, [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] in Krakow. And over there-- no, no, no. We went to uh, from over there, we went to-- we supposed to go in some concentration camp over there. 

We were staying overnight, an empty place. Because uh, you can't go, in the nighttime, no place. And after uh, over there was uh-- such a-- la-- you know, camp. And was working over there, younger people. They want to take me and my husband, nobody else. No-- not more-- my mother-law-- my mother, not my child. No, where we going to go? We c-- I don't want to-- I don't want to separate from my child and from my mother. 

We went to Morowitz This was, you know, a suburb from Krakow. Over there was some people. That German, was not German over there. Just, I don't know who was-- who was, you know, eh, you know, the-- the-- the, you know, what he-- just we was over there in a couple-- a couple over there was such a-- you know, uh, uh, camp was we went out to working by the [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] 

But we make a groove-- a big groove, you know, hole, along. And they making-- making um, like, a-- a-- a-- 

INTERVIEWER: A grave? 

SUBJECT: No. No, no, no, no. The Volga went through. 

INTERVIEWER: A river? 

SUBJECT: A river. A big, big river. Not a river just a lake. Like, not like a lake. A lake is, you know, round. This was a river with water. And we was planting on this with grass, nice making. 

And it was a couple week-- a couple of weeks. This went through by-- till this was, you know, uh-- after, you know, September, October. But the beginning, November, this was. Start to getting cold. We can't go out over there, working. It was very hard. 

And how long you can stay together in one room, so many people. It was very hard. Well, it was-- yeah, I-- it was like. And then one day came the German people from Krakow with a big, big, uh, truck. And all people, they took to the ghetto, to Krakow. All people. 

In ghetto, they took us right away to the-- you know, to the-- uh-- bathroom. You know? She give us a bath. And she make us cleaner, because we was very terrible, you know, a couple weeks, to stay in such a place, no-- no bath, get a bath and no nothing. 

They took away, right away, my child. In a-- in a kinder home, you know, for-- for children. My kinder, you know? And my mother took another place. And the young-- me and my husband, took into Krakow, Plaszow, in the camp. You hear of Krakow, Plaszow. 

You know, me separate, my husband, separate. We was not together. And a couple weeks I went, you know, I took uh-- to go out from the camp. You had to have uh, pieces of paper, you know? It's-- they have to allow you to go out. And we went out. And I saw my mother and I saw my child. 

[SIGHS] 

This took, uh, not too long. And after one day, people went, you know, to the Krakow. And they left the town and came-- the-- the-- you know, the-- the big, big shot from the SS. And he was counting the people. And lots of people was, you know, missing. 

And he was right away, shoot the-- the-- the-- you know, they was-- the people, the Jewish people was-- was taking care, us. You know? Was, you know, a lageralteste, a camp alte-- you know, like a-- like a president, like a-- you know, somebody. You know, they don't bother with us so much. They just making their, you know, what they have to do. And they was telling the Jewish people to take care of us. 

And they shoot two people this time. Was so terr-- terrible. You know? It was so bad for everybody, they shooting such a nice two people. What we can do? 

We went to work. Was very hard work over there, you know? They had to go uh, to take off. Because over there was the cemetery, a Jewish cemetery. And we have to-- to take apart the old-- you know, uh-- uh, you know, um-- how you call them? They-- not the-- was-- you know, the monument. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, the monuments. 

SUBJECT: We have to took out this and to cut in pieces, and to make uh-- the-- the-- the-- their-- 

INTERVIEWER: Roads? 

SUBJECT: Roads. Mens and woman have to work. You can't believe it, how hard it was of work. And carry the-- the-- the rock-- the-- the rocks over our shoulders, and to-- and to-- and to plant here in the-- the roads. It was very-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were making roads out of Jewish burial stones. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was your child? 

SUBJECT: Ah, well, in-- you know, it was uh-- about a year and a half, one day, they liquidate the whole ghetto. In-- in Krakow. They liquidate the-- the whole-- the-- the kindergartens and everything. They killed the people and they bring them up-- up over there. They make a roof. They tooking the people, you know, from the camp to work with this. 

My husband was looking for my mother, for my child, he could find it. And they took in-- they bring the people over there. They have to make the graves. And they kill them one by one, right in the graves to go. It was very horrible, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: I was in the camp. I was in the camp. Because the younger people, they took them to work. In the-- the-- the-- who was not able to working, they left it in the ghetto [INAUDIBLE], you know, because we was separated, the old people. 

We was-- we saw, already, what's going on. Because before, we were thinking maybe, maybe we're going to find somebody from our family. Because two sisters and my father, they, right away, they send to Treblinka or to Majdanek. We don't know exactly where they-- they got killed. 

I was-- and my husband, they send away-- about 1943, they send him away to Flossenbürg, you know? They took a transport, they send away people, another place. And I was-- after, when they was-- when we was you know, planting on the roads, they make-- in the top was over there, hills. And they make, over there, the barracks. And they make over there places for younger people who was able to work. 

People was from Krakow. What, you know, they was uh-- make such places, what they walk, we have to uh, um, fix it, the clothes of the German, you know, to give them clean and-- and not dirty, and not ripped. I was-- I was sew it, you know? 

And I went in this place too. And I got two cousins over there, you know. In [? NON-ENGLISH ?] it was, better people, but they was working for the-- the-- for the-- the high top, for ghetto, you hear of the ghetto, yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: For-- for miller for ados over there was better, you know? And they took me over there, in, mine cousins. I had one cousin, I got a tailor. Another one was a shoemaker. He was making the boots for them. 

And he got a little-- I-- maybe a little protection. And he took me in over there. And I was sewing over there, you know? And one day when they was finishing in the top, the-- the-- the-- this was the place, was called [? Glenda's. ?] When we was finishing, we-- we was moving everything up. And then st-- and then we make something else. Who knows what we made? 

When we-- when the place was moved, we don't make a lot of thing. Because it was a little mixed up, you know? It was-- over there was working another woman. And there are two womans, and rest was mens. Came, you know, a inspection, what we was prepared through the day. You have to give them a report. We saying, was not enough, you know, merchandise, done. 

[SIGHS] 

What I can tell you? Came after a couple-- maybe a half hour after, came 10 the Ukraines, strong men. And I was one woman. And they start to hit-- hitting me to such a-- um-- a rod from-- from leather. 

INTERVIEWER: They were hitting you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And I was hiding. I was afraid. And they find me, and they hit me. I saw how badly. It was-- pieces was hanging from me. They took me in the hospital. I couldn't lay down. I couldn't sit. I couldn't nothing. It was a horrible thing. I was thinking, I don't want to live anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Who took you to the hospital? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I don't remember who took me. Oh, the German or the-- the you know, the-- the-- the lageralteste. I don't remember who took me. There was over there, uh, such a barracks with hospital. They tooking care of people who wasn't sick. You know? 

And was-- took-- took it a couple-- maybe two weeks till I got better, and I went back-- back to work. After I went in another place, I don't want to go anymore in this place. And my husband was already not over there. They send him away before. 

This was, you know, we was-- they-- after they send away, us, another place, they send us to Wieliczka again. Over there was a group from salt in Wieliczka And we was working over there a couple weeks. And after, it was short, you know. The-- the Russian got closer. They liquidate the all smaller, the camps. And we-- they send us back all to Plaszow. 

One day, it was very short before 1944. And I don't know, they said they making us such a-- you know, they took-- so us all, they told for the people, the old people, what was you know, carrying with the whole camp, the Jewish people. It wasn't people from Krakow, the-- the whole-- you know, the Jewish. 

And they kill nine people, all of them, out. All of them. They kill them, one by the other. Because they was-- they was in town. They want to run away. This was not true. 

They was maybe-- they knew, maybe, too much, and they didn't want them to-- to leave. They kill all people. And they making an appeal. They calling the all people, and they have to go through. They hang them on the electrical, uh, uh, cables. 

They all nine. You know? Was a woman also. Them-- bi-- them, all this, you know, the bigger shots, his wife. She was also, you know, like a-- a blockalteste-- a lagerführer, you know? And she was so terrible person. She was so bad, talking to the people. 

You can't believe it, how she was talking to us. And she said, you're not going to live any-- any-- anyway. What you-- what you did? What-- what happened? 

INTERVIEWER: Was she Jewish? 

SUBJECT: She was Jewish, yes! She was even, from our town, a granddaughter. You know? A granddaughter. OK, they kill them. And this was a horrible thing for everybody. 

INTERVIEWER: Killed her too? 

SUBJECT: Yes, sure. Sure. And everybody-- everybody who just was alive from the Jewish people, they have to go and looking on them, how they was hanging on these-- on these cables. Uh-- we can't help it. And this was bad. 

You know, one day they making this, they making this. They making lots of trouble for us. One day they came, nighttime. Everybody who has some for gold, you have to give up. A pair, you know, earring. Who has? Have to give them everything. 

OK, this is not very important. . And took another couple weeks. They make, you know, because it was very short already, before the-- they liberate us. You know, the Russian got closer and didn't got too much time to wait with us. They liquidate the whole uh, camps for the kids. 

Because there was, over there, a lots of kids. All the kids from 10 year and 12 year. Kill them, all of them, all. All of them. Because the kids was not together with the parents. They keep them with-- separate. And after they make an appeal and they organized, you know, trains, wagons, you know? The wagons, and they send away the k-- the people to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You were there? You were-- 

SUBJECT: I was there, aboard the bus. You know, my luck, it came a little closer to me. Was not, anymore, the wagons. And they send back the rest people, back to the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was your child? 

SUBJECT: Oh, my child was already dead. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew this? 

SUBJECT: I knew this, sure. They liquidate the whole-- the ghetto. They liquidate ev-- all places. I knew this. My mother, my child. 

And they took us back to-- to clean up, to make clean the ghet-- the-- the-- the-- you know, the camp. This took another uh, six weeks. They-- you know, the transport, what went over there to Auschwitz is-- just one girl got-- you know, she got this-- she survived. Not a-- not-- nobody else. 

How she survive? She had, over there, a brother. He was working in Auschwitz. On the ramp-- ramp, they call-- they call. The trains came with the-- with the-- with the-- you know, transport. And they took the people in they-- or they send them to the gas chamber or there. 

And they took off the clothes. And the people, everybody, Jewish people, you know, and-- and they had something, you know, hided in the clothes. He was working over there and he find lots of things. All gold, you know, uh, pieces, or a ring or something. You know? And he had this. And he knew what, they going to kill the all people. He uh, took his sister out for this transport. And he uh, sent-- he went with her to-- in Bergen-Belsen-- in Auschwitz, in Bergen, how it was the-- what's called in the place. In-- 

INTERVIEWER: They must have to change. We have to-- the tape has run out. Um-- 