[TONE PLAYING] SUBJECT: When I first came to the woods, I found a woman. No, not yet. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: When I first came to the wood, I-- I found a woman I knew very well. She lived with us during the German-- German occupation. She lived in the same house. She-- her husband got killed. And she had-- she came to our town because her sister and her husband-- sister brother-in-law, and nephews and nieces lived there. 

But during the massacre, her sister and her brother-in-law got killed, and they left her with their, I think, three or four children-- orphans. And she herself wasn't a strong woman, a sick woman, but she just managed to escape the dam She came to the woods. 

INTERVIEWER: With the orphans. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And when I came, I found her in the woods. And she was so helpless. Nobody wanted to-- nobody wanted her in there. This was before winter. We had to make a-- out of the-- the underground home. They wanted money from her. She couldn't help. Whoever couldn't help had to pay for it. And she had nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: There were men-- Jewish men. It was survivors. 

INTERVIEWER: Who wanted to be paid? 

SUBJECT: They wanted to be-- some wanted to be paid. And she had no money. And she was scared and sick. So she cried for me. I said, well, I had a couple of rings-- my mother's-- on my hands. And I said, I'll give you a golden-- I'll give them a gold ring if this will help and let-- and maybe they'll let you in. And I-- they let her in for that. 

She didn't live too long because she caught pneumonia and she died. And then the nephews got killed during the-- the hunt What is called [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: During the German raid. 

SUBJECT: During the German-- during the German raid, yes. But I helped with this too. And she blessed me all this-- until the last day of her life. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember her death? 

SUBJECT: Well, she was laying sick-- very sick. Pneumonia-- she had all that coughing. You know, she had no medication and no food. She-- I helped her with whatever I could until she needed help. And then she died. She became so weak and she died. 

INTERVIEWER: And the orphans-- the children? 

SUBJECT: They didn't live too much longer because the Germans raided the woods and they got killed too. So-- and-- and then after the raid, my-- we had this little-- this little cousin-- my cousin's little boy was with us all the time. He followed me. 

INTERVIEWER: His parents were killed? 

SUBJECT: His mother, father, and his little sister. And he was left with me and with his aunt and his cousin. He followed me. And the bullets are flying, just like this before me, following me. 

They-- they shoot at me. They trying to-- they tried to-- they aimed at me, but I just was lucky enough-- at me, at him. And we both escaped. And ever since, I-- I-- I helped him. I-- the food I bought, I wasn't eating myself. He had it. 

And also my cousin was very helpless. She couldn't see good. She was very nearsighted. And she was getting lost everywhere. She couldn't find her way in the woods. So I helped her. She survived. Then she and her son came and went to Israel This little boy didn't want her to leave Russia. He's-- he's still in Russia. He wasn't little any longer, but-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did this little boy say to you? 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: I was like a mother to him. He always liked me, always coming and cuddling around me. And he knew I-- uh, always-- he was so happy as long as-- as long as-- he used to say, as long-- my Jewish name is [INAUDIBLE]-- as long as [INAUDIBLE] is here, I'm happy. He was always around me. And I would never leave him alone. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: How could you? After all, he's a relative and he's helpless. Until he needed my help, I wouldn't. But then later, he got older. And he didn't even come to-- with his aunties-- well, he left-- he wanted-- 

INTERVIEWER: But look it was more easy to save yourself without the little boy and without-- why did you want to save them? 

SUBJECT: Well, they're my family. Even if not my family, I'm a human being. How could I? I helped everyone-- everyone who I could. I told you about this widow, this woman. I-- I was-- me and my-- another girl, see and her-- we had no men. Some came with husbands, with brothers, and they helped them. 

But me and her, she-- she and her mother survived. Her father got killed. So we both used to go out, chop wood, like men. We worked together with the men, built the underground homes. We were-- everything. We helped with everything. Go out for food, everything. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- again, you describe this life in the forest. What kind of incidents used to happen between people there? 

SUBJECT: Between people it wasn't easy. People used to fight for a piece-- for food, for a piece of bread, for room. It was so crowded. To warm up, to cook some food on this little stove we made-- many fights. Many people used to fight. But also everybody wanted to lay close, summertime near the fire, to warm up. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Would-- did they ever sing together? 

SUBJECT: Did they ever what? 

INTERVIEWER: Sing. 

SUBJECT: No, never. They never did sing. No. The partisans did. Underground army, they used to sing. But in the woods, we're afraid to-- to-- to be heard. 

INTERVIEWER: So you had to be quiet. 

SUBJECT: Sure, very quiet. I remember when the typhus epidemic broke out. No medicine and such a high temperature, and one day it was raining so hard. I was very sick. And I was laying in a puddle almost. I didn't believe how I'll live today, I'll survive. But I guess it's just God's will. 

INTERVIEWER: What thought did you have then? 

SUBJECT: You didn't-- you didn't think much. You just-- you had no hope. I didn't hope then when I was so sick. I thought I'm dying. I didn't hope. I didn't. I just wanted to end already. But I started feeling better again. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you want to be with somebody at that moment? 

SUBJECT: I wanted-- I had no one to be with. I was with friends and that's all. I knew I have no one. I-- I stopped crying already. You usually cry, you lose someone. But then nobody cried because we knew it won't take long and we'll be there too. It will happen to us. 

INTERVIEWER: So being sick was perhaps a way of meeting your parents again? 

SUBJECT: I always used to dream-- see them in my dream. And this was the happiest time. I-- I wanted this never to end. 

INTERVIEWER: In the woods? 

SUBJECT: As soon as I came to the woods, I started dreaming-- seeing them in my dreams. And when I-- when I woke up, I felt so sad. Why did it end? 

INTERVIEWER: You dreamt of your parents? 

SUBJECT: My parents, everybody-- my family. I-- I saw them before me in my dream. 

INTERVIEWER: Every night? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, almost-- very often. And my father, my brother, or my mother always. And I was so unhappy when this ended. I-- 

INTERVIEWER: When you woke up? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I-- I-- I was thinking, why doesn't this last forever? 

INTERVIEWER: Did these dreams continue? 

SUBJECT: For a long time. I guess something I wanted to see. And I-- I always thought about them. 

INTERVIEWER: When did the dreaming stop? 

SUBJECT: Well, uh-- they stopped after a while. And-- well, once in a while, I used to see them I-- I dreamt about them, but not so often. But the first-- the first-- when I first came to the woods, I used to see them always in my dreams, always. 

INTERVIEWER: Did people fall in love, marry? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- 

SUBJECT: Marry-- never they got married, but-- well, I myself, I met a-- a neighbor of mine, a young man, a very handsome man. He was older a lot than me. He was-- but we were-- he was a lonely survivor and myself, and we're very fond of each other. And until he was alive-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say to each other? 

SUBJECT: It never-- well, just-- never saying anything like talking about marriage or about such things. This was out of question, but-- because we didn't know what our tomorrow will bring us. But we liked each other very much. And I'm sure if-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- did he say-- say to you that he loved you? 

SUBJECT: Not really. Not in words, but you still feel love for each other. And I'm sure, if he wouldn't-- he wouldn't get killed. But he got killed during the German raid in the woods. The first-- the first couple-- the first raid, he got killed. He was strong and healthy and a bullet hit him right away. He was close to my cousin and the children. And the children started to cry. So the Germans knew right away where we are and a bullet hit him right-- so. 

There-- there was another young woman, young man, they-- they live now in Israel. They were very much in love. 

INTERVIEWER: In the woods. 

SUBJECT: They got married now. Yeah, in the woods. In fact, this young man got wounded during the-- during the German raid. He got wounded. 

INTERVIEWER: By? 

SUBJECT: By the Germans. A bullet hit his leg here. He's limping today too. But he's all right. They-- he's marriage to this girl. 

INTERVIEWER: Who helped them stay in the woods? He was wounded. Who nursed him? 

SUBJECT: He was wounded. Well, we helped him. This girl and us with-- the best they could. And he healed. No doctors. Miracles. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you have a clear sense that it's-- it's going to end, that you're going to be free? 

SUBJECT: Well, we had-- the last year-- the last-- not the whole year. The last months, we had partisans around us. And they used to bring us the news. They said they heard this, they heard this, they heard the Russians are coming close. And we hoped-- we hoped it will end. They-- they used to-- they bought us the news. 

INTERVIEWER: When you started to go home, did you have any glimmer of hope that maybe, maybe your parents were still-- 

SUBJECT: No, I knew my parents were not-- they didn't hide. I was sure my parents-- I hoped maybe my brother or my sister's husband from-- from-- from [INAUDIBLE]. I hope maybe a little boy escaped or something, but nothing, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was-- you met the local people after the liberation. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did you say-- 

SUBJECT: Everybody-- what-- what is it? Not too many were left, only a few Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Not Jews. You met-- 

SUBJECT: Others. Well, we worked with them. The-- those-- the police, like I said, those escaped with the Germans. They didn't stay. They were afraid. But the rest of the townspeople, they haven't been too friendly, but with some we worked together. You couldn't stay too long there. It was not for us any longer. 

INTERVIEWER: Because? 

SUBJECT: Because knowing what happened here to us. The ground was-- was soaked with our blood, with our Jewish blood. The-- the earth we walk on is soaked with our blood. Every minute I looked at my home, I looked at something that reminded me of-- of everyone. I couldn't-- I couldn't live there any longer. 

And when the Russians passed a law that the-- the ones who were Polish citizens before the war could return to Poland, we were all very happy. And I-- nobody is left there now. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE], you met people who lived with you in the woods. And when you get together, what things-- 

SUBJECT: As I told you, me and my friend who lived together in the woods and then in this underground, we both came together home-- she and her mother and me and my cousin. She worked, I worked. On our day off, we used to visit the grave. It wasn't a grave-- there were-- people got burnt in the barn-- sit there for hours and cry, look around, the hair from-- people's hair, their beards. That's all we used to do there. This was our enjoyment. 

INTERVIEWER: And when you meet today? 

SUBJECT: Today, well, this-- this girlfriend of mine just came from Israel for a visit. When she first saw me, she started crying. She said, I didn't cry all this time. I cannot believe it I'm crying. It reminded her of the years we've-- we've been together in the woods, of the bad times. And we said-- and we talk, reminisced, everything we went through. 

INTERVIEWER: Has this ever ended for you really? You're in a new country and a new family, but is it over? 

SUBJECT: It can never be over. This can never be forgotten. In fact, when I made appointment to meet with you, I sat down and I thought-- I have to sit down-- I maybe forgot things, I forgot. So I sit down and-- but I wrote down many things. And then I read it to my daughter and we both sat and cried. I have it even now. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you show it? 

SUBJECT: You wouldn't read it because it's just scribble. But I could read you a couple-- 

INTERVIEWER: You did not speak to your daughter about it before? 

SUBJECT: Not too much. I-- my children went through a lot, you know. They lost their father. She was five years old. I-- I couldn't-- I couldn't upset them so much. But a little-- I used to tell them little by little, but not everything. I was afraid to upset them too much. 

Now, I just-- it's just a scribbling, not much, but-- most of the things I [INAUDIBLE]. You want me to read it? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: In 1939 the war broke out. The Russians invaded our territory. For two years, they leave it under the Russian regime. In '41, the Russian's suddenly escaped and the Germans invade attack our country. Until the German settled, the townspeople-- the non-Jews robbed, looted, and beat Jews. I remember one incident-- 

INTERVIEWER: It-- it difficult for you to say the non-Jews? You don't like to blame? 

SUBJECT: Well, I cannot-- I wouldn't like-- people from this country wouldn't understand. I remember one incident one day they surrounded the mostly populated Jewish neighborhood. They started throwing rocks, beating people, looting the-- the richer homes especially. 

My parents and myself went to the other side of town. There was-- in the non-Jewish neighborhood. One Jewish family lived there. We knocked on the door. They let us in. The house was filled with people, all hiding there. 

After a couple of hours, we went back home. We met my sister and brother-in-law. My brother-in-law was bleeding, crying, they beat me, they beat me. They were-- they were hiding on the attic. They-- they-- they-- they found them, demanded money, especially gold-- especially gold. 

After the Germans settled, every Jew had to wear a yellow star on his arm and was not allowed on the sidewalk. A Jewish committee was organized then. The Germans dealt with the-- with the committee members. From them they demanded workers. Everyday the committee sent out all the people who were-- to work-- all the people who were able to. 

I worked mostly in the field on a farm. The Germans used to watch us with sticks in their hands. Was one they didn't like, they beat with the sticks over their heads. For a few months, I cleaned flags. Sometimes I also did housecleaning for the Germans. 

I was then very young and not-- and not fit for such work, but who cared? The German police consisted of Germans and volunteers from our town, such young men which-- which we're able to beat and rob and also kill Jews. One by the name [INAUDIBLE], everyone dreaded. He stabbed people to death with knives. He killed out families like this. Shall I continue? 

INTERVIEWER: About the woods. 

SUBJECT: Well, where is this-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, why-- why don't you continue where you stopped. Just continue. 

SUBJECT: I can't find  the page. [INAUDIBLE] reading [INAUDIBLE]. How every holiday and every event was marked-- on the high holidays, a group of Jews were gathered in a field and were told to dig their graves and then shot. 

A few days before Passover, my dear sister, a beautiful young woman, with her darling little boys, got killed-- burned to death. Her husband managed to escape but later-- later on got killed. People told us how brave she was. Everybody panicked, cried, screamed. She was walking quietly with her little children by her side and saying, if this is God's wish, we have to accept it. She lived a neighboring town, [INAUDIBLE]. 

All this time, the German-- the German's kept looting, robbing, and beating the Jews, until one day in September, my dear mother awakened me early in the morning and-- and said, the town is surrounded. We're going to have a-- a massacre probably. And then she said to me, go my child, go. And this was the-- the last words and the last time I saw my dear parents. They-- they never wanted to go in hiding-- into hiding. They were not young and would not survive anyway. 

Our town Jews were gathered by-- in a large barn and the barn was put on fire. I was hiding with our next door neighbors in a barn, in a built  small hiding place in hay. We had been there three days and three nights. We heard the screams, the cries from women and little children, the smell from the burning bodies. 

On the first day of our hiding, a non-Jewish neighbor brought the Germans in the barn and told them that she is sure that Jews are hiding here-- there. They were-- they were searching the barn, sticking with swords in the hay, but fortunately did not find us. 

On the third night, after midnight, everything seemed quiet. I left the hiding place and went to a village to a non-Jewish family I knew. They let us in, fed us, and after a few days, we went looking for the other survivors. We found them in a dense forest called [INAUDIBLE]. I met there a couple of cousins and stayed with them. 

Daytime we used to hide in-- in huts in the-- made from branches. At night they used to go out to the surrounding villages to beg for food. The food we-- we brought consist of a cold potato, dried peas, onions, and salt. At night we slept near a fire. A log was our pillow. 

But this life also didn't last too long. The Germans found out where we were-- where we were hiding. The village people maybe told them. They surrounded the woods and started shooting. One of my cousins had two small children. They started crying and this gave us away. Many got shot. Some-- some got wounded-- wounded. I was shot at. I saw the bullets flying by my head. I guess I just was lucky I escaped. I survived. 

We left this part of the woods, moved to other-- to other woods, met other people. A typhus epidemic broke out. Almost everybody was sick, very high fever, no medical help, no food. Many people died again. I was lucky again to survive. 

Winter came. We had to dig underground homes called zemlyanka, we used to call it Everybody worked hard to help build their homes. After the homes were completed, everything was covered with grass so nobody could tell that people lived there. 

Life became a little easier. An underground army called partisans was stationed at not far from us. They helped us sometimes with food, material from the parachutes, [INAUDIBLE], et cetera. Then spring came and the partisans suddenly started moving out from this part of the woods. They told us that the Germans found out about them, and getting ready to attack them. 

We followed them. They settled in ditches. The mud was up to our chests. When the Germans started coming after us, their feet sank-- sank in the mud and they turned back. They opened fire and the partisans answered  back. After this, a couple months later, we were liberated. This was, I believe, the end of world war. 

INTERVIEWER: Ms. Reich how do you feel about being interviewed today? 

SUBJECT: I feel all right. I want to tell people. I want the world to know what-- what happened to us. Some people don't even know. When I came first to this country-- I don't want to mention names-- and I started talking, a neighbor of mine, I mentioned Hitler. Says says, who is he? People don't know-- an educated woman. 

They didn't even know. We have to tell them what happened. Not everybody, but some people don't know it. Now they know about it, but after the war, many people-- 

INTERVIEWER: Does it make any difference having spoken about it for an hour and a half now? 

SUBJECT: I think I feel better. 

INTERVIEWER: Pardon? 

SUBJECT: I think I feel good after. 

INTERVIEWER: In what way? 

SUBJECT: I just don't keep it in me. I just told-- it-- it makes-- it makes you feel better when you talk about it. It makes me feel better, I think. 

INTERVIEWER: Has it changed you? Are you different? 

SUBJECT: Since when? Because of talking now? 

INTERVIEWER: No, having gone through this, having survived. 

SUBJECT: I believe so. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: Well, I became stronger, I think wiser. You learn a lot from-- from such life. You know, you-- 

INTERVIEWER: Is-- 

SUBJECT: What you mean, is? 

INTERVIEWER: Has your life become normal again? 

SUBJECT: My life-- well, I always miss the ones I lost. This will never-- this will-- I always miss until-- until my-- my last day of my life. I always-- never-- I never stopped loving-- I even love them now. I miss all my family. I always talk about them. 

But it's something-- it's so many years went by, it's-- you have to. You cannot say you forget. But it's-- it's a long time and in the beginning it was very painful. It was aching. I always cried. 

But then later on, I married and I met a very nice man. And I had a very nice husband. But then a tragedy happened again. My husband died after 14 years of marriage. He died suddenly from a heart attack. And I stopped thinking, already, less about the ones I lost in the war. I miss him a lot. Always something. 

INTERVIEWER: And it's interesting you have not spoken much to your children about it. 

SUBJECT: Not too much. I -- I was afraid I'll-- because my children were so hurt by-- they were small children when they lost their father. I told them. I-- I always told them about my parents and everything. But how-- how they died I-- not too much. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- 

SUBJECT: Now I'm-- they got told. But when they were smaller, I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you tell anyone who was not a survivor about it? 

SUBJECT: I told them. In fact, when I first came from this country-- to this country, my brother-in-law's, uh, brother and sister-- he had a brother and sister here in New York-- find out I'm here and they came to find out. They thought maybe he's still alive. 

And when I told them how he died, she says, how could you tell us such tales? I said, I'm sorry, if I could live through such things, I could tell you too. They felt so bad. I haven't-- I haven't-- I never heard from them again. 

So not everybody wants-- well, I came here to [INAUDIBLE]-- my brothers from my-- my father's first marriage were here in this country. And also my brother from my father's-- from my mother's first marriage is here-- was here. They brought me to this country. And them I told everything what happened. I told them. 

INTERVIEWER: And they were willing to hear? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they were willing. In fact, even before I came, I wrote letters to my brother. I wrote him everything like this, what happened. And he was-- he knew what he was a journalist. He wrote us in the paper. My letter was in the newspaper before I came to this country. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE], thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: I hope it's all right. I don't know. My English is not perfect. 