INTERVIEWER 1: OK, we're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Levarek War start before 1939. And your family? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was born in Warsaw in 1924. We had-- I had a sister and a brother. We had a-- our business was in printing and uh, manu-- manufacturing of paper boxes. We were primarily working for a big concern in Polad-- in Warsaw, rather. It was one of a, of big-- of the biggest firms of, uh, pharmaceutical and cosmetic concerns. Uh, we had, uh, 15 employees in our business. 

And uh, we were doing-- we were well-to-do people. Uh, when the war broke out, we, uh, moved, uh, to, uh, another city. It was around 20 kilometers. Eh, it was in another city. And we build our factory there. It was in, uh, uh, well, like, Pr-- uh, Grodzisk You used to take a, uh, train to, uh, about a half an hour. And it was-- uh. 

And when the war broke out, uh, we, uh-- as a matter of fact, that this place was not disturbed at all. This place. And uh, when the Germans came to Warsaw, we moved back from-- we had to leave the place and move back to Warsaw. And uh, we uh, lived in that same place where we used to it Warsaw. 

And uh, and little by little, where they-- when they used to they used to bring in people into the ghetto. Uh, we uh, had to share with other people because it was a very little place available and in the ghetto. And we had to share, naturally, uh, with some strange people. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your father try to escape? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was, uh, it was eh, a uh, from very reliable sources, my father uh, heard of a way that he would be able to escape into Greece. But by the time that when he decided to uh, uh, send the money, he was-- he heard through the newspapers that the uh, Greece was already taken over by the Germans. Uh. So, so there was no way of escaping from the ghetto. We had to stay. 

Now, during the ghetto, uh, we uh-- of course, for a short while, the Germans were confiscating all the uh, uh printing places. My-- our place was also confiscated. You know, it was-- they were taking it over. And uh, the uh, uh, as I-- what was I-- what was I saying. I forgot now. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You said they took over the printing place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They sent a [INAUDIBLE] handler. 

SUBJECT: They took over the printing place, that's right. Now, uh-- and, of course we had nothing. We couldn't-- we had nothing to do with it because somebody else was given uh, the rights to it. So we had nothing to do with the printing place anymore. 

But what happened is that uh, they were, uh-- in the beginning, they uh, used to, uh, take, uh, people out from the ghetto. And in order to escape, escape this, they uh, formed a, uh, sort of a workshop. And my father was one of the organizers to form a workshop in the ghetto in order to eh, eh, not to be taken away. Naturally, into, once that person was taken away, they, we knew where he was going. Well, they were going. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Right. 

SUBJECT: So we decided to-- uh, so what happened is that we, uh-- my father formed this, this uh, workshop. And we-- the people that were in the same line of business were all living together. So that they close up, eh, shop. But it didn't take long that they, the Germans came into that shop and were taking out people. They assembled all the people. And it was one of these days of the days when they assemble the people and they took my father away. And, course there was no way we thought that we will be able to get him out. 

But there was no way. We had no connections whatsoever to be able to get him out, eh, because the people where, where he was taken is into the place to be sent away to eh, extermination. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You knew that? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. Definitely. 

INTERVIEWER 3: How did you know? 

SUBJECT: Well, because that all the people that were taken out, taken away, they didn't come back. It was only at the very end, that there very, only a few people that had succeeded in escaping told us that the people are all being exterminated. So that there was no way-- so from this, therefore, we knew that there, there is no way of escaping. 

In other words, for the people they were taking away, there was no way of escaping. Only, as I say, that there was only one or two people that succeeded in escaping. And they told us. And they told us that the all the people are being exterminated. 

And that was-- I'm talking about Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Why didn't you want to run away so that they couldn't take you at that point? 

SUBJECT: Well, eh, eh, I wasn't-- as a matter of fact, I was still there in that, eh, shop. We were still there. But then when, when we realized that eh, that they are taking away the people from the shop, then there is no way of keeping the shop at all. We have to start running away. 

And that's what we-- our the mother, and my sister and brother. We went away to another place because we were afraid that they will come again. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What kind of place? 

SUBJECT: We went to, uh, a hideout where, private home somewhere in, in, in Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Outside the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: In the ghetto. In the ghetto. Still in the ghetto. And one day we were, uh looking-- of course, there was no food available to-- food was very scarce in the ghetto. So uh, and-- and only people that were voluntarily leaving the ghetto were given a certain amount of food. Eh, but whoever didn't go, didn't get any food. So we didn't have food at all. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Where are they volunteering to leave the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Well, no. It isn't that-- I didn't say that they were-- only the people that would volunteer to leave the ghetto would receive a certain amount of food. 

INTERVIEWER 3: SUBJECT: Where were they going, then? 

SUBJECT: Oh, where they were going? Oh, they're no, mostly didn't go. That's the fact. They did not go. Everybody there-- most of the people were hiding. They were in hiding building eh, bunkers and tunnels and-- and every possible way to escape to being eh, eh, taken by the Germans. 

And one and eh, one day, I actually, one day, eh, when I left home for, to look for food, and it wasn't until the next day. I couldn't come back the same day because the, the streets were all blocked with the SS. There were standing on the streets. And it was impossible to walk, 'cause once uh, they see us walking, that person walking, they would grab you. Therefore, I had to, eh, leave to the next day when there would be the chance to come back. 

INTERVIEWER 3: All this was in the ghetto. Life was in the ghetto. You just were leaving your place of hiding and going to another place? Right? 

SUBJECT: Exactly, exactly. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You didn't go into a greater Warsaw at all. You were all in Warsaw together. 

SUBJECT: No, we-- there was no-- we could not leave the ghetto because the ghetto was closed in. So there was no way for me to go out. And I wouldn't, eh, go out because it was impossible to go out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you're talking about what year? 

SUBJECT: It was during the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: 19-- 

SUBJECT: That was in 1940-- eh, 43. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And it was the beginning of the liquidation. 

SUBJECT: That's right-- before, it was before the beg-- before the beginning. Actually before the-- you see, the liquidation started in-- in-- in April-- in April of 1943. Well, it-- about at this time, I'm talking. This is about at this time. Were uh, again, when I came back to the place where my-- my mother was and my sister and brother, they were no longer there. They were already taken away from that place. Then I was left alone. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You got back to the place where your family had been hiding and they were gone? 

SUBJECT: That's right. They were taken because the, the Germans were picking them up from the hideouts. They were looking at the, the people. In other words, they were blocking streets. They were blocking sections and they were making a, uh, and they were taking them out with whichever possible way they were looking for them. And it's just that whoever was lucky that was hidden in such a way that they couldn't get to them, uh, they were lucky. 

But whoever, uh, depends where the people were hiding. And especially, there were police, uh, with the Germans. They were Deutsche Police with the Germans were working together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So [INAUDIBLE], in that went this kind of slowly cleaning up the ghetto went on-- went on for how long? 

SUBJECT: Uh, with this war, uh, were, it went until-- they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: From when to when? 

SUBJECT: Uh, well, it went on with, actually it went, let's say from the beginning of the uh, uh, beginning of '43 til the-- the middle of '43, I would say it went on. Until they-- they cleaned all the ghetto out, all the Jews that they could taken out from the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So if I understand you right, that on January '43, they, so to speak, normal life in the ghetto stopped and everybody was being taken away. Is that right? 

SUBJECT: It was. It was like this-- it was taken away within sections. In other words, they were blocking up a certain amount of blocks all around with troops, German troops and police, and they were going into the houses and taking the Jews out. 

This is the way. It was till-- till all possibly Jews were could taken-- uh, you know, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: And so you came back that day, and your mother and your sister were gone. And you were all alone. What happened to you? 

SUBJECT: Well then, uh, what happened to me is that I was left alone and uh, and uh, I had-- and I was and by myself. I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: How long? How old? 

SUBJECT: How old I was? I was, in 1943 I was 19 years old in 1943. Then, uh, when the, uh, Warsaw Uprising started, it was about at that time. When I lost my mother, and my sister, and my brother, I was by myself. That's where the uprising took place. It was at that time. Uh, and uh, I didn't take part in the uprising. I was only trying to save myself uh, from being caught by the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just tell us. You didn't find anyone-- where did you go and what did see [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: All right. So, so, what-- what-- I went is to, uh, uh-- I was looking for other people to-- to be able to hide together with other people. So I went into a house. And usually the people were building these places all the way on top, on top or on the bottom. 

So this particular place where I went to was [INAUDIBLE], uh, Street. That's a Polish street [INAUDIBLE]. 

And there, on top of the roof, it was inside there that some people had build a bunker inside. And, and I joined them. I went into that place. It was all closed in, so that nobody could be to go out from there. They closed themselves up and we were all there. I really don't exactly don't know how many people there were, but the, the room was full to capacity. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they let you in. 

SUBJECT: And they let me in. It was still open because there was, the people were still going in and whoever still got in at that time when the doors were open was lucky to get in. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Where did they get food? How did you-- 

SUBJECT: Well, there was no question of food at that time. There was only a question of being safe for a moment. That was what was it. No, no question of food. But downstairs-- on the uh, in the backyard, they were, the police eh, were hollering up to people to get out voluntarily from the house. 

But nobody moved. Nobody said a word. Nobody was willing to leave the place. And then they said, they were saying that, no, nothing will happen to anybody. You will be receiving food and you will be sent to work. But nobody reacted. 

Um, a few moments later, they are-- and they also said that they were-- the house will be put a fire. They'll burn the house down. And so happened, the house was placed on fire. And there, and, the, the this, this place where I was hidden with all the people, we were all-- the, the smoke already went up so it was so high and it was all en, enveloped with smoke that nobody could see each other. 

But somehow I pushed everybody away and rushed to the window, because it was hard to breathe at that time, because the smoke was in that place. 

And I looked out the window and I saw with my own eyes people jumping and that were shot. And the police shot them to death. It was-- it must have been better when they were shot then, then they would get killed instantly anyway. 

But somehow, at the last minute, I decided to lower myself into the next house, which was one flight lower, and get into, into that building. And I was there for a little while. And I-- there was nobody there. The building was completely, completely empty. 

I also noticed there was food-- passover food that was due to Passover time. And then I heard steps. And there was soldiers coming up. And there was German soldiers. Two of them. They walk up and they saw me, and they told me to raise my hands, and I should go down where the rest of the people are lined up. 

And I went there, raise my hand, of course, and I stood in the line. And they we're asking for jewelry. The Germans, they said, you're a Jew. You must have jewelry. Whoever didn't have jewelry received-- uh, they were beating and, and doing very bad things. 

So everybody had to give their jewelry out and throw it down. And then we-- I was brought into the place, which is not far. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long have you been hiding in that house? 

SUBJECT: In that house, uh, uh, it wasn't too long. It was a matter of, uh, of uh, perhaps an hour. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, in the first one with that was put on fire. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 3: It's only an hour. 

SUBJECT: That's about an hour. No more than an hour. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you have any jewelry to throw down? 

SUBJECT: I didn't have any jewelry, as a matter of fact. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did they beat you? 

SUBJECT: No, they did not beat me. I somehow, they, they-- it seems that they did not look at everybody. They just at random picked out. Uh, I was lucky. They didn't pick me up, because there were so many people in the line. So they couldn't possibly ask everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So where were you during the uprising? 

SUBJECT: During the uprising, I mean, this was the time during the uprising. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just during this hour? 

SUBJECT: Well, not exactly. It-- the uprising took place, I said, within eh, eh, eh, several-- let's see-- weeks. So actually it, it took place-- it, it isn't that I-- I just hid myself. I went-- you know, as I say, when we were with my parent-- when I was with my parents, we were in a house. And we went-- I was with my mother and fa-- and sister and brother for some time. I don't know exactly how long, but after they took away my father, I was with them for a little while. Till they-- they were taken away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was already in during the uprising? 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- what did you hear, see? 

SUBJECT: Well, the uprising-- uh, during the night, we heard uh, uh, shooting, and the like uh, artillery, artillery from, from artillery guns. Such a heavy shooting were going on. Uh, it looked the day, I saw, with my own eyes, I looked out the window and I saw German soldiers marching one by one, slowly, and looking in the, in the ruins, because there were all ruins around, and searching for the uh, uh, Jewish, uh, uh, boys that were fighting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know it was an uprising? 

SUBJECT: How did I know it was an uprising? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know who was fighting? 

SUBJECT: Well, I tell you-- the reason-- how did I know? Because I was told. I had a friend of mine that was asking me if I would, wanted to join, as a matter of fact. And I wasn't-- eh, I was too young and I wasn't, I couldn't make my decision to, to join the uprising. 

It was the uprising that was going on. I was very-- I, it was noticeable because there were, the Germans were fighting. They were fighting with, with guns against somebody. Eh, it must have been somebody that was uh, giving them a resistance. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did people talk to each other about the Jewish Revo-- about did the families, speaking of families about it, Jews are fighting now? 

SUBJECT: Well, eh, let me say this, that perhaps the-- it was-- you see, when I was in the ghetto, it was the beginning of that, of the Revo-- of the uprising. Therefore, I don't know much. Because the uprising was going on after I left for, for months. 

So therefore, I don't know much about-- I didn't hear too much about the uprising. I heard about the uprising when I was in concentration camp more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you hear? 

SUBJECT: Well, that the Jews are putting up a, uh, fight with the Germans. And they're fighting severely. That's all we heard. We didn't hear too much, but uh, that's about all we heard. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you feel badly you hadn't joined? 

SUBJECT: Well, at that time, I didn't have any feeling where I-- you know, it was a matter of my own, uh, uh, life to save. I-- I didn't think about it, of joining or not. 

I wasn't-- let me put it that I wasn't perhaps the type uh, uh, you know, you have to be uh, a type to fight. Perhaps I wasn't uh, uh, made for it. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Mm-hmm. Perhaps you'd be better off if you hid from them. 

SUBJECT: Well, I really don't know uh, to answer to this question. But as I say again, it was so-- everything was so quick. Decisions. You couldn't take too long to make a decision. You have to make it at the spur of a moment, the decision. 

Therefore, when you ask me this, it's hard to say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you know, from what you to-- tell us, seems to me that Jews kept going to the trains freely. But then they began hiding. 

SUBJECT: Well. 

INTERVIEWER 1: in bunkers. 

SUBJECT: Well, let me, let me-- you see, there were some that were going-- because, since they were calling out to Jews, and tell-- and told them that their house will be put a fire, naturally some of the Jews were freely, they rather go out before they, they burn to death. So, uh, they went freely. But some of them were not giving up. They were hiding and-- and-- and they really died, uh, burned, too. They are, they are really uh, uh, uh-- they were-- they died uh, I mean, terribly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But I wonder this is a different Warsaw ghetto. For years it was starvation and deportation-- 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --without people hiding. 

SUBJECT: Well. Before the ghetto. You mean-- you're talking about before the ghetto? 

INTERVIEWER 1: During the ghetto. In the beginning-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, oh, dur-- in the beginning, there was no one actually. People were not hiding. It was no question, no, no no. I was describing-- I was describing about that uh, during the uprising, people were hiding. That was already the remainder of the Jews. There was that little Jews that were left. They are the ones that uh, eh, were told that, that-- that they will, there's-- there's, sooner or later-- if they will be caught, they are being brought to Treblinka to-- to-- to die, to be exterminated. 

Therefore, they were trying to hide themselves. That was-- eh, because in the beginning, people didn't believe yet, uh, didn't believe that this is true. It was only at the very end where some escaped and were told about the truth of it. Then, the uprising started. Then people became-- they tried to save their lives in many different ways. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were sent to-- 

SUBJECT: And then, of course, as-- I was sent to uh-- the, my first trip was Treblinka. That was a suburb of Lublin. I was there for a little while. I was young, and uh, after uh-- life was there terrible. Because they were using you as uh, just to, uh, make you, uh, slowly start, you know-- slowly to, to make, to-- to-- to put you uh, to death, in other words. Instead of-- of killing you immediate, instantly, slowly they-- they-- they-- they-- they wanted you that you die. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And after Treblinka? 

SUBJECT: Eh, I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: After Treblinka? 

SUBJECT: Well, eh, after six months being in Treblinka, they, uh, selected me, uh, to go to another concentration camp. As a matter of fact, that they were looking for uh, well, uh, well, people, well physically-- eh-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Where did you get the numbers on your arm? 

SUBJECT: That's where I-- the numbers I got after I was taken from-- from Treblinka. Treblinka, we used to carry a number on our neck. 

INTERVIEWER 3: A dog tag? 

SUBJECT: A dog tag. That was in Treblinka. In a, from Treblinka, when we were brought to Auschwitz, that's where I received my number tattoo. And in, from Auschwitz-- which was the main concentration camp-- I was sent to Yavisowitz Yavisowitz was a camp, a labor camp, where they-- some prisoners used to work in the underground, mining coal. And I was working above the ground, in oil works in, in a, big huge, uh, buildings. Build-- they were building huge buildings. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you ever see your family again? 

SUBJECT: No, I did not see. I wish I would. I did not see my family. I, as a matter of fact, lost all my family I only bare the name only the one member in the family that bears the name. I was, I had-- there's nobody has this name. I lost all my family. 

If I would be-- if I were to die in the concentration camp, the name would be completely wiped out. 

INTERVIEWER 3: How many members of your family? 

SUBJECT: Well. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Nobody has your name? 

SUBJECT: That's right. There's no name like this. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Levarek 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 3: There is no other name? 

SUBJECT: No other name. No other name. I looked. I was searching, looking. There's no other name, Levarek I lost everybody. The family, [INAUDIBLE] there were, you know, the family. There were sisters and brothers and-- and-- and from my father's side, there was a brother. He had brothers. And eh Levarek you know how many member-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: No one in Israel? 

SUBJECT: No one. 

INTERVIEWER 3: No one in Europe? No one in the United States? 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you're the-- 

SUBJECT: Only one survivor with the name Levarek 

INTERVIEWER 1: The whole-- 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The whole world. 

SUBJECT: That's right. That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 3: [INAUDIBLE] 

