INTERVIEWER: We'd like to start. If you could first say your name, and where you were born, and when. 

SUBJECT: It's-- my name is-- Bella Schecter Gottesman I was born in Vienna, 19-- August 7th, 1920. 

INTERVIEWER: And can you tell us a little about-- when you were growing up? Where you grew up? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, my parents were married there, and I was born there. But after a while, I think I was a year old or so, they moved to Czernowitz. And there I grew up and spent my youth. 

I went back to Vienna in 1936 to study painting, and I was there, der eichmarsch you know? I was there when Hitler came. Then I returned to Czernowitz, and I stayed there with interruptions. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us-- what did your father do? 

SUBJECT: Well, on my birth certificate, it's written that he was a journalist. I know that he was always writing, but this was not-- he didn't make a living like that. They had a store. My parents were merchants. Especially my mother, actually. She was the one. And he helped her. 

They had store-- they had two stores. My mother had one, my father was by himself. Because he didn't want to be-- he was not really professional in that field. So he wanted to be on his own. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: I have a brother. A younger brother, seven years younger. And he too was with me all the time. And he's here with his family. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us a little bit about what life was like when you were growing up Czernowitz? 

SUBJECT: It was very-- I think it was a very nice life. I had a happy childhood. My parents were very nice people. And we had-- I had friends. We were a little different, in that we were trying to preserve our culture. We were speaking yiddish in a town which was very assimilated, or striving to be assimilated. And my father was what you call a Yiddishist, or a militant Yiddishist. 

He was having fights with everyone. Why do you teach your children Yiddish? And why do you give them Yiddish names? I always had this argument. And my father was very much convinced of the right-- that he was right. And he was very sincere and very dedicated, very honest. And he was a beautiful person. 

My mother went along. She was more a practical person. She was a businesswomen, and everybody said she's a very smart woman. I thought of my father as the smartest man, although he was not so practical as my mother. He was more intellectual type. 

But she was-- it turned out that, in her old age, she wrote a book of memoirs, which was really a sensation. She had a natural talent of telling a story, and she did it. 

She wrote her memoirs here in New York, when she was 81. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were in Austria when the first-- the first time that there was some signs of-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. I was in Vienna when the der einmarsch call it in 1938. It was a political-- you know, kaisers came over. And Schuschnigg, and Seyss-Inquart, the whole thing. 

I was not very involved politically, but I remember the names. He went to Hitler to negotiate perhaps not to go. But it didn't help. Otherwise, they wouldn't agree he would come before us. 

So they agreed invited him to come to Austria. And one day, he was there. I heard it on the radio. I turned on the radio, and I heard the description of how beautiful demonstration-- how the zopfer flattern im Wind, the braids, a romantic description of the [INAUDIBLE]. 

So I called up my aunt. I was living with my aunt, who had a store. I called her up to the store and told her that-- I didn't want to say his name. I said, the caliph is here. The dog. 

And she said, what? So I said, the caliph [INAUDIBLE], the dog of dogs was here. And she still didn't get what I meant. So I ran over to the store and told her that Hitler is-- is here. 

So she closed the store, and they came home. But I was with a Romanian passport, so I stayed a few more weeks, and then I went home. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you then when-- 

SUBJECT: I was 18. 

INTERVIEWER: And what changes did you see while-- after that happened. 

SUBJECT: In one night, I see all the windows with swastikas. Not only the windows, but each little pane-- window pane, like was covered with swastikas. They were very enthusiastic about-- 

I even went back to school where my colleagues, they didn't know that I was Jewish. So I could observe the overjoy that I was very-- I was very disappointed. 

And I even tried to do a little propaganda on my own. I couldn't believe it that civilized people believe in this theory of racism. And so I wrote a few paper-- on paper, I wrote that he's a this and that. I don't remember what I wrote there. But I wrote some bad things about the two. I thought it was the two of them. I went in the street and dropped a few. 

In Vienna, you know, streets are very clean. You cannot drop any papers. But it was a rainy day, and I walked over to another aunt that lived a few states away. On the way, I dropped these papers. And when I came to her house and I told her, she said, oh, maybe-- somebody might have followed you! She was very much afraid. 

SUBJECT: You weren't feeling any fear at that time? 

INTERVIEWER: I didn't think. I didn't think. I had to do something, so I did it. I was not afraid, really. I was young, and I was careful not to be followed. But I had-- I felt that I had to do something. 

SUBJECT: Like a protest. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. More than that. It's more-- it was rather-- to the people I was talking to, the people, what are they doing? But I was naive. It was the beginning. So you we were all naive. We didn't know what-- how people can act, how mean that can be. 

After a few weeks, I left. I went back home. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was it that you left? Was it-- 

SUBJECT: When? 

INTERVIEWER: How did-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I wouldn't stay there. My parents were in Czernowitz. I came there especially to learn art. And I was lucky that I could go home to my parents. My family there, by the way, my uncle was deported to Dachau and was killed, died there. 

But the rest of them escaped. I mean, my aunt and her daughter and son in law came to this country. 

INTERVIEWER: When you came back to Czernowitz, did they-- did people know what was happening? 

SUBJECT: Yes, everybody had-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: You could read it in the newspaper. But, I mean, nobody knew in the beginning what was really going to happen. But everybody knew that it is a bad thing, something unbelievable. But nobody could imagine what it was really going to be. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened when you came back? 

SUBJECT: I was home. Not much. They came to us. It was-- the war started-- in 1939, the Russians made a pact with Hitler. And Hitler took some of Poland and some parts of Romania. I mean, he didn't take these parts. These parts-- because he was allied. The Romanians were allied with the Germans. They didn't really-- they were not involved. 

But the Russians took-- the Russians took-- occupied Bukovina Bessarabia, the province where I come from and part of Poland. And so in 1940, we were occupied by the Russians. 

My father was deported. I experienced the Holocaust before-- a year before it started. Because my father was deported, and he was the best-- this was the greatest shock of my life. He was deported to Siberia, and he never came back. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened he was deported that-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what happened? 

SUBJECT: He was sentenced. There was a trial. We had to store, and-- see, in that time, all the superintendents were spies for the authorities. So and this-- our super was was very much against Russians. And because everybody in Czernowitz was so happy that the Russians came, not the Germans. And some were really happy, because they thought it will be-- they thought it will be paradise. 

They believed in something. Even if they didn't believe in communism, they thought something must be good in it. It's an ideal or something. 

So they received them very well. They danced in the street. They received the tanks. And the super was very angry. And she took advantage. I mean, she took revenge, trying to get back at the Jews. She told the military, I suppose, that-- the fact was that we had a maid, a servant girl, for a long time. 

And we were on business. It so happened with Dr. Loebson Not in business, but my mother did business with Mr. Loebson's grandfather, Mr. Satinger. He had a cotton goods store en gros. And my parents had it in retail. And they were very good friends. My parents were good friends with their customers and with their-- they were good people. 

And that's the sad thing, he was trying to save some of his merchandise. And he asked my mother if he could hide it in our basement. 

And So that what happens. The maid was very-- we were friendly with her. We didn't think it was something terrible. And she bought some [INAUDIBLE] of merchandise into our basement. Which was his, not ours. 

And she's-- this maid told a super. And she had something on us. And one night, they came and arrested my father. We didn't know why, but-- 

INTERVIEWER: In the middle of the night? 

SUBJECT: Yes. At 12 or 1 o'clock at night, you hear these boots and the knock to the door. And we came in. And they looked, searched everywhere. And whatever they found where was they thought it was-- and packed some-- two big trunks. 

And my father had put on his coat and carried them. They were very heavy, but we put in everything. And I followed him at night, and they saw how he stopped. He took off his coat. Then he took off his jacket. It was very difficult. 

But these three milizionar, they didn't help him. He had to carry it all the way to the-- you know, the seat of the police. Milizie, you called it. 

INTERVIEWER: They let you go with him? 

SUBJECT: They didn't let me. I followed him. They didn't know that I was following. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you feeling while you were following? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was terribly anxious. My father was being arrested in the middle of the night. And seeing this, I couldn't bear it anymore. I ran back and cried very much. I saw how heavy it was for him, how he, it was torture for him. It was enough. And then my mother fell sick worrying. You know, she had with her heart something. Myocardei, that is heart muscle inflamation. 

And she was in bed all the time. In fact, because she was afraid-- my father was not much of a businessman. It was she who was a business-- if somebody should be tried, it was my mother. Because she was-- he was helping her, but he was not really a businessman. 

So she fell sick of fear or what. And I had-- suddenly was there to do all these negotiations and diplomatic relationships. Following the milizia gang, going to the milizia to the lawyers to-- spying on them, they spying on me. It was-- it was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: You were trying to get your father released? Is that-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, sure. I went to the ... to the prosecutor and told him that my father was innocent. I didn't know. My Ukrainian-- I didn't know Russian, but I spoke Ukrainian. I told him he's nevinovat. He's innocent. And he looked at me. I told him, my father is innocent. You cannot-- 

OK. He listened. He let me go. Anyway, my father was really very innocent. Because there was nothing substantial against him. And he was freed at a first trial. He was really freed. 

The caring, good friends. Everybody who was there carried him out of the box. He was very much liked. 

INTERVIEWER: You were very excited. 

SUBJECT: He was liked by the people. And everybody was very happy that he was freed. And for 20 days, he was home. But the prosecutor wouldn't let him go. He had to make recourse. They call it-- 

INTERVIEWER: Appeal. 

SUBJECT: Appeal, yes. So my father said, look, if I have to go back, I'd rather go in the water. You know, to kill myself. I can't go back. 

But the-- nobody really advised him what to do. Everybody was afraid, and nobody-- if they knew that the whole thing would last such a short time, that only-- not even a year and the war would start, we would do something. 

But everybody was paralyzed of fear. And nobody really encouraged him to go in hiding. He could have, and he didn't. So he went-- there was another trial, and he was tried. He was convicted. And they find-- you want to know all this about the trial? Is this important? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, it is. 

SUBJECT: Well, see the first trial is a man ... the prosecutor didn't come to the trial, because he saw that the judge didn't feel there was anything-- any reason to prosecute him. 

So he didn't come. So he-- so he have a reason to make an appeal. If he didn't come to the trial, he had a reason to make an appeal. So that's what happened. 

But the second trial, there was another judge, another prosecutor. And this prosecutor asked for five years. But there were-- besides the judge, with two beisitzen. how would you call it? Not jurist, but some kind of a jurist. Two people were assisting and sharing the-- 

We call it beisitzers. Something else. There were two people from Czernowitz, local people. One was a lawyer, and the other was a girl from the factory. The three of them, the professional judge. And the two people had to give the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Like a tribunal. 

SUBJECT: Yes. But when they saw my father, these two tribunal people from Czernowitz didn't want to sign-- they said, he is innocent. He's not what you-- they felt he doesn't deserve to be sentenced. And it took a long time, some four hours. They were in a room. 

The man was fainting. It was one of them. And meanwhile, all these people waiting for the result stood in the hall. And also, the prosecutor. The prosecutor was lighting a cigarette and was looking for a match. And one of the men from the crowd came over to him and give him a match, gave him a match. 

And he said, do you know who you were trying to prosecute? And he spoke about my father. You know, he knew him well. So he said, why didn't you tell me before that? The prosecutor says, why didn't you come to me before? He was a nice man. 

So he said, look, if I came to you, you would think that I want to bribe you. Anyway, what happened there is that these two people didn't want to sign the five years. They made a separate vote in two years. Which is not according to the law. He had to get five years. 

So the judge was for five years. They, for two years. And since it was not a lawful sentence, the prosecutor was supposed to make an appeal. But this prosecutor didn't make an appeal, because he heard what it was all about. And in fact, he helped us after that. About the apartment, we shouldn't-- you know, he was a very nice man. 

But my father never came back anyway. Two years or five years, didn't matter. Because the war broke out, and he worked in Siberian woods. We heard the story how he died. It was a very sad story. Somebody came back. That's what-- about my father. 

And this happened in 1940-- September 1940, he was arrested. And I was married in '41, February. And went away from Czernowitz to-- my husband was a doctor. And young doctors were sent to the villages, in the Bukovina. They could choose which village they wanted. And he chose the village where the family comes from Zunyacha. 

It was a village on the River Dnister On the border between Poland and Romania. 

So we lived there, from February to July, when the war broke out. A few months. And my mother and my little brother were-- it was vacation, in the summer. And suddenly, everybody started to run. We heard at night tanks and busses. 

And we didn't know what happened. Only at night, some rattling all night. And then it started during the day. What happened is that the Russians ran away. They didn't fight. They retreated, I would say. Everybody run away. 

And then the civilians started to run, too. And we met some people from Czernowitz. Whatever means they had, they run. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that like for you when you first heard the noise that night? Were you afraid? 

SUBJECT: Well, no ... what it's like? It's like you're in shock. In a state of shock. And you're trying to save yourself. You become like an animal. How do I hide, or how do I save myself? You don't stay there and think. You are not even afraid. Because all you do is you mobilize all your faculties to do what's good for you. 

And what we did, we had a horse and wagon. We took all of our luggage, and we run too, with all the people. But we and another family, the doctor-- the neighbor, neighboring village, Dr. Rau. The two families, we went together. But on the route, one of the trucks-- or was it a tank? I don't know. Turned over our wagon into the ditch. And so we had to wait until everybody left. And we remained. Left. We were left over. 

Somebody had to come from the nearest village to fix our wagon. And when we were ready to go, we were all alone. We came to the little town of Korolowka. It was in Poland. On the other side of the Dniester. It was Poland. You didn't have to go far. 

And we stayed overnight in this village. And Jewish people came over to us and, don't go, don't go with the Russians. Because it's terribly-- it's very bad there. Stay here. They didn't try to run away. But we went anyway. We went, and we reached the town of [INAUDIBLE]. 

And there, again, it was late already, because everybody left. 

INTERVIEWER: When the Jewish people, they said to you, you shouldn't go to Russia-- 

SUBJECT: No, because it was very bad. They heard it was very bad in Russia. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was your thinking? 

SUBJECT: We didn't listen. We wanted-- it was-- how bad could it be? Not as bad as Hitler. I mean, every normal person would think that in Russia it's not as bad as in Germany at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: So you knew a lot. What did you know at that time about what it would-- what was in Germany? 

SUBJECT: We knew about the laws in Nuremberg. You know, laws against the Jews. Theoretically, we knew what it was. The Holocaust didn't start yet. I mean, they didn't really start the extermination of Jews at that time. 

Maybe there were concentration camps. I don't know. It was in the beginning. So nobody really knew what-- but we knew that theoretically, that they were very bad. So we were trying to run. And we came to [INAUDIBLE] there. We stayed in an empty house for the day. And my mother was running out getting some food. 

And walking from door to door. And she met somebody by the name of Gottesman turned out to be relative of ours. He was the head of the community in [INAUDIBLE]. And he told us to go back. Because if the Germans-- the Germans were obviously to come any day, any minute. And we will be the first ones to hang. Because we-- we're running with the Russians. 

OK. And anyway, it was too late to run. We couldn't anymore. They would reach us. So we started back. And we were all along the two wagons-- ours and Dr. [INAUDIBLE] and back. Empty fields and empty streets. 

And here and there we saw that man in the street, soldier. A Russian soldier, for some reason. I don't know what happened, because there was no shooting there. The Russians ran. They didn't have any fights there. 

Anyway, we came-- it was very-- it was very scary to be alone on the roads. You didn't know who looked at you through the windows. The villages, you know. The peasants. You didn't know. But you felt there was-- it was very scary. 

Anyway, we came-- it was late afternoon. It was getting dark. And we suddenly saw what-- we thought it was the army. It looked to us like a big army. And we thought it was the German army coming. 

But it really was a forest. [INAUDIBLE] same village when we left before. It was the forest [INAUDIBLE] around woods. And so we were very scared. And we looked for the first house, farmer's house, to go in. 

So we walked into the first house of the farm. And we were lucky, it was a Jewish farmer. He took us in and this family was very nice to us. They put us in their hangar. Stable or hangar with horses. 

And we were some-- we, the four of us. And then the other wagon was Dr. [INAUDIBLE] and his wife, and his five-year-old daughter, and the old man, her father. And the two-- he was an assistant and his bride. So there were 10 people we were with. 

And this man put us in his hangar there and kept us for two weeks, I think. He fed us. Very nice. Poor people, but very nice. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were going and seeing-- did you all think that it was an army coming toward you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We all had the feeling that there's an army. You know, it was getting dark. And it looked suddenly so darker than the surrounding. It looked like a marching army. 

Anyway, we stayed there for two weeks. And the army really started coming. It was first the Hungarians came. But anyway, we started to go back. We thought it was enough, and we-- his name was-- I forgot his name. The farmer. And he said, no, I will take you. You won't find your way. I will help you. 

And he, riding on a horse, we with all of our wagons-- by the way, our horse was changed already. When was it changed? Yeah, the Russians, when they met us. Going back, we still met a Russian army. And they changed our horse. And asked us to stop. They said, where are you going? Back to the Germans? 

And we said, yes, we tried to go with you, but we didn't have a propiska an authorization. So they sent us back. We had a good reason. And they took our horse, and they gave us an old, sick horse. And now, going again, we met the army, the German army. 

It was the Hungarians. And they stopped us, and they searched our carriages. And as we were searched, one of the soldiers approached us and spoke to us in Yiddish. [YIDDISH] Hungarian Yiddish. It means, don't be afraid. It was amazing. 

You know, in the beginning, they took Jewish Hungarians to the army. But the few words don't be afraid. They just search for munitions, they said. Anyway, they let us go. And until we reached the town of Zalishchyky, which was the border town from Poland to Romania. 

There, a thick rain started. And we looked up some relatives that we had in Zalishchyky. My mother stayed there with a wagon. And see, on the other side of the river was our village, Zunyacha, where my husband worked and where we lived. And we wanted to go back and see what's going on there. 

But the bridge was broken in three. They sprang the bridge before they left. So my mother stayed here with a wagon. And my husband, I and my little bother climbed over the bridge. Dniester was a big river. It was a very big river. But we climbed over, and we came over to Zunyacha, to our house. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you swim? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. He climbed over the broken bridge. 

INTERVIEWER: The broken bridge. 

SUBJECT: You know, somehow, he made it. And we went back to our house. And as soon as we came there, we saw things are missing. But it didn't matter. Being there a few minutes, suddenly we see a Romanian soldier and the man from the village approaching the house. 

And my husband right away is going in hiding, to the bathroom. Which was outdoors, you know. In the village, they had bathrooms outdoors. And my brother was trying to jump through the window and was caught, brought in. So the Romanian soldier, first of all, he asked me where my husband is. I said, he went to patient. 

Why did my brother-- why did you run away? And my brother said, well, he was afraid. He told the truth. He was afraid. 

And then he was looking. He said, where's the radio? And I said, the Russians took it. Which is true, they searched, and they took away our radio. 

And he says, why didn't they take you? And I said, I really-- I wanted to go, really. I'm sorry that they didn't take me. So he took out this revolver and was trying-- wanted to shoot me. 

So this man accompanying him said something in his ear, and he put the revolver in his-- I don't know what he told him. Till now, I don't-- know how saved me. Why he let me live, I don't know. But this is what happened. 

INTERVIEWER: It sounds like you were speaking very courageously. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I was fresh. I just didn't think, you know? I had to answer. We were like drunk with all kinds of emotions. Anger and-- anger, mostly. And we didn't care much, you know? And we didn't know much about death yet. 

We didn't know anything. I mean, we knew theoretically, but we didn't experience it yet. So we were courageous, I guess. 

So he left. He took some watches that we had and he left. Anyway, what he was coming to tell us is that all men have to be next day 10 o'clock at the townhouse, the town hall. Town hall. 

They'll be told something, that they're going to leave together with a bundle of 10 kilo, something that you will be carrying. And we will leave town and some place. So the men have to be tomorrow at 10 o'clock around the town hall. 

So already, we saw that something is going to happen to us. And we went to sleep. My mother was there, with all our things. And we were here. I was very-- I was very desperate, and I was praying to God that the world should go under. The world should-- I was really praying with all my heart. Now the world should-- something should happen. All the world should perish. 

And what happened was a great rain came. And the thunder, and the storm, and the-- what do you call it, lightening. Let us say, Now the world is really ending! And I went to sleep very relaxed that the world is ending. 

INTERVIEWER: So your prayer-- it felt like your prayer was answered. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I was very happy. So we all died. And the world didn't end. But what happened was the River Dnister was inundated. It was full, overflowing. And we were cut off from the other side. From my mother and Dr. Rau. 

And for a week or so, we were separated. And we didn't know what happened there, and they didn't know about us. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think you chose that prayer that the whole world would end? 

SUBJECT: It was the most comfortable. Why? I mean, dying way would be very easy. Instead of hardship and being selected to die? It would be better we all die together. 

I didn't particularly think of why-- how it would be to die. But just, everybody dies together is very-- 

INTERVIEWER: Even the Germans too. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. [INAUDIBLE] I didn't really think of it. It was a feeling. And when-- well, they didn't send us away because of this river overflowing. 

It took two weeks or so until things settled down. The river went-- the waters went back, and my mother, and her wagon, and her doctor all came. What they went through, they went really-- they started to go over river-- over the river. 

Not with a bridge, but you call it-- you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Pontoons? Raft? 

SUBJECT: Raft, yes. Somebody bought them over with-- not a raft, a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Boat? 

SUBJECT: No. It's something that you can wagon-- you bring a wagon over on the other side. 

INTERVIEWER: Ferry. 

SUBJECT: Ferry. Yes, yes. It was a ferry. And they came over, and they traveled to villages. The peasants were trying to kill them. A very dramatic road they had. 

They were put to death. I mean, supposedly put to death, with their faces in the mud. And the old man, Dr. Rau's Father-in-law, was saying his prayers. And the little girl was crying, Felicika. 

And he said, Felicika, cry. You're going to die. But they didn't kill them. They just dropped their wagons and let him go. 

And another village, when the little girl wanted a little milk, all the peasants were around, you know, looking at them. Because all the Jews were killed at that time from these villages. Some by the peasants themselves, and some by the Army, the Romanian army. But they didn't know, and we didn't know. 

So here, they saw some Jews. And it was like, coming from the other world. And in one of these villages, when this little girl wanted milk, and my mother was trying to get-- talking to one of the women. Said, look, bring a little milk to your mother yourself. Have pity on this little girl. 

And she bought her really-- this woman brought her a little milk. So one of the men hit her hand and spilled the milk. 

My mother was quite a woman. She had personality. So she gave him a speech. You're not ashamed? What kind of people are you? And then she told him, my son-in-law is your doctor. He heals you, and you are so-- she gave him quite a speech. 

So one of the-- I know what was there, that she couldn't drive the horse anymore. Because it was mud. It was very difficult for her. She was not used to drive a horse in the mud. And she was trying to get someone to help her. 

So one of the men, the peasants, came out of the crowd and said, yes, your son-in-law really helped me, and I'm going to help you. 

And I told him, the man said, what are you doing? They're going to kill you! But he didn't listen to them, and he helped my mother. It was an uphill and mud-- it was a very difficult road. And he helped her with the carriage. 

And after a while, some of his friends came over to him and told him something. Look, [INAUDIBLE], take everything, and then we'll kill them. I don't know what happened to this man. Maybe they killed him, really. But he helped my mother, and he brought them to the village of the Zunyacha, where we were. 

And when I saw Dr. Rau, I didn't recognize him. In these two weeks, what he went through, it's like, when he came down with his wife, and I said, where is my mother? Don't talk to me. Don't talk to me. He was like out of his mind, you know? 

He was so scared. He didn't really want to come into the house. I'll talk-- I'll tell you everything. So he told me that my mother was on the hill there with a wagon. And my mother was there. I pick her up and-- and then we were together. What happened then-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did that affect you to hear him talking that way? What did you think? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's difficult to describe. We were all very excited and very-- I can't remember the way-- the impression that he looked at me. He was like a man out of his mind. And it was scary to see him, such a normal person, suddenly-- I had a feeling that he was gray over his head-- something-- I had a feeling that it was very difficult to look at him. Their eyes were popped out, you know? 

It was scary. I didn't know-- I didn't know, that time, what they went through. They told us then, and-- my mother wrote a book, by the way, and she relates the whole story again. 

But here we were, together, and the whole village was told that they are going to farm over the winter. The farm was Jozefufka. And there, they are going to spend the winter. This is what they were told. And they should take everything that they can and. 

INTERVIEWER: The Jews only? 

SUBJECT: Only the Jews, sure. But we told the man-- their leader of the army-- it wasn't the army. It was the counter police. I think it was some kind of army. Gendarmes, you call them in Romania. That we don't belong here. We came here only-- the Russians sent us here for a job. And we want to go back to Czernowitz, where we come from. 

Somehow, we felt that a big city is an easier way to survive. And he said, OK. And we gave him-- we told him, you know, Romania with bacsisi. You know, could get away with many things. And we told him, look, we have some nice new furniture. Take our furniture. And we gave him some other things. And he gave us an authorization to leave. 

But we stayed on for awhile, and we-- while the people were leaving, we still were there. The people were taking their-- everything. We-- our-- where we lived was in the house of a relative of ours, Mr. Lindbaugh. His wife just gave birth. 

When the war broke out-- I forgot to tell you this-- Mr. Lind, she had just had a baby. And there was a bris, you know, a circumcision. And I was at a party-- everybody was at this play, at the party. Suddenly, we had airplanes over our heads, German airplanes. And everybody ran out of the house. And I saw these big leaves growing in the field. So I picked a big leaf that-- you know, these very big leaves. And I was camouflaging under the leaf. 

My husband was mobilized to the Zastavna a nearby town. This was before that, excuse me. I am-- I go back. Because I want to tell you about the people around us. 

INTERVIEWER: About Lindbaugh 

SUBJECT: Yes. And this was a little baby. And his mother, an old lady who taught me how to cook-- I didn't know how cook. She was a very nice woman. And my husband was called away to the army. Not really to the army, but to-- he was mobilized to check on-- I don't know. He was mobilized to a near city. And I was with my mother, and my brother, and these people. 

And my little brother, he was 12 years old at the time, fell sick. He got high fever. And so I had to go to Dr. Rauf, which was in the second village. And the man who took care of our horse didn't want to die. He was afraid. 

And so I-- I took the horse and carriage for the first time in my life, and I drove to Dr. Rauf and tell him to come. But he didn't want to come. He gave me some [INAUDIBLE], you know. For the stomach, remedy. 

In fact, it seemed that it was fear. That it was nothing else but fear. He was afraid. He was scared, so he got a very high fever, my brother. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were you feeling when you were arriving at the counter? 

SUBJECT: I was only worried for him. I was worried that he had a high fever. And so I-- I came back. And the Lindbaums. 

INTERVIEWER: You're talking about when everybody is being deported? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Now the Lindbaums, this family-- this old lady, and the younger woman with the baby, and the man. And he had also a-- a sister-in-law. Her husband died, also Lindbaum. 

She had a boy of nine. And they all packed their-- some had wagons. Some didn't have wagons, so they walked. 

And while I'm talking about the Lindbaum, because she-- when she was ready to go, she went back to take the picture of her husband. Her husband's picture on the wall to take with him, because he was supposed to stay on the farm over the winter. 

So they take him to this farm, Jozefufka. What really happened. And next day, they were driven-- they were chased over the river and shot. All the people. But we didn't know that. We stayed on, like nothing happened for a couple of days, until the Sergeant, who gave us the authorization, he said, you go away, because-- and he told us what happened. You go right away, because I will be responsible, because I let you live. And he told us that the Jews were killed. 

So we hired a-- we didn't have the horse anymore, and the wagon, and we hired a peasant who drove us to the Zastavna, the nearest town. And we get there. All the Jewish man were in the camp. They were-- to-- camp. It was a school building where they kept the men, only the men. And the women were home. We brought them food. 

And again, we started-- my mother was-- to be honest, she was the driving force. She was the one who said, we don't belong to this community, we had to go back to Czernowitz. And here again, she started. Let's start something. Let's go to the prefect of police. We don't belong here. Let them give us an authorization. Well, we want to go to Czernowitz. 

And in this town, there were also some 10 doctors from Czernowitz with their families. And they all started this action, to go back. Finally, we succeeded, and the police while we were there, we had these stories. Because the two men came back from the river and they told us. One's name was Carmen, and one was a young boy shoemaker. 

They came back. What happened in their village, they were driven to the-- and families were tied with a barbed wire, families together, and shot. Chased into the river. And this is how they were killed. The two of them. First, there was more, and then there remained only two. 

Stayed alive. They knew how to swim. And they came to the Zastavna to tell the authorities what happened. They didn't think that it was something legal. That it was something done by authorities. They thought it was something that was illegal. And they came to complain. 

So the police said, oh, such bad-- come, let's go. And they took him back. But these people survived anyway. And they came back, and they were in hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: And they told you about what was happening over there? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they told the Jews, everybody, what happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you believe-- what did you think-- 

SUBJECT: Well, sure you believed them. You have-- well, anyway, these were two who survived so far. And I think even one of them came-- aha, he got an infectious disease, and he went to the hospital in Czernowitz. He was sent to Czernowitz. Because either he had typhus or something, one of them. I don't remember the young man or the-- Mr. Carmen 

Anyway, this is what-- the greeting that we got from-- it was not our village. It was a neighboring village, where the two told. This was they did in the villages, all of them. 

Some of the villages, the peasants did it themselves. And some of the villages, the authorities did. So in Bukovina Bessarabia, they-- the Jews of the villages were killed like that. Not in Romania. I don't think-- Moldova, Bessarabia-- I mean, Moldova, Montane, other provinces. Only Bukovina Bessarabia because they were occupied by the Russians. And they took revenge. 

They said, all of them are communists. You know? The Jews are-- this is what they said. And the ones from the town were transported to Transnistria, over the Dnister to the Ukraine. It was called Trans-- a new name, Transnistria, over Dnister, the River Dnister, which was also the border from Romania to Poland to Ukraine to Russia. 

They deported the Jews from the towns and cities, from these two provinces. And most of them died in Transnistria. Yeah, we went back to Czernowitz with an escort, police escort. Over there, sergeant sent by the police to watch us, supposedly. But what really happened, he had a letter to the Czernowitz police authorities that we were-- there was something something, that they had to put in jail. We were put-- and we were put into jail-- in jail in Czernowitz. 

It was really-- jail was kind of a camp, where they had-- like a concentration camp, they call it. It was not a concentration-- it was like a peasant camp for-- people were arrested. I don't know what kind of-- a lot of peasants were there. Maybe it was a jail. 

Anyway, we were kept there. A lot of the doctors' families with us. One of the-- she was a doctor herself, Dr. Glanz. She was ninth month pregnant, very afraid she's going to give birth there. 

But we got in touch with-- with the Jews family, our families. And they would a little help. You know, money, that took us out. And the same-- they made a ghetto in Czernowitz. So we all went to the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: When was this? 

SUBJECT: This was in 1941. October, or something like that. November, October-- Autumn. We went to our house. And it so happened that our house was in the ghetto. And many of our friends came to live at the house. 

But after a while, our ghetto was narrowed, and we had to go to other people's houses. We went on a-- an attic. We lived. 

INTERVIEWER: It was narrowed because people were deported? 

SUBJECT: No, they just narrowed the space. And then they started deportation. First, they narrowed it into a ghetto, and then they started out with-- everybody who they didn't need was deported. 

If you had an authorization to stay, you could stay. Some of the people-- some of the professions were kept, let's say. But some went voluntarily. They wanted to start a new life. 

Like in our family, we had this man with his two sons. He was a roofer, worked with tin, with metal. And he was not a rich man, certainly, but he hoped to start a new life. He got an authorization. He tore the authorization, and he went with the other Jews to Transnistria. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did he think-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, he voluntarily went. You know you see people can be so naive, what can be bad? We'll start a new life in the Ukraine. They'll be resettled. That's what they were told. They'd be resettled. 

He never came back. His sons came back, though. We got-- we didn't get an authorization. But somebody else in our family also Dr. Gottesman a different first name. His name was Leo Gottesman. My husband was Jonas Gottesman. 

So we fixed their first name. He got two or three authorizations. This other Gottesman. So we-- with a little-- again, a little Bacsis fixed it. And we stayed. We remained in Czernowitz. 

My father's-- my husband's father was deported though. He was in the hospital. That took him from the hospital, and he was shot by the Germans. 

In Transnistria, in some area, the Germans were over the Buch, the other river. Between Dnister and the Buch, I think the Romanians had the authority. But after the Buch, the Germans were there. So some of the people were already sick from the-- the crazy people. From the uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mental patients? 

SUBJECT: Mental patients were sent there to be shot. Orphans or some-- so my father's husband-- my husband's father was shot. His sister and her husband and daughter. They could have stayed. They could have tried to stay. But they wanted to go, because their friends went. They went to Transnistria, and they died there. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in Czernowitz then? 

SUBJECT: We remained there, during Germans. During Russians came back until after the war. We stayed in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: And as long as you were in the ghetto, you were-- did you feel safe? 

SUBJECT: Well, there were all the time transports. And first transports to Romanians to Transnistria. Everybody was hiding. If they didn't find you at home, they didn't send you away. So we were hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you hide? 

SUBJECT: Somewhere in a basement, or in a-- you know, you could have been caught in hiding anyway. But you tried. We were hiding in the hospital. In the hospital-- this was the time that the Russians were hiding in the hospital. Because the Russians transported too. When the Russians came back, they took you from the streets. They wanted to send you to Donbass in the coal mines. 

And when they caught you from the streets to-- so we were hiding. We were hiding when you saw in the newspapers an article-- the Donbass is calling you. When we saw this kind of article, we knew that next days we will look for workers in the mines. So they took everybody from the streets. 

INTERVIEWER: This was the Russians? 

SUBJECT: This was Russia. First, we were hiding from the Germans. And then the Russians came back. And they did the same. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did you stay in the ghetto in Czernowitz? 

SUBJECT: Until the Russians came. 

INTERVIEWER: So for two years? 

SUBJECT: It was from '41 to '44. They had transports all the time. We were hiding in the basement. In fact, it was the basement of our house when we had the last Germans passing by. There was-- I remember. Because we had nothing to do with Germans. We had only the Romanians, because they were allied with the Germans. So they did the job. They did the job for the Germans. 

But one day, I had-- this was the end of the war, almost the end, when the Germans were treated. We were hiding in the basement, and three Germans were passing by. And it was so quiet. Nobody was in the house. Everybody was hiding. In the streets, it was so quiet that you could hear every sound. And one of these three Germans was saying, wir sind voll Juden, voll, voll, voll. still the sound in my ear. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Full of Jews. 

SUBJECT: Full of Jews. How did they know that we were hiding in the houses? There, in the basement. They knew, because they didn't have authority to-- they didn't quite trust the Romanians. 

So they retreated, and we were-- the Russians came back. But you see, the Russians-- the Russians, when they came back, the first thing they did is-- also, the Jews came back from Transnistria. From deportation. The ones who survived came back. 

INTERVIEWER: When you heard the German spoken, did you-- what did you-- 

SUBJECT: Sure, we were scared. We were scared, because we thought maybe they are going to burn something before they leave. They-- logically, they should have done this. They did this everywhere. But somehow, they were allied. They couldn't do it in Romania. It was Romanian territory. They were the friendly territory. They didn't do it. 

They did it everywhere in Ukraine, but not in-- but when we-- Romanians came back, when the Russians came back, and the people from Transnistria, the ones who survived-- by the way, Dr. Laub's parents come back. 

And they took the people-- they took the people who came back from Transnistria in the army to the front. They were starved, sick, half-dead people. And they took him. 

And sure enough, they were killed. So it was his father. His father was taken away and killed. And-- we now have survived. 

So we were lucky. We were always somewhere in between that much, yeah. It's like the Egyptians in the night, you know. Where they just went on the dry Nile the Egyptians. You know the story of-- that's what happened to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- what did you-- did you have any feelings about having been so fortunate? 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you something my Holocaust started when my father was deported. And I was kind of numb all of the way. I didn't think much. We just thought how to survive, how to be-- just feel what happened next. It's like animals who live from day to day. Today is this, tomorrow is this. Jumping and hiding and trying to live. 

My great pain was that I lost my father. And I couldn't feel anything anymore, because nothing mattered to me anymore. I didn't care if I died anymore. Life lost its meaning somehow that time. And I didn't care much. This was my personal feeling during those years. I was very unhappy. 

When was it that you knew that your father wouldn't come back? 

SUBJECT: Well, that time, I didn't quite know. I just knew this was even worse. Because I knew that he was suffering. Frankly, when I heard that he was dead, I was kind of relieved. I couldn't stand the thought of him suffering there. 

Every night, I dreamed of him. How he was walking. When they took him from Czernowitz, he was without-- in some work. I mean, it was autumn. They took him from home without any warm clothes to Siberia, to the real cold. And they were walking through snow. 

This is what I dreamt every night. I dreamt that I went with him. What happened then, a man came back who was with him, Mr. Greenberg-- Mr. Greenberg wrote a letter, a big letter. Smuggled from there and another man who came back told us that for three weeks they worked in the snow and the cold. 

And later on I found out that I was psychic. And I think-- psychic. And I think back that maybe I really-- all these weeks that they walked, I was in the dream. Because every night, I dreamt of it. 

INTERVIEWER: What exactly happened in the dream? 

SUBJECT: I was along with the prisoners. And walking, and walking-- more or less. I cannot tell you. I know only that I dreamt every night. 