CREW: Are we rolling now? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes? 

CREW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: I am Heda. I am born in 1914, shortly-- or I would say after the outbreak of the First World War. I lived, uh, life of, uh, a child whose parents were artists. I was not neglected, but I was not brought up trimmed and well-washed like most of normal citizens. 

I was also pushed around quite a bit. And I'd take a long nap and see myself when I was five years old, standing in a fountain in Dachau, where I cut my foot very badly on a glass. I don't remember Dachau. I only know that, when much later, after the Second World War, I was in the neighborhood of Dachau, that I could not bring myself to look, like most of the American tourists gladly did, at the gas chambers, the torture instruments, and what else was there. 

My husband told me afterwards, and he took pictures. And I could look at them. Of course, I had seen it already in the publications. When I was five years old, we lived in Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you were not born in Dachau? 

SUBJECT: My-- my father was already dead. Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were not born in Dachau? 

SUBJECT: No, I was born in Munich, which is very nearby. My father died when I was three years old. My mother and I lived in Dachau. 

My mother was a very liberal woman. Had many, many friends, many visitors. And in 1919, there was the Kapp Putsch. That was the first raising of the Nazis, I would say. 

And I always say, jokingly, that I was one of the first victims of it, because my mother was arrested and put into prison, so to speak, because of communistic tendencies. The lawyer who defended her later on claimed that there were not only communistic books in my mother's library, but also Chinese ones. And she is most certainly not a Chinese. But that was only a story that I got told. I remember the prison in which I was put. And it, of course, was not made for five-year-olds. 

At that time, the family of my father, who was German and, uh, very-- must have been very anti-Jewish-- I didn't know that I was Jewish on my mother's side-- got custody of me. And I was pushed around quite a bit with foster families and orphanage schools until finally my mother could get me back when I was eight. Then the period with my mother was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the time in prison? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was-- I think I was for 15 days in prison. I remember the prison cell. I remember the living conditions there. I remember that we got some toothbrushes brought through the window. I still see them on the little, uh-- on the little fenced-in window. 

Eventually, all the-- I don't know how long my mother was in prison, because I was taken away from her. And she couldn't see me for three years. That was when the kind of, uh, defense-- the-- the lawyer came in. 

I would go from here on right to Berlin, which is the place where I lived longest as a child. I lived for four years there. And I must have come to Berlin around 1927, '28. I really cannot fix the date completely. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Heda, before that, you were back, uh-- back in Austria? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I was back and-- I was brought back and forth. My mother didn't have much money. And whenever the money gave out, I was shipped to my grandparents who were not very happy to see me. 

That was to Vienna. I was by that time probably also not very easy. My grandmother was very sick. My grandfather spent most of his time outside of the house. He saw some patients in the apartment in which they lived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was-- he was a physician? 

SUBJECT: He was a physician and a hofrat, like all of his family, was kind of aristocratic. Either they had the Von title, or they were hofrat, that is, some kind of minister to the court. They were geheimrat, for which I also don't know the proper translation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the family was of Jewish origin? 

SUBJECT: That I only found out later, because my mother kept it secret that she was of Jewish origin. When she was asked why she was so black-haired and dark-skinned-- she had big brown eyes and black hair and really olive-colored skin. She looked very much-- we look very much alike on pictures, but she was completely different coloring. 

She said that there must have been some kind of Spanish, um, misshape in her makeup. I later on-- but that was only after the Second World War-- found out that my grandparents were Jewish. As a matter of fact, there were Sephardic Jews. 

And to survive the, uh-- and to survive, they had to convert to Catholicism and try to get some kind of positions, uh, at the court. It was always easiest for Jews to become doctors. And so their being doctors, being so desired, that they didn't have to fear persecution. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like in Vienna for a girl of 10? How did you spend the day? What did you do on a weekend? Did you have friends? Did you go to school? 

SUBJECT: I went to school in Vienna. As a matter of fact, I went to four or five schools in Vienna. And since I just came from the north of Germany when I first came to Vienna, people didn't understand me because I spoke, uh, a kind of North German dialect. I didn't really speak-- speak Plattdeutsch, which was spoken in Worpswede, where I was for a few years. 

But I was a strange critter, and the people made fun of me. And my life had so little similarities with-- with the life of the other girls with whom I went to school that I was an outcast. And I felt an outcast and made the best out of it. [LAUGHING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- yes-- you made the best-- the best out of it? 

SUBJECT: I made the best out of it. [LAUGHING] I really had to grin because the cameraman was grinning. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. What was their life like? What was a girl in Austria-- what-- 

SUBJECT: I was very lonely, because to be together with a sick grandmother was not very much fun. I roamed the streets for a while. I tried to get as much fun-- I had one girlfriend who also was an outcast. And it comes now to my mind that she was Jewish. With-- with that girl, I did all kind of pranks, and we not always behaved as we were supposed to behave. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one? 

SUBJECT: No. Oh, we might have stolen apples or things like that. Frightful, awful crimes in the eyes of my grandmother. In school, I wasn't too good, either. But that was always because between Austria and Germany, it was a happy year of difference when the school year began. 

So I was either too much in advance or too far back to really be interested. Can I go now to Berlin from here? Or do you have any other questions? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, I would like to hear more about Austria, about, uh, the-- did the family-- what was the social life of the family? Who were the friends of the family? 

SUBJECT: There was very little social life. As I said, my grandmother was sick. She had cancer of the nose, and her nose was constantly running. So I think she was very conscious of that. The food was, of course, much too good, and I was very fat. 

Grandfather came home to eat or to see patients and then went again. In the evening, he was also doctor in the theaters and in the schools. He was away. 

My grandmother had one radio that-- so I listened quite a bit to radio. She was very sentimental, and we didn't get along very-- too well. There was first a very old maid that had been with the family. I don't know for how long. That was at my first time that I was there. 

The second time I was there, the maid that was with my mother in my earliest childhood, as she was also in Dachau, came with me there. And this maid was, for me, a kind of hold. She was the mother for me, much more than my mother, who didn't like children and wanted them to be very intelligent, very beautiful, very graceful-- superlative. I couldn't be that. Nobody can. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Grandmother-- did she ever mention her background, her own parents, where she came from? 

SUBJECT: It was all kind of sentimental. And I don't think that she ever became that intimate with me. She hated me like she has hated her daughter who had the audacity to be born as a girl and not as a boy. 

And, uh-- that she had to take care of me was a burden for her. I know-- it comes to my mind, my mother once wrote to her that she should put me in-- into-- send me to swimming lessons or something. And she wrote her back that she could most certainly not take me to swimming lessons. 

I was old enough at that time, uh, to take a tram to wherever the bath was. But I was very, very unhappy. That's probably why I remember the way that-- and it was my grandfather whom I loved and who loved me. As-- as much as-- as there was any contact, he was never home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So the family had titles and, uh, academic titles and-- 

SUBJECT: Academic titles and court titles. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Court titles? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And there was no mention of any Jewish background-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --whatsoever? 

SUBJECT: No. Not-- never that I've heard about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Religion-- I was brought up as a Catholic. I-- I thought I was a Catholic. And I don't know if I ever was christened or not. I've not found any documents about that. 

But I thought myself a Catholic, and I was-- it comes back to me now. I was sent to Holy Communion, nicely decked out in white. It was a white kind of flowers in my hair. So there was some kind of connection, but I don't recall it. I-- I was kind of unable, already at a very young age, to accept the artificiality of-- of it. Didn't answer my questions. 

I think the most difficult thing that I can tell was when I was with my foster parents-- that was when I just came out of the-- out of prison. I was with my foster parents, with my foster mother in the store, uh, a little girl like this. And I looked up at a woman, and I said-- she was pregnant. And I said, when do we expect your baby? 

And there was quiet in the store. And then I was frightfully reprimanded and told that I'm a filthy little girl and that could only come from my mother. Uh, how can I suppose that a baby is there? Don't I know that a baby is being brought by the stork? 

[LAUGHING] 

That I turned out a little bit of a revolutionary is, I don't think, very surprising. Can I go now to Berlin? In Berlin-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what-- you arrived in Berlin at what age? 

SUBJECT: 13. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: 12, 13, around there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And there is Berlin in 1927? 

SUBJECT: '27, '28. I cannot really pinpoint it down. I went to a gymnasium that was called Karl Marx Gymnasium. Formerly, it was called Kaiser-Friedrich-Realgymnasium. It was a very liberal school. 

We had big debates between Nazis and communists. And I didn't learn very much there, but-- because most of the time I played hooky. But I think there came also a little bit of an influence that I was very much interested in politics. 

And I lived with my mother. We moved very often. We had very many friends. And the-- I started not really joining a party, but being at the periphery of the Social Democrats and the Communist Party. 

It was very complicated, because there were so many small little groups. One was left, left, left, left, right, and the other one was left, left, right, right. And each one wanted something different. And we came into contact with a group that didn't think-- Hitler could have been-- was already felt around 1930. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? What was Berlin like for you, in that? 

SUBJECT: Berlin for a girl like me was lots of fun, you know-- parties and-- and-- but there was an oppressive atmosphere somehow. The-- the-- I could not give any names. The chancellors were constantly changing. 

Uh, in Vienna was-- was unrest. There was unrest in the air. And we didn't talk about Hitler yet, but we spoke about Hindenburg, who was a senile, old military man. 

It just was being felt it was oppressive. People didn't trust each other anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember incidents, discussions? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember any big discussions with people who were on the Nazi side, really. I only knew that we all feared something and that-- there-- there was direction towards the doom, especially in-- after 1930. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see on the streets, in stores? 

SUBJECT: Well, the stores were beautiful. You could buy everything. There were not yet any scarcities. There were not yet any pogroms. It was all very, very peaceful. But nevertheless, there was something-- we-- we didn't know where Germany is going to go to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your own memories-- when-- how did you see the first, quote, Nazis? Who were they? 

SUBJECT: Oh, they were on-- on some kind of parades, on May parades. When-- when the communists were marching on one side, the Nazis tried to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe a parade like this? 

SUBJECT: Only very peripherally. I once partook in a parade where the police came, which the police dispersed. I think there was a Mayday parade. That was more in the workers' neighborhood in Berlin. 

I actually lived in the-- I lived in an artist colony. There were-- were several blocks with houses in which all-- a lot of famous artists lived. I try to think of names and-- Osievsky lived there for a while. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember-- 

SUBJECT: Brecht lived there for a while. Kantorovich lived there for a while. But those were actually people-- either if I knew them, I knew them by first name. They were not big celebrities. 

Berlin was also at that time very avant-garde, with cabarets. It was shortly after the premiere-- I think it was in '26 that, uh, The Threepenny Opera was first produced. It was brooding with Reinhardt and Piscatow. Is that his name? [LAUGHING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Piscator. 

SUBJECT: Piscator. [LAUGHING] Thank you. I'm getting it all mixed up. So it-- it was a-- a big kettle in which it was boiling for somebody sensitive that could be felt. Of course, we-- they had all the news movies. There was a transition from the-- from the quiet film to the spoken film. 

And in the colony in which I lived with artists, I was much more interested in pictures. And I was much more interested in love affairs. I was periphal-- peripherally interested in politics. But it was never that I wanted to make that now my way of life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the name of the suburb or the area of the artist colony? 

SUBJECT: Uh, Wilmersdorf. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's part of Berlin? 

SUBJECT: It's part of Berlin, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were there differences in the newspapers? For example, between the end of the '20s and the beginning of the '30s? 

SUBJECT: That I could not say. Of course, we had the whole slew of newspapers from the right-right to the left-left, from the Rote Fahne to the Volkische Beobachter. And even that-- I don't know when that first came out. Somehow seems to be-- as if it had always been there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you regard the Volkische Beobachter? What kind of opinion did people have of this paper? 

SUBJECT: Uh, boof. Bad paper. Destructive paper. Wrong paper. There were probably already-- Streicher must have been at that time already kind on-- on the rising. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But taken seriously or no? 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't take it seriously, but we were afraid. Some people took it very seriously, because reading Mein Kampf, you know exactly what-- what Hitler planned to do. But Mein Kampf was not read that thoroughly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Again, what was this life like in the artist colony? What did-- how did people behave in the evenings, on weekends, holidays? 

SUBJECT: Well, I on weekends went, in the summer mostly, uh, out with a folding boat. And it was in the environments of Berlin on the water and camping. 

There were parties. There was-- there were social gatherings. One invited each other for eating or one went-- went to the theater to the movies, uh, just for-- for coffee in the Romanisches Café and met people there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any particular, uh, event or-- 

SUBJECT: My mother had wonderful parties, masquerade parties. It was 30, 40 people there. And I was a very vel-- developed young lady. So nobody saw that I only was the 14- or 15- or 16-year-old girl that I was. 

But I don't remember one particular party. I remember that we were kind of invited through the artists of the cabaret. It was all kind of actors and dancers. 

There was always something to talk besides politics. There were orchestras playing. My mother rented some rooms to members of that cabaret. There were, of course, political jokes, uh, about the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like? 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHING] Forgot them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But who were the jokes about? 

SUBJECT: About Hitler or about the Nazis or about Hindenburg or about-- they were always left versus right. At that time we didn't have the ethnic jokes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned Nazis. How were they-- how did you see them, in what uniforms, doing what? 

SUBJECT: I see them in the brown uniform of the SA and the black uniform of the SS. But I could not say when I consciously saw them for the first time and what the exact moment was. It seemed to me that they have always been there, that they only got more and more. And when I then started in that particular group, which called itself-- standing above all the other little splinter groups on the left, that-- I forgot what I wanted to say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The name of the group that you-- 

SUBJECT: The name of the group I would-- would rather not say. But when I was, uh-- I became very much aware that they were there. And I-- also since I was blonde and very German and didn't have any inkling that I was partly Jewish, tried to have a SS man as a friend, just to be on the outside as safe as possible. I tried to-- of course, the flag was-- that was already after '33. The flag was hanging at any location that the flag should be hanging. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The flag 

SUBJECT: So to camouflage completely that I was on the outside Nazi and the inside, had my own thoughts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The flag with the swastika? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, what-- how did you get in touch with such a group? How did you make the decision to join them? How did you know about them? 

SUBJECT: Well, you-- you first got in touch with one person. You never used your own name. I got in touch with Conrad, or Conrad got in touch with me. Uh, I had his telephone number in case some mail came that looked as if it-- that wasn't for me, but was kind of connected with the group. And then I could call him. 

I was also-- through him, I got in contact with other people. We had kind of instructions about-- well, that Hitler would now pretty soon come and that it is kind of impossible to do anything against the overwhelming organization and force of Hitler from the inside of Germany, that we have to try to get in contact with the outside of Germany and give them inside reports of people who have been at concentration camps. And concentration camps were-- were there already early 1933. And friends of mine were there. And, uh, I saw them coming home being beaten up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who? Not the name, but who do you remember? 

SUBJECT: There was one-- one boyfriend of mine was there. He was actually a member of the communistic party. He was what in Berlin is being called a prolet, a worker, who was quite outspoken about his political beliefs. And I don't know in what concentration camp he was put, but when he came back, he was beaten up about after two or three weeks. They didn't keep them too long at that time. 

I was not very politically active just at the time when Hitler came into power, because I just had a baby. And, uh, in a way the baby saved me from quite a lot of things, because I became less involved. In the artist colony, we had very often razzias at the cars of-- of-- of-- of, uh-- a lot of SS and SA men came and then looked through the apartments. At the beginning, with the little baby, I could always get them out of the house without them looking around, saying 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember one such round-up? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. They came once in the middle of the night and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What exactly do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Uh, they-- they went from door to door or from-- from one door to the next, more or less. They came and wanted to search the house for illegal possessions, illegal material. And, uh, I-- I came to the door in my morning gown. 

I said, please be quiet, the baby is asleep. The baby had had a very difficult night. So if you have to look-- you know, you are always very polite. 

It was, um-- if you have to look, do it quietly. Don't make any noise. And they say, oh, well, it's all right, and left. But then there were others who-- who insisted on searching. But at the beginning, they were very polite. 

Later on, when I didn't live in the artist colony anymore-- I don't know why I moved. We moved a little bit-- my mother got an apartment on one side, and I got an apartment on the other side of the postal employees building. Uh, there we had razzias where they really, practically took everything apart, except that coming into our household that was loaded with books was kind of distressing for them. And they couldn't look through all the books. 

Once I had hidden among the books the passport of one of our friends who was about to leave Germany-- it was always very difficult-- that was a Jew. To get a passport-- he had-- had the passport already in his hand, and he didn't want to have it stolen or-- or found on him. So I had hidden that. And that was when we had a kind of house search. I-- they usually went from one room to the next. 

And my mother was there, who was sometimes a little bit too outspoken, so I had to hush her down. I knew there was the passport. And I had a chance, taking the passport out of the room in which it was and somewhere hiding it in the toilet and then trying to get the Nazis to look at that room first. 

And then when they were through with that room, I could take the passport again and put it-- we were allowed to walk around freely. But then a very funny thing happened. We had-- that was a fourth floor apartment that had a small little room, which my mother had rented to a man who was also in our organization. And we all had codes. If you came home, you call up first. And if you get the answer-- this is so-and-so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the code? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. If you get the answer, this is so-and-so speaking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who? 

SUBJECT: My family's name, which I don't want to mention. This is so-and-so speaking. You knew that the air is clean. If you answer this telephone number that has been called, stay away. 

Make the telephone call. Behave as if everything is all right, and you get the answer. But don't come. So this man, that one day when the thing was going on, came up without making the telephone call. 

And he was very, very active. He had been active with the Communist Party at the time. He was in the newspaper distributing, uh, business, where he very often had possibilities also to put leaflets into the newspaper that were distributed. So he-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Communist leaflets? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So when he came up, my mother had the presence of mind to say, look here, we-- we have here the Gestapo. We haven't eaten. We haven't had any breakfast. 

They came early in the morning. Could you go and get us some rolls? And the gestapo let him go. He came back because that would have-- him not coming back would have been too obvious. 

He came back and they-- they-- they just took a few brochures out of his home. But I recall that-- that after that one examination when they had left, I had the feeling that my legs were kind of melted butter. I-- I sank into the earth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did they search your apartment so-- 

SUBJECT: They took books out. They-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But why you? 

SUBJECT: I-- yeah. My mother was at that time writing articles for periodicals. So we had a typewriter. And that typewriter could be heard by the tenants underneath. 

And the tenants underneath there-- there were already big Nazi house blocks, you know. There was Mr. Bratz, who lived on the bottom who was a big-- big wheel in that. 

So Mr. Bratz was informed, they must have-- have up there a printing press. We hear some kind of regular noises. They must do that. It was in that kind only-- they only have not to like you when they found something. And being artists and being a little exceptional makes you immediately outstanding. 

So I think that was at that time the reason. You never could find out what really made them. But having in the background a bad conscience-- first, you-- you were against Hitler. You were working against Hitler. You had to expect it. Prepared you for it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned working against Hitler. You mentioned that group. What did you know about it that-- when you came to join it? What were its purposes? What were its organizat-- 

SUBJECT: The purposes were to try to inform England and France and surrounding countries of what is really going on in Germany. Because in reading the papers from the surrounding countries, you saw that not everything was being told. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That group formed before Hitler came to power? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Already then? 

SUBJECT: Already then preparing, trying to get also the contact with the-- with the exterior going. The-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So there were people who had the foresight? 

SUBJECT: Had the foresight and-- and-- and wrote pamphlets about it, wrote books about it, who were very well-informed politically. And for, uh, 18-year-old woman-- what do I know with 18 years-- I trusted them. 

Also, I was married at that time. I fell very vehemently in love with Conrad, and Conrad fell very vehemently in love with me. We never could do anything about it, because in 1936 Conrad was arrested. 

And his girlfriend tried to commit suicide in jumping out of the window. And she was also arrested. That was then the thing that started the ball rolling, that it was decided it would be good if I take my child and leave the country. My mother had already left the country in 1935. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's come back to joining this group. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How big did you know it was? Who did you know? What kind of a person-- 

SUBJECT: I knew about four or five people. I knew that it was much bigger. I knew that it was not-- but how big-- either I was not interested how big, really, in numbers because I'm not good in numbers. I trusted them, not only because I was in love with them-- with-- with one of them. 

My mother was also there, and I trusted the judgment of my mother. And I had the feeling you had to do something against that oncoming avalanche. So we-- you know, it was never so you join a group officially. It was much more you were together and you had a cup of coffee. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who-- can you remember that cup-- 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, I met Conrad in a cafe. We had a cup of coffee, and he says, well, you know, I'm receiving some mail which should come really to an address that is safe. How safe, do you think, is your address? I said, so far it is safe. 

Well, then the letters came, and I had Conrad's telephone number to call him when it came. That was the way it started. Then I learned the chemical process of-- of writing on starch-free paper with iodine, which is now a very official thing I-- I thought, oh my, how fantastic, you know. You write something; you can't see it. 

Then we started coding the written things, and I was involved in that. Or I got a letter, and I typed it and gave it to Conrad, knowing that Conrad will give it to somebody else, knowing that the less I know on names, addresses, and telephone number, the safer it is, in case that I am being arrested-- knowing this also of the other people. 

It was so that I-- I knew everything by heart. But now I have a very careful telephone book. I cannot remember one telephone number as long as I can write it down. I don't remember names. Don't remember addresses. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You don't remember now? 

SUBJECT: No. But at that time, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember any-- any particular letter that you typed up? What did you write in those letters, in one particular or two? 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember only over and over that people did not believe what we wrote outside. That can't be. That is fantasy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Those were the letters that you received? 

SUBJECT: That came from the outside. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you decoded. 

SUBJECT: Then also letters from the outside of some of the group that were already outside, because their position inside would have been too endangered, giving information what should be done. From the outside, it was also sometimes easier to see who is more-- most endangered inside. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you remember receiving and typing letters? And what information did you put in those letters? You mentioned that you typed-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --or encoded. What did you-- information did you send out, specifically? 

SUBJECT: Specifically about the concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did-- 

SUBJECT: The location-- I don't recall that anymore. But I know that anything internally that went on after the fire in the Reichstag-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which was 19-- 

SUBJECT: '33. Uh, we started sending out letters, and started sending out letters to the effect that what can be read in the German newspapers is not really what's going on. I don't really remember details. 

That belongs also to the, um, atmosphere. You try to forget very quickly, because anything that-- you might get into a situation where they press you so hard that you might give an information. If you have forgotten it or put it so far back, you are not in that danger. You don't endanger other people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you think of always in-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --interroga-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Absolutely. Because people were arrested, uh, just for not wearing a Hakenkreuz on their lapel when they should wear one, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You expected to be arrested? 

SUBJECT: I hoped not to be. I expected that people would come and search, but, uh, there is a built-in mechanism in the human being that it always happens only to the others. It doesn't happen to yourself. 

[LAUGHING] It just doesn't happen to you. You-- you are prepared. You wake up every morning at 4 o'clock. You listen if somebody is coming up the stairs, but you don't make the connection that it could be against your life. 

But on the outside, of course, we spoke about it. You spoke about of being careful. And you spoke about-- there was one member, a woman whose husband was in the organization. And she knew about it. 

And she had to go into an operation and the preparations to try to find the proper doctor in case that in narcosis she would spill something out. And the danger that is being connected where you then have to-- immediately the people who were involved with that one person more or less set on a-- on a packed suitcase or on a packed bread and butter sandwich to go to the next border. 

I was only once involved in bringing a member to the border. We-- my husband and I had a car, and somebody was in danger. And we just on the spur of the moment at midnight left and brought that man to the Czechoslovakian border. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that trip? 

SUBJECT: It was exciting. There was really the excitement of a dangerous trip, as if you stand high up on-- on a slope and you have to go. And I'm afraid of going deep. Uh, it was the man who had been living with us, so we knew him. 

And he is an extremely funny character. He has fantastic dry humor. Mostly we were talking jokes and-- and-- and whistled in the dark. And for him, when the trip-- for us, when the trip was over, it was over. For him, he still had to get over to Czechoslovakia. He's living now in New York, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, you mentioned the Volkische Beobachter. You mentioned the uniforms. You mentioned the neighbor who was a Nazi. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see happening in-- among regular citizens? How did this grow? Even before the takeover? After the takeover? What-- how did they join or respond? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was very funny that very soon after the election-- I think there was an election in March or in April in '33. 

INTERVIEWER 2: March 5th. 

SUBJECT: March? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Uh, of course, I was running around with a yes button. But everybody else was running around with a yes button. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, but what-- 

SUBJECT: You had the choice to vote for Hitler or against Hitler. So everyone was running around with a yes button. 

INTERVIEWER 2: For Hitler? 

SUBJECT: For Hitler. You'd-- at that time didn't trust anybody else. There-- there-- there is that one joke where in a small village everyone was running around the yes button. And then they-- all the votes were no. And I think everybody went with the next train to a concentration camp. 

But those were stories that were mumbled underneath. I felt very good because I was fighting against Hitler, while there were quite a few Jewish people who were against Hitler. Only if Hitler wouldn't have his policy against the Jews, everything else would be good. The Arbeitsdienst would be good and all his, in quote, "social reforms" were wonderful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have personal contact with such-- such Jewish people? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you name some of those or describe the background? 

SUBJECT: Well, they were acquaintances and, uh, usually intellectuals. I didn't have much acquaintances with Jewish people in-- in the working class movement. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned Kantorovich before. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, you see, I-- I have-- probably so-- I-- I don't-- I never knew if somebody was Jewish or not Jewish. But if somebody says I'm a Jew and I would be very much for Hitler if he were not against the Jews, you'll take notice of that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many times did you hear that? 

SUBJECT: Said very often-- very often. And full of people who were intelligent, who were just swept over with the propaganda. And since the ways to the outside became smaller and smaller, you had to rely more and more what you have heard on the radio, what you read in the newspaper. And there were, of course, much less newspaper than before Hitler. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you recall her relationship with the Social Democrats and communists in the 19-- 

SUBJECT: They-- they fought like cats and dogs. 

INTERVIEWER 1: About what? 

SUBJECT: That I couldn't tell you. All-- every one of those small little groups fought every one of the other groups. There was one big movement, let's please all unite. But, uh-- it wasn't possible. 

Either they fought about people who should be on top of them, or they fought about small little political things. Uh, should we, uh, use that kind of weapon or this kind of weapon in the final struggle for liberty? I was very little involved in that after. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know what the communist attitude towards the Weimar Republic was at the time? 

SUBJECT: They were against it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they sometimes cooperate with the Nazis? 

SUBJECT: That I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But it-- 

SUBJECT: It might be-- it might be possible. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did the communists expect about the Nazis? Would they last long or short time? And what would come later? 

SUBJECT: Well, they thought if we only could get one front against them, they wouldn't last long. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: I think that was, uh, among the opposition to Hitler, the main argument, they cannot last long. Something will come up. We will come out of this struggle victoriously. That is at least what-- what I heard. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you recall any differences between Trotskyites and-- and traditional communists? 

SUBJECT: I think at that time was already quite a fight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that clear in your group at that time, uh, the differences of the ideological kind? 

SUBJECT: We didn't go into that difference too much. It was clear in my group that the Trotskyites were believers that the whole world has to be communistic before communism will-- could take over and that the communist says-- said that one small thing will lead to more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know, you didn't identify the group that you were with. 

SUBJECT: I didn't want to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was almost 50 years ago. Why? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did you do that? 

SUBJECT: Why? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why, yeah. 

SUBJECT: It might be one of the same things that falls under not wanting to remember. And since I had to sign this one piece of paper here that with the material that I give, anything can be done, I just don't feel that people who have risked their lives should be exposed to that. If I expose myself, that's my own life. But I don't want anybody else to be connected with it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which danger would they run today if they did that? 

SUBJECT: It has absolutely nothing to do with danger. It has something to do with human decency. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT: Uh, those were people who have risked their life. I don't want any advertisement with them. I have seen one installment of Holocaust, and I was just appalled about it-- about the dramatization. And I was also appalled about advertisements. 