SUBJECT 1: Just moments of being free. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Also do you think now things are different for you because of that experience? How do you consider yourself different? 

SUBJECT 1: If-- because it's not different at all. 

SUBJECT 2: I think that we always were-- 

SUBJECT 1: And it changed you. 

SUBJECT 2: --happy together since we got married, because we always had something in common. They always, any time we start talking-- once we come talking, we come to the same thing. We come to the war, and-- you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We would like to hear are you different in any way because of-- 

CREW: You rolling? 

CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. What about the f-- 

SUBJECT 2: When we were in the partisans-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, no, wait a second. You were in the subway station in New York. 

SUBJECT 2: You finish off here. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, not that-- I'm going down to the subway station, because I knew I would find somebody. I saw a lot of Jewish people there in Brooklyn. And they're always-- you know, they carry a [INAUDIBLE] in the hand. I could see it sticking out under the pocket. 

So I knew it's a man who can read Jewish. He must speak Jewish. So I would go over to him and ask him, where do I go? I'm looking for that and that street. 

He would tell me in Jewish. He would show me. He would take me down, even sometimes, to the subway. Put me in there to make sure that I get the right subway. 

And it was really very hard, you know. And at night-- that was a lot of times-- six weeks that didn't let me go, even, to do anything. That family that brought me over. 

After the six weeks, I, like, got tired already, you know. And I had to go. Look to do something, so they found me a job. That's why you had to find a way to go to work. For quite a long while, I had to-- until I got used to it, where to go, and how to get there. I was waiting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you got out of Dachau-- 

SUBJECT 1: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --how did you become a Jew again? 

SUBJECT 1: Very easy. So soon I found that man. I became a Jew. Because I found a Jewish soldier who liberated me. I became a Jew again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think when you were liberated? When you came into Dachau, did you believe you'd ever walk out again? 

SUBJECT 1: I never believed that I'm ever going to be a man free. I thought that's my way of living, and I'm just next to die. There was no other way that anybody could have thought of anything. 

I never saw, and I never would believe. If somebody would have come over and said, you're going to be out in 10 years. I would have said, you're lying. 

Because what you see-- how people die every single day, how much longer can you take it? I was lucky. I was young. But anybody over 30 years was in for a few days. After that, you didn't see him anymore on his feet-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And-- 

SUBJECT 1: Like disappeared. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think about? What did you try to do to pass the hours? 

SUBJECT 1: Nothing! You don't do anything. There's nothing that you can do. You're a prisoner. You do what-- if they take you to work, you go to work. It's just like you having a horse. If there's work for the horse, you take him out from the stable. If not, you put him back into the stable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see Jewish prisoners in the camp? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, because you could recognize them. On the uniforms, every nationality had its own mark. We had numbers on the uniforms in Dachau. And that was at Gross-Rosen, too. We had the blue and the white stripe uniforms. And Jewish would be a mark of our Jewish quarter, yellow. 

SUBJECT 2: The star. 

SUBJECT 1: No, that didn't have the star. There was the number, and there was a triangle of yellow. Then they had-- French would have their flag. 

We didn't have a flag. The Jewish people didn't have a flag at that time. There was no Jewish state. All other nationalities had their own mark of their flag to recognize them by their nationality. 

There was no more name. Once you became a number, you were a number. So that was the finish of Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see what happened to Jews in Dachau? Did you know? You could-- 

SUBJECT 2: That's what they said-- 

SUBJECT 1: But-- but-- but I saw what happened. When I came in and they called Jews out. That was the end. There was no other reason of calling Jews out, unless to get rid of them before anybody else. 

They didn't call any Frenchmen out. They didn't call any German out, or any Pollack out. Nobody-- just the Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The decision not to walk out-- 

SUBJECT 1: That just came in, like-- well, like, in a split second. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT 1: Because, like I said, I must have felt something. That something is going to happen to me. And I didn't care what's going to happen. If they're going to find out about me the next hour, I didn't care anymore. And that may have slipped into my mind. 

Just like somebody would say behind me, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] you say, that's your name. That was very, very simple for me somehow. That's how I heard my name until, I think, almost until I came and started to make papers so I could come over to this country. 

SUBJECT 2: No, you kept that name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You kept that name. 

SUBJECT 1: No, I got name back now. But I must-- I thought-- I knew-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you left the camp with that name. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And when you talked to the gentleman. 

SUBJECT 1: But the Americans came then. And I have documents from Dachau still that-- I told you that when she finds them, she'll-- you know-- 

SUBJECT 2: I just been looking for them. But he said, [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: That's signatures from all the army brass from this 8th army that liberated us. That's been the asking at that time my name. I gave them my real name. I didn't-- I had, on some of the papers, I still have-- 

SUBJECT 2: That little paper was two of us. It was [INAUDIBLE] and Dachau, what I wanted to bring. I forgot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Some of the papers were still with the Polish name? 

SUBJECT 1: I think so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- after you were out, what-- 

SUBJECT 1: What did I do? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do? Did you think of-- what did you think about your family? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, I knew. Because while I was already in prison, in concentration camp, then some other prisoners came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you then? 

SUBJECT 1: I was already in Gross-Rosen. And they brought, every day, prisoners from other camps. When they brought in prisoners, right away you went to look if there is anybody coming in from another camp that you know, by any chance, is from your own town. Because the Jews were spread out in so many different camps, you know? And Gross-Rosen, and, like, Dachau, they were like headquarters. They're brought in, always to fill the gap. 

Because in those big prisons that was like a factory to liquidate the Jews or other prisoners. They needed men to do their work-- to build back the railroad tracks that were bombed last night, or to build the buildings that were bombed last night. The always needed so many thousands. And so many thousands died every day. The quota had to be filled right away to take their places. 

So when anybody new came in from another prison. You rushed out to see. Maybe you'll find somebody. Once in a while, you did find somebody that came-- that was taken away later from that town. So you-- did you hear anything? Did you see my family? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you find? What did he say? 

SUBJECT 1: I did find a few friends, or a few older people that they came in at that time. And I asked him, do you know anything about my family? Oh, yes. I heard about it. 

I know your parents are dead. I know your father was killed, and that your mother was taken away. That's all he had to tell you-- taken away. So you knew right away what for they was taken away. Because anybody over 40, if they were taken away, they were taken away for one reason, right away into the gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] your brothers? 

SUBJECT 1: I had one younger brother. He was seven years old when I was taken away. He went with my mother together. I never saw either one of them. 

After the liberation, I was living in Munich at the time. I went back to Poland to see, to make sure. But I couldn't go as far as home. I went to Poland. 

I came in to Poland, but still a few hundred miles from my hometown. I had no desire to go any farther. I went back to Germany. 

Because I knew, if I'm going to go to Poland, and if I'm going to hear for sure from somebody there that my parents are not alive, then I thought to myself, maybe I'm going to hear that this-- this guy had pointed the finger or something. I'm going to have to kill him. So I thought to myself, I don't go back. So I went as far as [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] Then we were-- we met. [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: I was there for about four or five weeks. And I met some friends there from my hometown. There's that lady that's sitting outside here. She's from my hometown, and a few other. 

I came to Poland at the time-- that some things that I knew I couldn't walk by my way back across the border. But I knew I had enough with me-- money-- to bring a few more people across. I brought this lady and a few other couples with me across the border into Germany. Because that-- 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. Because they wanted to leave Poland. But they had no way of getting out of Poland into Germany. So we had contacts with one border guard on the border of Poland and Czechoslovakia. And he took us across into-- what he called it? Bratislava. Czechoslovakia, you know, that's the border there. And I brought, I think, at that time-- 

SUBJECT 2: From there to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, about seven people with me into Germany. And somehow they all wound up finding relatives in the United States here. And they all came over here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Has it changed you in any way? Are you different? 

SUBJECT 1: From when? From what time? I mean, since the first time I came over here, I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: From before. 

SUBJECT 1: I was-- I was a child when I went in. I was still 19 when I came out. So I don't know really what-- it didn't change me for anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were happy to be in this country when you came. 

SUBJECT 1: That's-- that's the-- that's the main thing. But the main thing-- but then the other thing was that, as long as I was in Germany, I hated almost every German. Because I knew one of them did something wrong. Or every second one, every second German did something wrong. 

And when you lived in Germany right after the war, you were asking somebody. Nobody knew anything. Like Dachau-- into-- go into prison, to the concentration camp, we walked every day a big street, a long street. People living on both sides of the street. 

The smell from the crematorium was stinking up the whole city almost. Right when I came out of the concentration camp, I go in to one family there. And I ask them, did you know what's going on in there? 

They shake their head no. I was ready to kill those people. And believe me, many times, their whole-- you know, we never went alone. We always had friends that we were released together. We were just trying to help each other not to kill anybody. People so full of hate, like wild animals when we came out. 

Any German in Dachau, any child, knew 100% what did go on in that concentration camp. Because every day, even from the work crew that went out to work, somehow every night on the way back, carts loaded with dead people were coming back in to the concentration camp, that had died on the job. And here you go out to ask the people, that they live right across the street there, and they say, no, I can't believe anything like this went in there-- you know, happened in there. I mean, it's-- at first, you know, you just felt like go around with a machine gun and just killing everybody. 

SUBJECT 2: And now I should start. [LAUGHS] What they-- from where did they finish? The partisans? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're still with the partisans. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. You know? So we were living there, day by day. Just hoping, one of these days, you know, it's going to be-- the war is going to be over. Then you're going to survive. Then you're going to come out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go back to the forest. 

SUBJECT 2: But we were laying there every night, and get up in the morning, same routine every day. Get up and preparing everything. And the-- you know, the partisans were organizing themself. One was going this way. One was going that way. 

You know, they send them to commandeer us, organize groups and send them in each direction, in a different way to go. And you know, what they tell us to do. That's what we were doing, you know? Just-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you with your sister the whole time? 

SUBJECT 2: All the time with my sister, yeah. All the time with my sister. My sister was [INAUDIBLE] too, you know? She was more educated. So she was on the [INAUDIBLE] She worked with the Russians, because they had the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] where they had to give the news. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. And they just kept me-- they wouldn't keep me. Because such young kids, they wouldn't keep. But my brother was the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] And he says, you know, he took care of me. And you know, I was there. And every day was the same thing. Get up and the same thing. You know, you're always going out at night in the villages and bring all the things. And the winter was snow. You covered anything you had. You had the Russian [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] You know, those high-- you know, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] You know those-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tents? 

SUBJECT 2: Tents. You put them up on the floor, and you try to sleep. And some of them, they stole, took away from the villagers, from the Ukrainian people. And the food we're bringing. And we'd just, you know, lived our few weeks in one place. Then they said, it's not safe there. Because one day, you know, the Germans and the Russian alone, one for something to put-- you know, to do as a [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] to do-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mission. 

SUBJECT 2: --mission. And they brought a nice German girl. I guess she went with them, slept with them, and made believe that she wants to go to the partisans. And then a few of them like this happen. And then they find out they were spies. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They brought a girl? 

SUBJECT 2: They brought the girls. The girls said, probably like me, that she's a partisan. That she's, maybe, she said she's Jewish. They were trained, you know? Details, I really don't know. 

But I just know that they were saying the commandeer brought today a nice beautiful girl. And he was staying with her and living with her. And she was there, like, a week or so. And all of a sudden, they discovered that she was running away. You know? 

She took out of him informations and everything. And locally, they catched her, and they shot her. So was a few, a few like this. You know, the Russians, they liked to drink. And you know, they believed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Those were German-- 

SUBJECT 2: Germans trained spies when they were coming in there. And that's right away, they didn't come back to them. They were afraid already that's the [? goner. ?] They know, discovering where we are, and we have to move on again. And we had to-- then we stayed in another place for a couple of weeks, and then we had to leave everything, burn all the documents, everything. And then run far away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one of those girls? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't remember this. I just hear it. But I know that the thing they were saying. This and this they shot. 

But who remembers? You know, I don't remember. You know? How could you remember? You know? 

I remember my sister was carrying me, helping me to go. We were all from the woods, you know? In Ukraine, all teared up, you know? You have to go through bushes to run away at night. You know, some of them died, too. 

Because it was kids that were sick. I mean, you know, the people, they couldn't take it. And nothing what could be done. You know, some of them, the planes picked them up, soldiers, and took them someplace that-- you know, I don't even know where. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember-- 

SUBJECT 2: I was so young, I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember landing of a plane? 

SUBJECT 2: Landing, I don't remember. I just remember that at night, they used to make us chores. They used to call it in Russia. Fires, little ones, so the plane could see where to draw, you know, to throw away things. 

I don't think they could land there, because it was woods. And I don't think a plane could land in woods, you know. But this I remember. 

That was a Russian commandeer. And he was the whole organizer. And there was a few more, you know, Russian commandeers. where they would organize and all those things. You know? But they did a lot of damage to the Germans, those partisans. But they really, you know, doing underground work all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of them was a Jew, the commandeer? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, this one, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT 2: And people forget. He was the whole commandeer from the whole-- from the whole partisans. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. That's OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where did they get the ammunition to do all this? 

SUBJECT 2: That's the Russian. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Russians supplied them at night. 

SUBJECT 2: From the beginning, it's not from the Russian. From the beginning, it was just the Jewish partisans. they Where they were going and doing the mines of the Germans. 

SUBJECT 1: They were on-- they went on missions. 

SUBJECT 2: On missions. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But-- [INAUDIBLE] let's say they killed a few Germans. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: And they just had a few. Till it got bigger and bigger. 

SUBJECT 1: That's how you started off, a few. 

SUBJECT 2: That's what I was telling you before. That's they were going in the little towns, 10 times, 20 times around, thinking that's a big part of some organization. And that's why just few. Till it got bigger and bigger. 

SUBJECT 1: Think, like, if you remember-- 

SUBJECT 2: Bigger and bigger, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: --when Israel became a state, remember that? At that time, Israel didn't have any army. They had a very small organization. They are doing in the Haganah and some of the kibbutz to make believe they didn't have too many vehicles at that time to make believe that they have enough power or to show that they have an army, at night, they would take a few old, beat up trucks or cars, put their headlights on, and go around in circles all over. 

SUBJECT 2: That's what we did. 

SUBJECT 1: Over and over again. They thought that's a whole big-- 

SUBJECT 2: They thought it's a big army. That's what they did. That's what the partisan does. That's what they did. 

They used to come at night, and go around whole town. Oh, maybe 10, 20 times, just make believe. They should say if the Germans [INAUDIBLE] the Germans to tell them that the partisans, you cannot go so easy. They are big army. Because if they knew it's so little people, they would want to [INAUDIBLE] at us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you-- how did Jews get along with non-Jews in the partisans? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, together, some of them, they didn't even say from the beginning. They didn't even say their Jews. You know, because there were some Russian where they are anti-Semite, anti-- anti-Semite. And they didn't even want to know if you are Jew. You know? 

But then, later on, you know, they get acquainted. And they get-- they get along very nicely with them. They work together, you know? They got along very nice. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there any-- 

SUBJECT 2: They helped each other, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any executions of-- of other Germans or traitors? 

SUBJECT 2: No. This, I-- I don't remember. I don't remember this one, you know? I just know they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have to witness any executions? 

SUBJECT 1: Of prisoners, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT 1: In Gross-Rosen, almost every single night. Because whoever did anything wrong in that prison, or he was hiding out when they called out appell. They called the appell, you know-- to get together. Everybody has-- you know, when the whistle blows, everybody has to go out from the barracks. 

And the kapo is responsible for every group. He has-- each kapo has his own group. Kapo is the head of the prisoners, like a foreman. And if one of the prisoners-- he wanted to die or something, the Germans wouldn't use a bullet on him. So there would be another way-- get lost. 

And if they couldn't find him in a certain time, they would call out every 10th man and string him up on the poles. Sometimes it looked like a parade. You have, like, every 10 feet a nice doll hanging-- which it looked like dolls. 

Then we had, in another camp, that was even not in a concentration camp, that was when I went first to the arbeitslager. One guy-- that was easy to escape, at that time. And one guy escaped. Then they found that guy. And they brought him back into prison. They tied him down by his neck to a car. And they dragged him for miles on the rough roads until they brought back piles of bones. 

And they hung him up right in the front of the window where we would get-- or where we would go over towards the soup kitchen. Everybody should see this. Everybody had to go in almost touch him with his head. That's how low they hung him up. 

And there was a lot of that that I saw. And a lot of other things that's really-- that I don't even want to bring out. That's how awful it was. We saw unbelievable things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any clashes with the Germans? 

SUBJECT 2: No. We didn't. Just-- just when they weren't going to do the things, they were clashed with the Germans. But the Germans, one thing, they never came in the woods. They never catched us. 

They were afraid. They were sending the Ukrainians and the [INAUDIBLE]. But by themselves, they never went. They were afraid to go in the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know how the war was going? 

SUBJECT 2: We do-- we didn't know. We just-- you know, we weren't touched. We had the correspondent with the Russian, you know? And then one day, we just found out that the war is over, and it still took till we find-- so everybody decide, you know, to go your own home, to go home and see. 

And each one is going to meet in your own town, that's the only way, we figured. We go in your own town, maybe somebody survived, and it's going to come. So that's what happened. I came back to my town with my sister. 

And then we had-- our home was gone and everything. But the Russian were there. It was occupied by the Russians. 

And we were working all day. I had to-- I was very sick. So I was in the hospital there. They had to put me in right away. Because I got something when I was laying down. I got fro-- froze up or-- but the-- from the ground. 

Here everything was rotten, you know? Like rusting and thing, and I didn't even-- and then when my sister came from-- I had a sister in Russia. I told you what you went away. 

When she come back, she says to me, my god. What's wrong with you? You don't even go see a doctor. I went. And then they put me into the Russian hospital. And then they got out. And they did-- that was, you know, after the war. You know, we didn't have-- not too much medical attention there in the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you find out about your family? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, I found out they killed them all. Just my sister came back from Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you-- 

SUBJECT 2: She was in [? Russia. ?] There. We came back to our town. We were back in our town. And we inquired, and we find out. And the [INAUDIBLE] didn't put them even in a ghetto. Right away, when they took him from one side to the other side, they killed him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So your mother was right. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. She was right. They killed them all. They made-- the Polish people said that they made them, ditch graves, you know? 

And they throwed them in. They even say to some kids, they've been buried alive. They just shot, and who was-- you know, lived and who was-- that's what the Polish people just told us. 

We came back to our town. We worked-- my sister worked. She was in a magazine. Worked-- she [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was she there already when you came back? 

SUBJECT 2: No. I came with her. We were all the time together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, the one that was in Russia. 

SUBJECT 2: We brought her over. She came to us. She came to home, looking for maybe somebody survive. So she and had husband with a baby. She had a little baby, a girl. And her husband was in the Russian army there in Russia. 

And from there, we tried-- you know, we had to come to Lublin. We had to come to Poland if you want to come to America. So then, when you stayed with the Russians and you are with them, it's not so easy to get out. They don't let you out. When you work for them, you are-- you got to do-- I mean, they wouldn't let you out. You're already with them. We had to-- there was all kinds of people used to come up-- Jewish, from organizations, and make-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] that's how they used to-- you know, they used to pay you money. And they used to-- 

SUBJECT 1: Smuggle. 

SUBJECT 2: Smuggle. Give you different passports, and they smuggle you out from Russia to Poland. Because that's the only way you could come to America. You couldn't come another way. 

So me and my sister-- the first me-- they decide they're going to send me away. You know? Because I felt they figured if I should-- we couldn't go at once, all of us. 

So then they made some papers. And me, I went away, myself, to Lublin. And then I didn't, because then my sisters came later on, too, they-- for money, everything-- you know, the Russian you bought up. With money, you could do everything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you meet? 

SUBJECT 2: And then I came-- 

SUBJECT 1: Displaced persons camp. 

SUBJECT 2: Then we-- We went-- from Lublin we went to [INAUDIBLE]? Wasn't it [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE]. I came there, and then he came there. Then we met each other. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the day you met? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, oh-- at that time, we didn't even think we were going to get married. We just met girls were in one camp, and boys were in another. We were so young. We were going. This was a camp [INAUDIBLE], organized by the Amer-- But United, uh, States. 

SUBJECT 1: About the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Jewish-- 

SUBJECT 1: Joint. 

SUBJECT 2: Joint. They used to bring us food. They supplied us and the kids. 

SUBJECT 1: From there they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you meet? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, the children-- they had-- 

SUBJECT 1: How did I meet? Oh! I know how we met. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, you maybe know. You came to visit. And he was so handsome. 

[LAUGHTER] 

SUBJECT 2: Really! All the girls were going after him. He was the first one. What he had, you know, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] You know those boots? Nobody looked so-- at that time. And with the leather jacket and all the girls-- 

SUBJECT 1: And a motorcycle. 

SUBJECT 2: And a motorcycle! 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, my! 

SUBJECT 2: Nobody had-- 

SUBJECT 1: That I took away from a German. 

SUBJECT 2: And nobody has. Boy, they said, what a handsome guy came in now with boots and with that thing. 

SUBJECT 1: When I came in-- 

SUBJECT 2: And everybody was after him. 

SUBJECT 1: --when I came out of the concentration camp, then I moved in to a building full of Germans all by myself. I carried the gun with me because I was afraid. It's a house. It's an apartment house and full of Germans there. That friend of mine, that soldier that brought me over, he put me up there. 

I wouldn't go to sleep without a gun because I was afraid. They know that I'm from a concentration camp, so they must have thought that I am a killer, you know? And I saw a motorcycle stay in the front of that building. 

I just sat on it, drove away to [INAUDIBLE]. 300 miles. 

SUBJECT 2: But he wasn't even in [INAUDIBLE]. He was living in Munich. 

SUBJECT 1: That's what I say. I lived in Munich. Yeah-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: I was in [INAUDIBLE]. And he used to come, just visit, to the camp all the time. I was living there steady with my sister. But he used to come just to visit, and we knew each other. But I mean, we didn't know we were going to get married. We were going together for a while. And then he went away to this country. 

SUBJECT 1: And she thought she would never see me again. 

SUBJECT 2: I never see him again. Then I used-- he used to write to me, you know? He was writing to me, but we never thought. And a year later, I came on the same boat, and he was reading in the paper, you know, they used to write, that some-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: Who comes in. 

SUBJECT 2: Who comes in, you know? And I came in, and he met me by the boat. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm. 

SUBJECT 2: And then I didn't get [INAUDIBLE]. But then I came and stayed in the-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] the-- you know, in the-- you know? I stayed there. 

SUBJECT 1: The HIAS building. 

SUBJECT 2: In the HIAS building for a while. And then I had an aunt, and she took me to her house. And I stayed there a year. And he-- after a year going forth from New Haven to New York, we decide to get married. 

And we didn't have nothing to live. We got married and my aunt and my grandma and the lady, they made the wedding for us. And strange people bought us gifts. We wind up with money, with everything for two people they felt sorry. 

[LAUGHING] 

SUBJECT 2: That we didn't have nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said something that surprised me. You said that perhaps the people in the building would think you were a killer. 

SUBJECT 2: No, because they were for the Germans. 

SUBJECT 1: You know, I-- because they knew, you know-- 

SUBJECT 2: That he would kill the Germans, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: --out of a concentration camp, right? You would think the Germans-- they don't know. Why are you in the concentration camp? They didn't tell them just because you are a Jew. They must have told them something else, right? But at the same time, I felt afraid of them. 

SUBJECT 2: They're Germans, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: I'm still a Jew, and I just got out of concentration camp. I'm still afraid. I still think I'm always with a gun behind my back. 

I was used-- all those six years like this. I didn't move without a gun for one-- for one step. I went to work with the gun behind the back. I stayed at work with a gun behind my back. I came back with a gun behind my back, everything. 

SUBJECT 2: Wasn't so easy. We came here, and believe me, I had to go plenty to a doctor or the nurse. Every night-- you know, you don't think it. You are young and healthy and everything. 

But you have all the time, there were the Germans running after you. The Germans is all the time wake up and the heart is shaking like this. You think they're after you. They're killing you. 

Always I had my mind working with my mother. Like, she said, run away, kids. And you never, you know? It took years till you will remember and forget it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In dreams? 

SUBJECT 2: And oh, in dreams and all the time, used to wake up at night shaking. Oh, and I said, I'm relaxed. Where I am now laying and I'm quiet. Everything's all right. And you have to start to relax yourself. For a long time to [INAUDIBLE] I used to take tranquilizers [TAPE STATIC] to calm myself. I had-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have nightmares? 

SUBJECT 2: I had terrible nightmares. All the time, my mother was in mind, where [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: Everybody, you can't-- that can't-- 

SUBJECT 2: My sister, and like, you know, shaking all-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: It's 30 years already. You try to forget. You start talking about it, every moment comes back to you-- every single moment. 

SUBJECT 2: And thank God we tried to forget. Because thank God, we got married. We were lucky. He came to this country, New Haven. And we got married. 

I have two beautiful children. One is married here in New Haven. One is went to U, very educated kids. One went to Union College, and for-- now she's in Hahnemann Medical School in Philadelphia. And she's bright. 

And this one finished BU. And we gave them-- we didn't have nothing. We gave him all the best education, all the best schools we send them. And-- 

SUBJECT 1: We tried to give them what we missed out on. 

SUBJECT 2: What we missed out, we give them everything. Our kids are very bright, and you know, and they really do well. And now my younger one just left-- last week she came, and she got engaged with a doctor, too, she met in the Hahnemann. 

And they happy. So we accomplished something. After all, we say-- we always said together, when we talk, we say, what we went through, I guess our parents prayed for us. But you know, praying we should be all right, you know, a different life, because we want through so much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were are your children asking about your experience? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, yes. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: My younger-- my younger one, my young daughter went to Europe during being in Union College to study socialized medicine. So she went in Poland. She was in Warsaw. 

SUBJECT 1: Looking for the little remnants of the Jewish. 

SUBJECT 2: She went all over. She went in Warsaw. She went in-- what other [INAUDIBLE] a few Polish places. And she went all over, looking and saying. But she said that the professor told her don't ask questions. They didn't like this. She wanted to ask question. They say in Poland, there was a big statue in Warsaw ghetto. But it didn't say Jews in the Warsaw ghetto. It just said the [? own ?] people, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How much could you tell your children? 

SUBJECT 2: I told them everything. 

SUBJECT 1: Everything. 

SUBJECT 2: My younger one is I want to know everything. 

SUBJECT 1: Everything. 

SUBJECT 2: She wants to know everything. She's so, I, all the time, start talking. You know? 

SUBJECT 1: You'd start telling her about it, they start crying. 

SUBJECT 2: The younger. The older one is already, I mean, she's, too. But she already has had a baby. 

SUBJECT 1: They're here so many years. But if you try to tell them each time a little bit more. The last time I told Cindy something, she started to cry. 

SUBJECT 2: Now we met the boy. He's very nice, too. And he is American. And they are American born from long time generation. And when he went to visit them, they really-- we felt so comfortable with them, even though we speak with accent. 

And then they-- have you told them all what we went through. They were so interested to know. And they love my daughter, and they're so good to her. I came so feeling good, that they treat her like that-- like they would be parents to her. You know? 

And they said they were thrilled with us, that we went through so much. And they said, from now on, we should just have happiness. And they're really very wonderful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Shouldn't you have said that when you begin to tell, it's only a beginning. You feel that there's more-- that you can go on? 

SUBJECT 2: How much? You know? 

SUBJECT 1: You know there is so much to tell. You can write a book 10 feet wide, and you couldn't tell the whole story. 

SUBJECT 2: You cannot tell all the details. I mean, every little-- you could your whole life-- 

SUBJECT 1: It's impossible, believe me. No matter how much you're here. And how much-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But for you? 

SUBJECT 1: I tell. 

SUBJECT 2: I think he told more than other people. 

SUBJECT 1: I still cannot tell enough of every minute that-- 

SUBJECT 2: But I think-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: --that I went through. 

SUBJECT 2: He told plenty, I think. I think you told enough. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you feel it's only, like, the beginning of it? 

SUBJECT 1: It's-- it's a lot more to it. Because sometimes, you think, and even many times I think myself, there's always some-- something coming into your head. But it did happen to you. One, or a few one day, or one hour, or a few hours in a certain day at different times-- like, you know, many times, like in the-- that was in one-- in one camp, that we lived in such conditions there, that I don't think a pig could live. We had no, nothing. I mean, some days for recreation, we had to do all day long from the morning until night, you know those tin cans that you buy tar here in? They would supply you, the Germans would supply you with those cans. 

And that's all you would do all day long. Go out to the ditches where they had made for the people to go. You had to put it in with your hands, and carry it across the fields and empty it in the fields, and other things like this. Believe me, that's-- if somebody would tell me about things like this, I couldn't believe it. And a lot worse things than this. It's just unbelievable to-- 

SUBJECT 2: Just most of the people survive when they were young. Most people. Because you were young and strong. 

SUBJECT 1: But the human people, the human being can take-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT 2: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] You know what that means? [LAUGHS] You could went-- so much you could went through, and you still live, you know? It's not believe what you're going through. 

SUBJECT 1: It's true. 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] [LAUGHS] 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] Those stones start with the sledgehammers all day long like this. And there was no food. If somebody just sat down or fainted, they would come over. They would pour a little water on you. It's really-- I mean, it's-- 

SUBJECT 2: I bet you can't believe what people could live through. 

SUBJECT 1: It's un-- really unbelievable things, unbelievable. You know, some people there had short times in the concentration camp, maybe a year or a year and a half, most of them. But when you're six years in it, that was a lot. And each camp there's a little more to tell. 

SUBJECT 2: He was six years. 

SUBJECT 1: It's-- 

SUBJECT 2: And now we think about everythings you try to forget. That's so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you forget every day? 

SUBJECT 2: No, you cannot forget. We have, you know, we have our friends. We have our group. Maybe hear them call, and you know, we get together. And any time we come, we have [INAUDIBLE] 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: We have 10 couples we socially together. 

SUBJECT 1: Somehow-- somehow it always comes out. 

SUBJECT 2: Always we come to the same thing. 

SUBJECT 1: It always comes out somewhere. 

SUBJECT 2: We are five or six couples with we go out every Saturday. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you generally have friends of survivors? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: I would say most of them, yes. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, that's what we are. We have [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: Not that some of them didn't-- didn't-- yeah, didn't spend that time in a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who are they? Because we [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] You didn't have him? I think you have, no? 

SUBJECT 1: Did you have Feynman? 

SUBJECT 2: [? Fayman. ?] 

SUBJECT 1: [? Fayman. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Fayman, ?] I heard-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: Martin [? Fayman. ?] Think he was there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: Who else did you-- [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT 2: [? Peretzman? ?] 

[LOUD TAPE NOISE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Peretzman. ?] What's his first name? 

SUBJECT 2: Abraham-- no, I don't know. [INAUDIBLE], that's all I know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, [? Peretzman. ?] 

SUBJECT 1: He was in the concen-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: He was liberated, though. 

SUBJECT 2: He was in Dachau, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who else? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, who else? I think most of them are here, doing here already. Carlos? I don't know if they he was. 

SUBJECT 1: No, he was in Russia. 

SUBJECT 2: They were in Russia, I think. 

SUBJECT 1: Not too many here, really, that they were in a concentration camp. 

SUBJECT 2: That's all I know. We all [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] Russia all of the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But then, you know them well? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you speak to them [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT 1: If I have a-- speak to them. They wouldn't do it. 

SUBJECT 2: Don't even mention we said something. Because they're busy and they wouldn't go. 

SUBJECT 1: If I ask-- well, [INAUDIBLE] would get very sick. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: I wouldn't even want to ask. 

SUBJECT 2: I wouldn't ask. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You would not ask. 

SUBJECT 2: No. His name is [? Kozaritzki ?] and he had a heart attack. And we wouldn't talk to him because he takes it very hard. 

SUBJECT 1: [COUGHS] 

SUBJECT 2: If he talked about it, he'd get sick about it. So that's [INAUDIBLE]. And his uncle, I don't think they were. 

SUBJECT 1: His uncle wasn't-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] maybe Russia's-- 

