[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: You're sitting in a very comfortable arm chair. Nobody is around. Definitely not the camera. And if you have an old picture album, you know those brown faded? And you open it, and it's the first page. 

SUBJECT: My name is Gina Esturick I was born May 20, 1905 in Grajewo Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: Grajewo Poland. In 1914, when the war broke out, we fled from Grajewo We lived nine months in Bialystok And from there we went to Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was terrible. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: No, where you were born. What-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: As a child, what kind of childhood? 

SUBJECT: I had a happy childhood. My parents were wealthy. We had three servants. And it's funny, when the war broke out, we wanted to take the train and one maid with us. And the Polish people did not let us stay. They took their pigs and whatever it was, but not for Jews. Then my parents hired something like a horse and buggy. And this way we went to Biaylstok 

INTERVIEWER: What was your father doing? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: What was your father doing for a living? What kind of-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, at that time? Yes, my father was breeding horses. Mostly in Germany, in Berlin. And then we stayed in was nine months. The war expanded. Then we left for Warsaw. And we went to Warsaw. There I attended school. Graduated there. And in 1928 we moved to Berlin. My father was there already. 

And then when Hitler came to power-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about Berlin in 1928. 

SUBJECT: Oh, Berlin was beautiful. By the way, I was last month one week in Berlin. Invited by the Senate. Oh, it was beautiful. It was beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe it. 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: When? 

INTERVIEWER: 1928 in Berlin. 

SUBJECT: 1928? Oh, yes. It was a beautiful city. We had a good life in Germany. And I learned German. And then I got a job in an office. And then came 1932. 

INTERVIEWER: But in 1929, there was the big inflation. 

SUBJECT: No, the inflation was over already. The inflation started in 1923. Not for my time. No. At that time, the conditions were normal. No. 1928 everything was all right. And then, life did go on until 1932. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of social activities-- friends, parties. 

SUBJECT: Yes. We used to go to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe-- what do you remember, what flashes of memories do you have of Berlin? 

SUBJECT: We had three operas. We could go everywhere we wanted. There was no limit for Jews. We did not know what a Jew is, or not a Jew. Until Hitler came. Now? 

INTERVIEWER: Your family was-- 

SUBJECT: We were in Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER: Where you a traditional-- what kind of Jew-- in what way did you keep the Jewishness? 

SUBJECT: Mostly only on the holidays. That's all. Actually, my mother was a little more religious than my father. And when Hitler came to power, it was forbidden to slaughter the cows in the Jewish way. And then my mother said she will not buy the meat. We explained it to her, it's a higher power. We cannot do nothing about it. You have to accept it. You buy the meat, and do it the way you did before. That's how it worked. 

INTERVIEWER: He was in what business now, in Berlin? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Horses. 

INTERVIEWER: He went into the horse business again? 

SUBJECT: From before. Yes, he was still. Yeah. And then my father had an accident in 1929. He was riding in his private buggy. And then a group of workers was working there, and the horses got wild. And in order not to run into the working people, he stepped-- I would say on the brake. And he broke his leg. And four weeks later, he passed away. 

They tried out something like a new machine, but I don't know. And this was not good for him. And he died in 1929. It was January? 

INTERVIEWER: And you were 24 years old? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And how did life change after he passed away? 

SUBJECT: It was a little hard. We were working, my brother and I. Life goes on. 

INTERVIEWER: It was in the same in business, or did you-- 

SUBJECT: No, no. My brother's work was retail and wholesale. Material-- silks. And he was in that wholesale branch. He was the manager and had something like eight people under him. 

INTERVIEWER: And you, as a 24-year-old, what did you do? 

SUBJECT: I worked in an office. 

INTERVIEWER: In Berlin? 

SUBJECT: In Berlin. Now, we knew already in 1932 that Hitler was coming. Right? That's right. And finally-- 

INTERVIEWER: What were the first signs? How did you know? 

SUBJECT: How did we know? Well, reading the papers and Nazis were marching in the street. We saw them. Yes, already in 1932. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? What you saw? 

SUBJECT: What we saw? Big crowds of Nazis with the swastikas singing and talking against the Jews. So we knew they are coming. Hitler is coming on his way. And finally, January 30, 1933 the big event happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember yourself watching a particular parade? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe what you saw? What you thought? What day it was? Sunshine? Crowds? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was very miserable. We knew Hitler was coming. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe what you see in front of your eyes. 

SUBJECT: I said I saw marching. And then sometimes we ran into a place to hide of fear of them. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Esther did you hear about them before you saw the first time on the street the Nazis? Did you hear of them? Did you hear people-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, in the papers. 

INTERVIEWER: You heard it in the paper before you saw the first one. 

SUBJECT: In 1932. Yes. We knew Hitler was coming to power. Because we had big unemployment at that time. And the industry supported him. You know how it started, with nine people in his party. You know that? In Munich? You know the story? 

INTERVIEWER: I'm thinking more-- do you remember when you would sit with your family around the table, and did you talk about what you heard was going on? 

SUBJECT: Yes. But we did not realize that it would be so bad. No. No. We could not-- we did not know what would happen yet. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what your mother said? You were a young girl then. Do you remember what she-- 

SUBJECT: Well, we were afraid. And as I said, we had it too good in Germany, and so we did not try to go away. But only a few minority knew what was coming, so they fled right away from Berlin. And among those people who left were very wealthy, and those who had some problems with their taxes. Our landlord disappeared overnight, because he knew what can happen to him. So he disappeared overnight. 

INTERVIEWER: While you were living there, he was there one day and gone the next? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember when that happened? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And then, 1933, was not so bad. April 1934, you had that big boycott against the Jews. The Nazis, the SS, they were standing in front of the entrance to the department stores and did not let in the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, was this at the office that you worked at also? Could you go into your office? 

SUBJECT: Yes. At that time I could go. But 1935 they discharged us, all the Jews. We could not work. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you were maybe going to work in the morning, you could see the Nazis on the street in front of the-- 

SUBJECT: Department stores. 

INTERVIEWER: Department stores. What did that look like to you? 

SUBJECT: Terrible. I was too frightened to go in. But some Germans did not mind it. They walked in. 

INTERVIEWER: And you just look at them and walked right in? 

SUBJECT: Yes. This was 1934. And after this happened, we thought everything is over for us. But things quieted down, and everything went back to normal in 1934. 

INTERVIEWER: You still worked in the office? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And my brother had, at that time, bought a cleaning store. Yeah. Was it good business. That's how it was. 

INTERVIEWER: And he still lived at home with you and your mother? This was in 1934, he bought a cleaning store? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Before the-- it was some time in February. And then you had the boycott on April 1st of 1934. As I mentioned, we thought it now will be over. Nobody will come to Jews. And then we had the newspaper, The Striker? What was it? 

INTERVIEWER: The Striker, Der Sturmer. 

SUBJECT: Der Sturmer. Yeah. Der Sturmer. It was terrible. It said don't buy from Jews. And so, the Jews are ugly, and everything. Everything was against the Jews. And then in 1935 they passed new laws. The first law was Jews cannot have Aryan help. Let's say somebody had a maid-- had to discharge her right away. And then the Germans were not allowed to go to Jewish doctors. They considered Jewish doctors better ones than the Aryans. And we could have only Jewish doctors. That was 1935. 

And then they discharged all the actors who were in the theaters. And Jewish actors formed their own theater-- the Kulturbund. That was 1935. 

INTERVIEWER: You know, my parents were in Cologne at that time. I told this to you on the phone. And they would tell me what it was like. Do remember as each of these laws came down, what your family and you experienced? What you felt like? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We were powerless. We had to accept it. Because we thought to go away, because we knew things will be getting worse. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew that then? 

SUBJECT: We knew that then. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you hear of the new laws? Who told you? 

SUBJECT: The newspapers. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about reading that newspaper, and what was written in it? Or what a friend said? 

SUBJECT: And actually how we'd discuss with friends, it was terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember an incident? 

SUBJECT: Not particularly, no. The new law comes out, we had to accept it. Now, the big event was that we still had Polish citizenship. And 1938-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let me just-- I still would like to hear about Berlin. 

SUBJECT: Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER: You were a Jewish young woman working in Berlin. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was beautiful. Life was beautiful there. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, but in 1936 you begin to be part of your own events. You had the Olympics in Berlin in 1936. What did you-- 

SUBJECT: We were not allowed-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you personally see about it? 

SUBJECT: The Olympics? I saw the place where the Olympics took place now when I was in Berlin. At that time, we were not allowed to go. Oh, yes-- and finally they wrote the new law that Jews were not allowed to go to the theater. 

INTERVIEWER: Jews were not allowed to go to the theater? 

SUBJECT: Anymore, no. We had our own theater formed, the Kulturbund. 

INTERVIEWER: An evening in the Jewish theater, can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was nice. Well, sometimes I would like to go to an opera. I could not anymore. And so on, out of fear. The Jews, we had our own theater, and you go there. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like, an evening in the theater with Jews only? 

SUBJECT: It was a lot of comedies, thing like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one evening? 

SUBJECT: It was a long time ago. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to know about the daily life-- getting up in the morning, going out in the street, taking transportation, walking. A day of yours in Berlin in the mid-30's. Any day that you remember. Any one. 

SUBJECT: We met with friends. And then each one told some stories about what happened. They started calling people to come to the Gestapo. And they never came back from the Gestapo. As you say about the Gestapo-- the very wealthy they called in, and they had to sign a paper that gave away everything that they possess, like properties and businesses. And within-- and they took them to a concentration camp. And they were allowed within 48 hours to leave the country. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Esther do you remember any of your friends that went down to the Gestapo headquarters and then didn't come back? 

SUBJECT: No. I remember only cases where people used to say, they called somebody in. And the person never came back. Just in the evening or a day later, they got a hat or a coat. Something like this. 

INTERVIEWER: A hat? Or a coat? 

SUBJECT: Or a coat. Yeah. Some people they either wore a coat or a hat. That's it. The person disappeared. Yeah. That was-- they took them to a concentration camp. Mauthausen or the other ones. 

INTERVIEWER: Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Dachau. Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And nothing, only the hat or the coat came back? 

SUBJECT: That's all. That's all. I heard from my friend, somebody who knew the person. Yes, that's all. And they never found out about what happened. And now, as I mentioned, the Polish government passed a law that all the Polish citizens who live abroad are losing their citizenship. This was in 1938, October 28. And in the morning, the doorbell rang, and they called in my brother only, come with us to the police. We have to check something. And he never came back. Because we had relatives in Warsaw, so he went to Warsaw. And he let us know where he was. 

And then he wrote to us-- they had to walk miles. And some of the people took suitcases with them, and they could not take carry them so they left them on the way from the train to the Polish border. my brother had nothing with him, so we sent him his clothes afterwards. 

And I believe a few months later, the families-- yeah, they picked up only men and young boys, from very young kids until the age God knows what. Only men. And a few weeks later, the family has to follow them to go. And my brother was in Warsaw, and he had an affidavit that he could not go to America, because there was a quota for us. 

But in the year 1936, I remember one time Goebbels said in his speech, go! You better leave country. Yes, he warned us. Otherwise we will dry you out like a flower without water. And he kept his promise. And as I mentioned before, we had it too good. We did not go. We knew when you go to a new country without knowing the language, it will be very hard for us. So we stayed there. But my brother had an affidavit, but the affidavit did not help him, because there was a quota. 

Then they took him to Auschwitz, I believed in 1942. 

In 1941, we had to wear a patch-- Juden. It printed in what looks like Hebrew letters-- Juden. It was beautifully done. A yellow patch with black lettering. Juden. And we had to wear it. It was 1941. 

INTERVIEWER: In Berlin-- 

SUBJECT: Yes? 

INTERVIEWER: Until 1941-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah-- the Kristallnacht. Yeah. I skipped that. 

INTERVIEWER: You did not have to wear a Jewish star? 

SUBJECT: No. Not yet. Not before. 

INTERVIEWER: Only in 1941? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 1941. The war broke out September 1, 1938, right? 

INTERVIEWER: 1939. 

SUBJECT: 1939. 1939. They took the men in 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: And then the Kristallnacht? 

SUBJECT: The Kristallnacht, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What you see? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah, what I saw. And at that time, when my brother left, I took care of the store. But we had gates-- in the morning, I left the house. I wanted to go out to the store. And on my way to the store-- it was walking distance-- I saw a few stores with broken windows. And I could not understand what happened. But we had gates-- 

And yeah, I forgot to mention. In 1936 in order that they knew where the Jewish stores were, everything was prepared. We had to, one inch wide, put down the name on the windows. But the problem was it was not big enough, so they changed it. We had to make it to bigger-- about two inches. It was more visible. So they would know where the Jewish stores are. 

And that Kristallnacht-- as I said, in the morning, I do not know what happened. I came to the store. Our store was safe, because we had the gates. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew nothing of what had happened during the night? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Nothing. No. And then we had people who said, every the store was destroyed. And then the police stood there, and people were-- now, when we had, that time here when the blackout was-- so I forgot one thing, too. They were stealing-- how would you call that? 

INTERVIEWER: Looting. 

SUBJECT: Looting. Yeah. And then, in fur stores, the police stood near watching the store, but the looters came out with all the furs, and the police did not say anything. And always marching and marching. Just terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: What else did your eyes see on that morning? 

SUBJECT: The Kristallnacht? Yes. Yes, as I said, on my way to the store, I saw only two stores that the windows were broken. And I did not realize what-- I thought maybe there was a fight. I did not know this was Kristallnacht yet. That it was all over the city. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you begin to hear about it, then, that morning? When-- 

SUBJECT: The other people we met on the street, they said, oh, our store was completely destroyed. And so on. And then we saw pictures in the newspaper how it looked. So we knew about Kristallnacht. And the funniest thing, afterwards, not only the Jews had to clean up, they had to replace the windows. And we had to pay a fine for that. Yes. Because this was-- they took a step-- it was a young boy in Paris, a 15-year-old boy, that killed a German. I don't remember. Right? 

Yes. And then we had employment only for Jews. We were not allowed to look for a job. They send the Jews, in the summer, to pick the potatoes and so on. My husband did it. I didn't know what to go to the unemployment office to look for a job. The store-- a few days later, I sold the store. I got a good price. But how the Gestapo worked is unbelievable. They came about two weeks later to me. I still was in the store with-- a tailor bought the store. He was very happy. It was a good business. The Gestapo came to me, and told me that the store has to be closed. I am not allowed to sell it. And I returned the money to the tailor. 

INTERVIEWER: This was after you sold it? 

SUBJECT: After I sold it. 

INTERVIEWER: They came to you in the store? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened? You gave back the money? 

SUBJECT: I gave back the money, naturally. And I closed the store. And then I read an ad in the paper. It was nearby where I lived. They wanted somebody to do whole-work, lampshades. So I worked there maybe three months. And after that time, I was called in to the Jewish employment office. And he showed me a newspaper, like we have in New York, the the Aufbau a German paper. Don't you read this paper? I said, no. Don't you know you are not allowed to look for work? I said, no, I don't know. And then he said, I am not allowed to do this work anymore. If you need a job, come to us. I said, thank you. Then 1938-- 

INTERVIEWER: All this time, you had neighbors, Germans-- 

SUBJECT: Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: You had clients, friends. Did you notice a change in the relationship? Did the friends leave you? Can you about talk that particularly? 

SUBJECT: For example, there was one Nazi who lived above us. When we walked up the stairs, he turned his back. when he saw us. And our neighbors-- the same thing. They ignored us. But they did not harm us. No. They did not. And then we had benches in the park only for Jews. We were not allowed to sit where we wanted. That 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember sitting on such a bench? 

SUBJECT: No. I did not go there. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] I am now. No. And then the war broke out. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it-- did any-- did you have any good German friend who stopped being your friend? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Or continued being your friend? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No, no. But I cannot blame all the Germans that they were Nazis, because they saved our lives. They took us in, some of them did. Some did it for a friendship. And other ones did it for money, and then they reported them to the Gestapo. That was different people who went into hiding. We had 10,000 persons in Berlin who went into hiding. As the Jewish, like the Judische Gemeinde. I think this is something similar like here the Jewish Federation, right? 

INTERVIEWER: But I'm asking about in normal life, you had social contact? You go to dinner. You had friendships established. Can you describe things that stopped, or other friendships that continued with Germans? 

SUBJECT: No, we did not have friendships with Germans. No. No. No. 

INTERVIEWER: Always, or just as this developed? 

SUBJECT: As this developed. Mostly, even before. I did not have-- only Jews. No. 

INTERVIEWER: It's now 1939. The war began. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you hear about the beginning of the war? How did you? 

SUBJECT: From the papers. We know it months before that it's coming. Yes, the papers. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know months before? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, from the papers. You see, I had an aunt and her children were already in London. And they used to call her to come, come, come. The war is coming. And she had a permit to go, but she had one daughter in Berlin. She did not want to leave her. So she remained in Berlin. But she was able to take the last train on September 3rd to got to Holland. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did your aunt hear from the people in England? What did she hear was happening? 

SUBJECT: Well, they knew that-- the children insisted that she comes, because the war is coming very soon. 

INTERVIEWER: So the war began. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: The papers had articles. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: The war with Russia has begun. Do you remember the headlines of the papers? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, they're marched-- oh, when we used to go to the stores, they all are so happy. They are running-- they are doing it so fast. First they invaded Poland, right? And three weeks later, they were in Czechoslovakia. They were marching-- yes. And the Nazis were marching in the streets. Victory is ours, and Hitler, you will be the king of Europe. 

INTERVIEWER: You would see the Nazis marching in the street? 

SUBJECT: And I was afraid. 

INTERVIEWER: You would be standing on the street, and you'd see them? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did it look like to you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, terrible. Such a mob, and all the people were so enthusiastic about it. Because he promised them-- there was unemployment of 12 million people. And when he came to power, he rationed already butter. You could get only a quarter pound a week. They rationed butter. As soon as he came to power. So he was preparing for years, as soon as he came to power. 

INTERVIEWER: The war began, and the Germans were crying victory, victory! What next? How did life change for you? Incidents that you remember? 

SUBJECT: At that time, I expected to get a permit either to go to England or to Australia. But the war unfortunately came a few weeks too early, so I got stuck. And my mother went to Warsaw. My mother did not want to leave, so she went Warsaw. No, no. No, my mother remained. My mother was picked up from Berlin. No. She couldn't go to Warsaw. No. I'm mixing up things. 

INTERVIEWER: You were married then? 

SUBJECT: No. I was not married then. I'm married now. 

INTERVIEWER: So in 1939, the newspapers just mentioned the war began. There were victory parades. Poland is conquered. Czechoslovakia has fallen. There are victory parades all over Berlin. And if you're living there and working. 

SUBJECT: And then we had a curfew. In the wintertime, you have to be home at 9:00. In the summer at 8:00. Then 1940, there were big signs-- not just in the paper-- we have to register for work to help Hitler to win the war. So I applied to work at Siemens Healthcare. You know who Siemens Healthcare is? Yeah. Actually they wanted to send me to a place where they made airplanes. There they sent only half Jews. And I mentioned to them, I am not a half Jew. I am a full Jew. So I went to work at Siemens Healthcare. 

And they promised us, they told us we are safe until the war is over. Now, 1941, they started to bring in people from Belgium. And it took a long time to train them. And they did not know the language. And later on they brought in Russians or Ukrainians. And these people, they took them to work in groups. They were not allowed to walk on the sidewalk. 

And then at this time, 1941, we had the sign of Juden. I remember on my way to work, the people in the subway Shtatbahn It's the L train. They did not know that I'm Jewish. So I heard them saying-- they pointed at me-- she's Jewish, too. In order to use the subway, you had to have a yellow card that permits us to use the subway. Only on our way to work and from work. 

At this time, 1941, the deportations started already. They picked up. And they assured us we are safe until the war is over. 

But in 1942-- 

INTERVIEWER: Now, as the deportations began, did you hear rumors of what was going on in Poland with Jews? And the Ukraine? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: From who? 

SUBJECT: We heard from soldiers who came on a furlough. 

INTERVIEWER: German soldiers? 

SUBJECT: German soldiers. And they said, don't believe it that there are-- the Jews, they take them and they put them into gas chambers. And they take babies, they throw them on the wall. German soldiers who came on the furlough told us. And by the way, at that time, all the Jews have to give away their furs, everything that they have. And diamonds. But we were Polish. We were exempt from it. So we could have it still. We did did not give them away. Only they Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the soldiers actually telling you this? 

SUBJECT: My husband. I knew him. He had friends, he had good friends. And they told him. So he new what happens. Yes. And my mother, because I was working at Siemens, my mother was safe, too. But in 1942-- 

INTERVIEWER: And your husband was-- 

SUBJECT: My husband? I was not married time at that time. He was working on the railroad at night. And I remember he used to say, when he used to come home in the morning, he used to keep his eyes only closed. He did not sleep. And somebody tapped him on his shoulder, hey, you-- don't know you sit next to a soldier? And he had to get up. It was a terrible time. 

Now, 1942, the doctor told me-- and then they started even my mother was not safe anymore. So the doctor said, let her go to the hospital. In the hospital she will be safe. They don't take the people from the hospital. This did go on only for two months, from July until October. 

And in the beginning, when they used to deport the people, they used to send letters-- you will picked up on that and that date. And when people knew about it-- because the rumors spread that the concentration camps are only gas chambers-- but they did not show up. And later on, they just came into the house and picked up the people. 

Oh-- I'd like to say something about the Judische Gemeinde. The Judische Gemeinde helped the Gestapo to speed up the deportations. Let's say they need to transport of 1,000 people, right? And the Judische Gemeinde was nice-- they brought them 1,200 instead of 1,000. They thought this will help them to remain in Berlin. 

They used to close up a few blocks. And let's say you had visitors that don't belong there. They took everybody. Now, another thing-- we lived in a Jewish house, an apartment house. And then they passed a law, Jews who live in Gentile buildings have to move out, move in with Jews. So we had to give up two rooms. One room was a large one for a couple, and a small one for a lady. So we were safe in the Jewish apartment building. 

INTERVIEWER: You were living there with your brother still? 

SUBJECT: No, my brother was already in Warsaw. No, with my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: With your mother then? You said she was not safe where she was? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, because-- at home. The doctor said, it's better if you write a paper-- she is sick. She needs hospital, to be hospitalized, and she needs care in the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: And she then went to the hospital? 

SUBJECT: Yes, she was there for three months. And later on they picked up all the people-- all the sick ones-- who could walk, who could not walk, from the hospital. This was October 3, 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she picked up? 

SUBJECT: Yes. She said they picked her up, and they stayed in a place where they kept the people for a about a week. Now, where I worked, they were very nice to me-- the Nazis. So I asked them for permission to leave work earlier because I'd like to see my mother. I used to go every day to see my mother. In order to go there, I had to have changed my permit so that I could use even a streetcar to go there. 

When I went there to that office, to get the permit, I opened the door. And an old Nazi was sitting there, and I said, guten morgen. And he looked up at me and he saw my sign, and he said, what did you say? Heil Hitler? So I said, I said, guten morgen. And the funniest thing-- in the beginning, they demand that the Jews greet, Heil Hitler. Was it in Cologne, too? Yes. So I said, "Ich habe gesagt guten Morgen." 

INTERVIEWER: And what did he say? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: No. And he was quiet. I wasn't afraid of him. This way he could get me-- I would commit a crime. 

INTERVIEWER: If you said, heil Hitler? 

SUBJECT: If I said [INAUDIBLE] I said, "Ich habe gesagt guten Morgen, nicht Heil Hitler." 

INTERVIEWER: For a Jew to say heil Hitler was a crime? 

SUBJECT: Later on a crime. First they demanded that the Jews greet and say, heil Hitler, instead of guten Morgen. That was a terrible time. 

INTERVIEWER: Then, when your mother was taken away, how did you hear? Where were you when you heard that she was taken away? Or how did you hear about it? 

SUBJECT: I knew it. I know she was in the hospital. I was notified that all the people were taken away. Yes. And then, when we went home from work, we could see all the people at the railroad station. And there were nurses and many people. Always a transport about every two weeks, they picked up people. 

INTERVIEWER: That's starting to make sense. Could you describe what you saw when you saw all the people? What was it like? Could you say what you saw? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: How was it terrible? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: I'm on my way home, and there we passed the railroad station. It was the L train we took from [INAUDIBLE]. And I see a big crowd with people waiting for the train. And they had all of them suitcases, but the people never saw their suitcases. They took away their suitcases. And the suitcases were put in a special car. The people did not see it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see many people? Were there hundreds, thousands? What do you think? 

SUBJECT: Oh, a few hundred. About a thousand. As I said, the Judische Gemeinde was working so wonderfully. Instead of bringing 1,000 people, they brought in 1,200 people to speed up the deportations. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you stand there and watch? Or did you run home? What did you do when you saw this? 

SUBJECT: No, I took the train, that's all. I saw it from that train on my way from work. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what was on your mind, what you thought watching those convoys? 

SUBJECT: The end is coming for us. That's what I thought. And when I was in hiding, it was a terrible feeling to live, to wait only for my death. That I could get caught by the Gestapo, or killed by the bombs. 

INTERVIEWER: That's what was-- your mother was a week in the Umschlag, ja. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And you visited her every day? Can you tell about that? 

SUBJECT: Yes. On the last day when I came in, they did not let me in anymore. They said the people are leaving now. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say to your mother in those visits? What did she say to you? 

SUBJECT: Well, I said to my mother, eventually I will try to walk to Switzerland. Because many people went to the Belgian border. In the beginning, thousands of them. They opened up the border and they could cross the border. But later they stopped it. And then we heard from other people that there's a possibility to go to Switzerland. 

Then somebody recommended to me there was a man in a bar. And the back room was red wallpaper, and he looked like Rasputin. I was afraid of this man. It was everything described so beautiful. He said, oh, for you it's no problem. I give you the passport from my wife, or my sister-in-law. And on our side is his brother, and on the Swiss side is somebody else. And then he said about my husband, it'll be a little harder for him. He has to cross the border by himself. For men it's a little harder. 

And then, in order to get out of there, he said, it's a very good idea. And we'll let you know about it. 

And later on, we found out some people got into this trap, and the Gestapo picked them up. We did not go. That's what I used to say to my mother-- I hope to go to Switzerland. 

INTERVIEWER: When you would visit her in-- 

SUBJECT: In the hospital. Yes. And later in that Umschlagslager Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the last conversation with her? What did she say to you? 

SUBJECT: I saw her the day before. I did not expect it. I thought it would go on for quite a while, a little longer. But the following day when I came, they did not let me in anymore. They said the people are leaving already for Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were telling her where you were going. Was she telling you where she was going? 

SUBJECT: Yes. She knew. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? What did she say about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We are going to the Theresienstadt. We accepted it. It was very hard. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that? What was Theresienstadt to you? 

SUBJECT: Theresienstadt was in Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think of it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They said, this is not like Auschwitz. This is something for older people, and for privileged people. That was Theresienstadt. But I never heard from my mother, no. That was 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- excuse me-- did you believe when you heard that it was for privileged and that it was different than Auschwitz? Did you believe that it was different? 

SUBJECT: I did, yeah. It supposedly was. I don't know. Yes. But when the war was over, the first transport, that train, from Theresienstadt came. I went to look for my mother. There was no mother. I met another lady, and she told me that she and her husband were the first in Auschwitz. And then the husband was put into the gas chamber. And they sent her to Theresienstadt. And she mentioned to me, there were sometimes children in the morning, they were playing in Theresienstadt. And in the afternoon, there were no children anymore. They were gone. That's how my life was. 

Now, in December 1942 they brought in-- and we saw in our different apartments every day less Jews. And in December 1942, they brought in people from Poland. Then I said to our friends-- we were working together-- this is the replacement for us. And it was. Because we used to come to work every day, there were less people in there. This one is not here, and so on. 

Finally, February 10, 1943 I am on my way home. I was lucky, I came a little later. Otherwise, I could fall into their hands. And I was ready to open the door, and I heard a voice, somebody, said, where's my briefcase? Then I realized the Gestapo is there. And I ran. 

INTERVIEWER: You just ran right out of there? 

SUBJECT: I ran out. Yeah. It used to be sometimes there was a truck waiting in front of the building. But later on they realized the people, when they see a truck, they don't go into the apartment. There was no truck when I came. But my luck was, I heard them say-- somebody said, "wo ist meine Aktentasche." Then I knew the Gestapo was there. 

And we lived all the time in fear if somebody rang the bell. The worst time was Sunday. We worked the Saturday a half a day. Sunday if somebody rang the bell, the Gestapo. That was on our mind always. 

And then my husband-- I was not married at that time. I was walking up and down the street. Weeks ago, he was already in hiding. He said to me he found a place for me where I can stay. And he said, you better leave. You can be too late. So I said, oh, I am still at home. I would be happy if I would have a place as big as under my bedtop. See if they would let me alone. 

So he said, you better make up your mind. You can be too late. He was right-- it was almost too late. But I was lucky I came a little later. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go then? Where did you go then when you ran away? 

SUBJECT: I think I had to go to the store, do some shopping. We were allowed to buy only from 2:00 until 4:00. And some stores-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go after you heard a voice "meine Aktentasche." 

SUBJECT: I ran down. I walked up and down the street. And then my husband came, he wanted to come up to see me. And he had a lamp for me, I gave him to have it repaired somewhere. What are you doing, he says. The Gestapo is there. This was around 5:30. And the storekeepers, some of them, they were so nasty if a Jew used to come after 4:00. They did not sell them. But my store was nice. And they had cards that were written Juden, with a big J, for food. It was one card for every week something to get our ration. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? 

SUBJECT: What happened. Now, we're walking up and down, and then we came-- they waited for me until 11:00 at night. And we had Venetian blinds. And in one room the couple lived in order to be safer, so the light doesn't go through. They put up blankets. Then I saw the blankets were taken off. Then I realized, aha, now it comes. They are leaving soon. Then we run away. 

And we came about a half hour later, and there were signs on the door-- three pieces of paper. Judische Gemeinde. This was not the Gestapo. The Hilfsgestapo I called them. Oh, they were nasty. It was dangerous. I ripped off the papers, and we walked into the apartment and took out as many things as was possible for my personal things. We did it about three times. It was until 7:00. 

INTERVIEWER: That's after the curfew hour? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Courageous. And then, it was already light, day time, so I was afraid to go in. So my husband went in. 

INTERVIEWER: At 7:00 in the morning, do you mean? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: All night long? You did this all night long? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. A few times, three times. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry. Where did you stay between each time that you went back? 

SUBJECT: Always in the street. We went back and put it in the place where I supposed to stay. And then, it was already daylight, so I was afraid to go in. Maybe somebody of the neighbors could see me, and they knew what happened and I am in danger. So I did not go. My husband went by himself. And there was a barber store, and he approached me. He asked me, where are you going? So he told him-- he said to him, I'd like to visit Fraulein [INAUDIBLE]. And he did not go anymore. 

Now, in this building-- 