CREW: It must be done just before the cameras roll. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

CREW: Just before. There's a-- a-- I can talk in front of [INAUDIBLE]. But there's a psychological reason for that. I want to say [INAUDIBLE]. Um. That-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sometimes people are afraid that they said something what they should not have said. 

CREW: Right. If they-- if you wait till afterwards. So you must ask for it just before the cameras roll. Because otherwise, we have-- we have used time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Run it with the [INAUDIBLE]. 

HELENE ROSENBERG: All right. 

CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do we want to start now? 

CREW: Is it rolling? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

CREW: It's rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

HELENE ROSENBERG: OK. My name is Helene Rosenberg. My maiden name is Vajcz, V-A-J-C-Z. And I was born in Warsaw, Poland. I come from a large family, parents, six brothers, a sister, and myself. 

As a child, we had-- as I could remember, we had a large family. We lived in an apartment house with a lot-- a lot of children. And in our summers, we were sent to camps. 

I attend a Polish school. Schooling in-- in Warsaw was six days a week. At home, we spoke Jewish. I, myself, did not. When they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't you have Jewish at home? Your family did? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Yes. The family spoke Jewish. The children speak Jewish. But I-- I didn't, because I attended Polish school. I understood Jewish. I could speak in-- in a broken Jewish language. But I couldn't carry a conversation. 

When the family, uh, wanted to have fun, they said, Helene, let's talk Jewish. And when I start speaking, they laughed. They laughed, because I-- I-- I-- I was spoken-- speaking in such a broken way, that it was funny to them. It was funny to them, but it aggravate me. And I stopped talking. 

Maybe by not speaking Jewish, uh, somehow, uh, this was a certain point in which not being able to speak Jewish saved my life. The war-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Eh, I mean, eh, where were you in the family? There were seven-- eight children. But-- 

HELENE ROSENBERG: I had six brothers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But Where were you? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: I was the seventh child. And I had a younger brother and myself. My sister was one of the oldest. I had five brothers in between. And I was the number seven in the family. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you consider yourself a Pole? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Did I what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Consider yourself a Pole? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: No. I didn't consider myself a Polack. Ah, the Poles couldn't-- they couldn't-- uh, I was, uh, born in Poland. And I was a Jew. But I also was a Pole. Because I was born in Poland. But I didn't consider myself a Pole. 

Uh, since we attended Polish school, we used the Polish language constantly. When I spoke Polish at home, my parents could have answered. They spoke Polish, too. 

They-- but they could have answered Jewish. But, eh, some-- somehow, it wasn't necessary for me to speak Jewish. Because everyone around me spoke Polish. And, uh, the rest of the-- the family spoke, uh, fluently Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was an Orthodox home? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Uh, my father was Orthodox. But, uh, not that Orthodox, you know? Uh, Father didn't have a beard. Ah, he didn't wear the Jewish, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Kaftan? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: --kaftan. Ah, but, uh, it was a kosher home. And, uh, the holidays and the Fridays and the rituals, they were 100% Jewish. We mingled with-- with Jewish friends. 

And before the war, life was normal. None-- none of my brothers and sister looked Jewish. My father didn't look Jewish. Uh, everyone was blond and had blue eyes. We didn't have any long noses. We didn't act like Jews. 

I-- I really don't know how a Jew is supposed to act. But, uh, if you would have meet them, you-- you couldn't say who they really are. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

HELENE ROSENBERG: When the war started, in '39, I was 16 years old. Uh. The Polish people didn't expect that the Germans would take over Poland as fast as they did. 

Somehow, uh, when the-- wh-- when the war was over-- when-- when the war was over between-- when the German approached Pol-- Poland and occupied it, s-- something was-- was missing. The laughter disappeared, like the sun would never shine again. 

People are frightened. Uh. They day-- they didn't know where they belonged. They didn't know what-- what will bring tomorr-- what tomorrow would bring. 

They saw what happened to the Germans' Jews before the war started. In '38, the German Jews were sent out from Germany. And a lot of them came to Poland if they had some families. And they were like displa-- displaced persons. And-- 

But we didn't think it would happen to us, be-- because, after all, we're not German Jews. So we were Polish Jews. But the fear was such. And people were worried, particularly in Warsaw. 

There was the biggest amount of-- of the Jews who lived in Warsaw. A ghetto was started. They-- they put all the people in that ghetto, and they-- and they built a wall, that people should not be able to get out. They should have everyone under their control. 

They were taking people from the streets to work, to camps, for daily jobs. And anyone who didn't have any papers, that he is working for the German government, was taken away to camps. 

Uh, I study nursing. And, at that particular time, I wasn't a finished nurse, but there was a epidemic of typhoid. And-- and whoever was in training had to go on the floor and-- and, uh, get their experience from the floor. 

Epidemic was-- the epidemic was really bad. And we had to put, sometime, two people in one bed, a head on one side and the other head on the other side. And all of a sudden, uh, uh, the Germans decided the facilities are-- are too small. 

And-- and out of wh-- if they would take the sick people out of Warsaw to another town or where the epidemic is not as bad, where the facilities are better, than they would have more bed avail-- available for the people who are sick. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was this hospital in the ghetto? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Uh, nn-- at beginning the ghetto was closed in '41. There was a open ghetto in beginning. There was a ghetto. But it was a open ghetto, because a trolley car had to go through. 

They couldn't just cut-off the ghetto completely. The ghetto was in the middle of the town. And a certain ways that they built a wall around but still the trolley car had to go through. And-- and-- and the traffic had to go through the ghetto. 

And, uh, they picked up a transport of sick people, plus doctors and nurses, for the outskirt. They were-- really didn't know exactly where, but they came. And they said the epidemic is great. And-- and, uh, we don't have the facilities and not enough doctors, nurses. We're going to bring them to a sanatorium, to a-- to a place out of Warsaw, where they're going-- going to be given a chance for them to recuperate. 

One transport went. Another transport went. The-- the hospital was never empty, because the epidemic was so fantastic, and they were knocking on all the doors. And, uh, people were sick at-- at home. They were taking the people to the hospital. The epidemic shouldn't spread. 

And after a few weeks, someone return, somehow. I don't remember the-- a-- a-- if it was a doctor or it was a tech-- um, or a male nurse. Someone came back to Warsaw. 

And he said, those people are not going to any different hospitals. They're going to Auschwitz. They're being burned. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was 1940? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: '41. 1941. At that particular time, the guy-- the guy came back. And-- and he says, all the doctors, all the nurses wen-- went to Auschwitz with the patients. 

Next day, I didn't go to work. I didn't go to wok, because I figure, who knows? May-- maybe the next time, I will be on the transport to-- together with those sick people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were living with your family? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Yes. I got sick at that particular time, myself. I brought the typhus home-- home from the hospital. And I got sick. And my, uh-- my father got sick. My father had a complication, a brain complication, and he died. I recuperate. 

At that time, they were talking about closing the ghetto. And living conditions were very bad. There was not enough food. And we decided that we'll split. My sister's husband comes from a small town in a different part of Poland. Over there, there was no ghetto. It was like a village, small villages, and they couldn't just group all the people as easier as, uh, in a big town. 

So, four brothers-- not four, five brothers-- Here's one thing. One of my brothers, the oldest brother, he went to Israel in 1939. Uh, not-- to Palestine at that time. And he survived. Four brothers stayed in the Warsaw ghetto. 

I, mother, and my little brother, plus my sister and her husband and her little girl, went to a different part of Poland, where there was no ghetto and there was a little more freedom. 

At that time, I was smuggling. After I recuperated, I was-- I couldn't be in the ghetto, because-- or I had to go to the hospital and work or I couldn't be on the streets. Be-- because, you know, if you walked on the street, they took you sometimes off the street to labor camps. 

And I was bringing in food to Warsaw -- by train and trolley car, jumping off. And this way, I was helping my brothers to survive. And I was taking clothing from Warsaw and brought it to the farms. Farmers didn't have too much clothing. And we exchanged the clothing for food. 

There comes a time, it wasn't easy, because the trolley car went through the ghetto, and you had to jump off. And by jumping off-- the trolley car went very fast. And you had to throw down your bundles. And there were Polish cops watching you, because this was unlegal. You could've been arrested for it. 

But I was young, and I had, uh, enough guts and-- and did it as long as I could. Then they closed the ghetto. After the ghetto was closed, uh, there was no way of-- of getting in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anybody try to take the packages you were bringing in away from you? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Hm? No, because they didn't know that I'm a Jew. I didn't look typical Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But why were you getting off in the ghetto? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Oh, why? There was a lot of smuggling going on. The Polish people used to do it, too. They were doing it for money. I was doing it to help the family to survive. And you-- you took chances. Of course you took chances. So they catch you? But look, you have only one life to live. And-- and, you do everything to-- to help yourself and help the family. 

They closed the ghetto. There was no more, uh, chances of, uh, bringing in food. At that particular place, where we used to live, the name was Polaniec. And they start walking there. The-- pretty soon, they will gather the people, and-- and they will bring them to a-- to a larger place. They should be able to control them and have them all un-- under one roof, so to speak. 

There was a group of young people, who were thinking of, uh, going to the forest and join-- joining, uh, the underground. They were young and healthy and expected everything should come easy. 

There was one man, between them, who had a gun, one gun. Maybe 25 or 30, a young man. That fellow was, uh, very much involved with-- with some-- with a sheriff, or not a sheriff. Wh-- uh. Oh, what do you say? Well, the mayor of the town. And somehow, he got some forms, uh, to make out passports. 

And to make out passports, you have to have pictures and stamps and signatures. Um, we were trying to make false papers for people, who don't look typical Jewish, who could somehow, with those papers, survive. My sister and I, we were sitting, days and nights, and-- and trying to learn how to copy a certain name on the passport. They call it kennkartes. 

And we were pretty good at it. That young man, he was very artistic, and he made the stamp of the German Reich, the eagle, very good. And we were making passports for people who we knew we could trust and who we knew that they will somehow, because they don't look typical Jewish, survive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, at that time, ahem, you are living in that little town with whom? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: With my mother, my sister, my little brother. And my sister was married. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the other members of the family? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Were in Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the ghetto? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: In the Warsaw ghetto, right. I will come back to-- to one point. Before the ghetto was closed, uh, we very often used to go shopping to a open market. Family was big, and we were buying food in larger quantities. 

One day, my brother-- his name was Israel-- came home, and he brought-- and he says, Helene, I have something for you. And he handed me a birth certificate. He says, well, this birth certificate-- this birth certificate someday might save your life. And this birth certificate did save my life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did he get it? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: He bought it. On the open market, you can buy everything. People were selling things for money. I was, uh, six, seven years older on it, but didn't matter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What age were you at that time? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: 16. See, I was 16 in 1939. Going back to the place where I lived with my mother, we were making those papers for-- for our friends and without charge. There ca-- came a day-- and, at the same time, I had, uh, some papers done for myself. 

But since I knew that those papers are false papers, if a Polish cop would have caught you, you show him those papers, those papers were fine. But if a German policemen or Gestapo catches you, somehow they had certain tricks to it. He-- he would find out that the-- that-- that the papers are not the original papers. 

At that time, I went to a certain town. And I registered there. And, uh, if you ask me-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you know the name-- the name of the town? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: The name of the town? 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

HELENE ROSENBERG: I don't remember offhand. Maybe it will come back. I don't-- I registered there, and I was-- and-- and if you were living by yourself, without a family, they, right away, suspect that you were a Jew. Because the Poles had large families. 

And I registered myself in that place. And I-- There was a certain part in Poland, when the Germans came in, uh, Oberschlesien, and they said, this part of Poland used to belong to Germans. And now we are taking it legally back. 

And they took all the Poles, and they threw them out from there. They took away their homes and their belongings. And those Poles had to go to diff-- the other parts of Poland to resettle. So, if someone ask me, where are you from? How come you don't have any parents? I said that I am from Oberschlesien. The Germans threw the family out, and we trying to find new places where to live. 

This sound logically. But still, if you by yourself, people were suspicious. And I didn't live in that place. I didn't live at that place, because, usually, when they check, somehow, cards, they go to the second and third generation if-- if there is not Juden blood, by any chance, between them. 

One day, I called in. Miechow, the name of-- of the, uh, place was Miechow. I called in to-- to-- to the city hall and asked if my papers were ready. And they said, yes, they're arrived. I came, and I picked up the papers. And I never went back to that place. 

So I had two pa-- two kinds of, uh, papers, original papers, which I felt very secure about it, and papers-- the other papers helped me when I went on train before I got the originals. Having the papers-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Miechow papers were the original? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Original. They were in true, uh, you know, legally, because I registered un-- under that name. Ah, ah, the name was Maria Zuk. Zuk, in German, was "Tsuk," so it sounds a little German. 

At that particular time, someone got sick in a town, Wieliezka. Wielezka was a very well known town in Poland. They had the mines, salt mines. And that particular time, someone got sick there, and they needed some money. And-- and the people were wondering, who is there who-- who could deliver a message to those sick people in the-- in that ghetto? 

My mother said, look, my daughter has some false papers. And if you ask her, she is a good girl. She will do you a favor. People came over, asked me to deliver some money. Did give me a letter written in Jewish and give me money for the train. 

And to me, at that time, it was like a adventure. I went, arrived in town. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the purpose, exactly? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: The people were in ghetto, and they were sick. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you went to help? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: And-- and they didn't have any money. And-- and they had to buy medication for their child, maybe better food. And this was a close family, so they wanted to supply them with money to-- to the child should get well. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were carrying the-- 

HELENE ROSENBERG: I was carrying the money and the personal letter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh. 

HELENE ROSENBERG: I came to the town. Well, I-- I just couldn't, uh, start asking, where is the ghetto? This would be, right away, uh, suspicious. So I walked for hours around the town till I came to a fence. 

The fence had holes. You could see eyes looking through those fences. They were surrounded by Polish police. And every 20 yards, there-- there was a station of Gestapo. There was a-- German SS man standing there in that booth. 

I watched Polish children taking a dead cat and throwing it into the ghetto. And the Jews were throwing that dead cat out. If you are insulated-- isolated and you have no way of getting out, it is always very easy to-- to have a epidemic where people live together. And they didn't want a dead-- the dead cat had germs, sickness. So we're throwing it out. 

I stood there, and I couldn't-- I-- I-- I was crying inside of me. How could people, how could children be so cruel and do a thing like that? And all of a sudden, a Polish policeman walked over. And he asked me, what are you doing here? 

And I said, what am I doing? I'm doing the same thing what you are doing. Well, don't I have a right to stay on the street? He says, ah, young lady, you-- you-- you too smart. Why don't you show me your paper? Am I afraid? I had the original papers with me. And I showed them the papers. 

He says, what is your name? And I quote my name. What is your religion? I said, I'm a Catholic. What kind of a Catholic? I said what kind-- what kind? A Roman Catholics, because the Poles were Roman Catholics. 

And he says, I'm sorry, we have to go to Gestapo. I said, why? And he says, in your papers, you are a Greek Catholic. As a child, when I got those papers, 16, I didn't know the difference between a Roman Catholic or a Greek Catholic. 

They took me into Gestapo. They took away all my money, all my belonging. And they closed me in, in a room. It was this, a sunset. As I watched the sunset, I said to myself, well, my mother sent me for my death. She wanted me to do a favor for someone. 

I don't know how long I stood there. The door open, and someone grabbed me by-- by my arms and said, get out. I couldn't move. At that moment, I didn't know if I'm alive or I'm dead already. And a Polish cop pulls me out, and he said, get out. 

I said, if he's asking me to get out, and he is pressing the card, my-- my passport back in my hands, that mean that-- that I'm OK. And if I'm OK, I said, I want my mon-- my money back. All the money that I had, I want my money back. And he says, no, sir. You get out, otherwise we're going to keep you here. 

And they threw me out. Threw me out, but the letter, what I had for that family, I had hidden in my bra. When they arrest me, they look just in my pocketbook and the little suitcase what I had. And they-- they didn't-- I didn't have the letter there. If they would find the letter, there-- there's no doubt that I would be dead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because it was in Yiddish? 

HELENE ROSENBERG: Because it was in Yiddish. When I walked out, I said to myself, if I could come out alive, from the hands of Gestapo, I will survive. At that particular time-- moment, I was thinking, how-- how did it happen that they-- that they spared my life? 

The communication betw-- between the Polish cops and the German was very poor. The Pole didn't speak German. And the German didn't speak Polish. When they brought me in, he took the papers. And-- and-- and he just brought it to someone who is in charge and said, there's something wrong with it. 

The guy probably called up that place, where the original card was made, that particular city, and asked if there's anyone who is registered by that and that name. And he didn't ask any more. And they said, yes. And this was it. 

If a Polish policeman would have called that place, it would be a different story. Because he would right away ask, are there any suspicions about that person? And suspicions they had, because I was a single girl without parents. And they probably would have said, yes. This would be a quite different story. 

So my luck was that the Germans couldn't communicate well with the Polish policemens and that they didn't ask any questions. I walked out from the Gestapo. 

Now, I said, I have to meet the people. I have to give them the letter. I'm sorry about the money, but I do have to get in touch with them. I walked around the fence. And there was a board. If you press the board on top, the bottom open. 

And there were things being smuggled, some food in. And I got in through that board. In the ghetto, they had Jewish cops, who were keeping order in the ghetto. And-- 