EVA LEWINSKI: Five years. 

DORI LAUB: Well, especially-- no especially when unusually band that you heard, rumors that came, and about crazy rumors. A bit more about, is-- from your own memory, what it was like to live in the ghetto. Do you understand what I'm asking? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Yes. The beginning in the ghetto. 

DORI LAUB: See, when describe on-- you're rolling? 

CREW: Yeah. 

EVA LEWINSKI: In the beginning in the ghetto, they couldn't-- to break a Jewish spirit is very hard. The Germans could not break the Jewish spirit. Even when we were locked up, and we had no food, but we had concerts. We may chose-- people that had talent tried to do something to make you feel a little happier, make you feel a little better. Even there was nothing on the table, family life, usually European-- 

DORI LAUB: Your family. 

EVA LEWINSKI: My family life was very close, regardless whether there was food or not. On Sabbath, there was nothing to put on the table, but there was the Sabbath. My father-- 

DORI LAUB: Describe the Sabbath. 

EVA LEWINSKI: My father-- still there was a house where men met. The men, they prayed, they came home. And if there were-- if there were not candles, they found a candle, you broke it in a few pieces, and you still lit the candles. In the beginning, then later, it was even, not even candles left. 

And it was still the fam-- family life was very close. My family life was very close. I adored my parents, my parents adored me. The same with my brother. We were very-- extremely close. My grandfather lived with us until he died. In the beginning of the ghetto, he died in the ghetto. He lived with us. And we tried-- 

DORI LAUB: Did-- did people sing Hassidim songs? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Yes. Yes. They sang after the meal, just like it was-- that was in the beginning. But as time went on and it became worse and worse, the Germans succeeded what they wanted to succeed, to break the spirit of the Jew. And they did. Not only they-- they broke our lives, but they also broke the spirit. And it become-- became less and less. 

I remember-- I-- in the beginning, I was-- as young as I was, and as pampered a child as I was, I-- somehow, I was the strong one in the family. And I was the one that organized and thought of survival of everyday survival. I was the one of all of us. 

And I dressed as a peasant, as a Polish peasant. I smuggled through before they close the ghetto. And I went back to this-- to town. I got out some jewelry, my mother's jewelry, a little bit of silver, which we sold on the black market for bread. We change. 

DORI LAUB: Who did you find? How did you sell it? What exactly do you remember? 

EVA LEWINSKI: It was-- there was a black market. 

DORI LAUB: But do you remember? 

EVA LEWINSKI: What I remember. I remember my father, in the beginning of the ghetto, my father taking my mother's diamond ring. He sold it for a loaf of bread. He said, when-- if we all lived through this-- my grandfather was a very wise man. And my father was a very wise man. And they said, this is a blitzkrieg. 

This is not going to last long. It's going to length-- last maybe another month or another month. It cannot last long. And we will live this thing through. And then my mother will have other diamonds. But now, we need bread to survive. So he sold a diamond for a loaf of bread and-- until there was nothing, anymore to sell. And then it became worse and worse. 

My-- I-- after I worked in the kitchen, I got another job. I got a job where they-- where if a horse died on the front, they sended them to the ghetto for the people to divide it on the ration for the people, occasionally. So I worked in this place where we were giving out the bones. And, of course, I was stealing whatever I could to bring home. My family should have a little bit more. 

And-- but my father would not eat treif. Even so, even he was so hungry, and even-- he just needed it for survival. But he cannot make himself eat treif or eat horse. 

So I decided I'll make a connection, and I will change the bones for something that my father can eat. So I-- I make an acquaintance with a man that worked in a bakery for bread. And, of course, he worked in the bakery, and he stole bread. 

So I said, look, I'll give you the bones if you give me some bread. He agreed on it. And so my father had a little bit more bread. 

But after a while, I got caught. It was two girls with me. We worked together, and we were caught. And, of course, those two girls were sent out immediately to Auschwitz. Then later, I found out that they were-- I didn't know then, but then I found out that they were sent to Auschwitz. I managed to escape. 

DORI LAUB: How? 

EVA LEWINSKI: I managed to escape because my aunt, my youngest sis-- my mother's youngest sister, she had a lot of connections also because she was the daughter of Abraham Katz. She had a lot of connections in-- in the circle, in the Jewish government, in the ghetto government. And she knew exactly what's going on, when there is going to be a deportation, where they going to come for who, and so on. And whenever something went on, she let me know. 

And one night-- usually they were coming at night. If they couldn't find me, they would take somebody else instead. They would take either my mother or my father, whoever was there handy, they would take instead. 

So she came and said, look, you have to run away. You are the first on the list. They going to come for you. They need people to send out, and they're going to come for you. So I was hiding for a long time. And I bolted the house, the apartment, put the big lock outside, so they would think nobody is there. My parents, I locked them in there, and I went away, and I was hiding for a long time. 

But then after a while, I couldn't hide anymore because I had to go to work. If I wouldn't go to work, I'm not getting my ration. And then I have absolutely no way of survival, absolutely no way. So I got-- I got caught. But because they didn't send me out, because, again, I got word from Rumkowski that I am the granddaughter of Abraham Katz and what happened to me. 

So I had a caught. And-- 

DORI LAUB: Rumkowski saved your life? 

EVA LEWINSKI: I got sentenced to a month in jail. 

DORI LAUB: OK, describe that that you were-- 

EVA LEWINSKI: It was a cou-- it was just like a regular court, with a judge. There must have been a lawyer, prosecutor. I don't remember exactly, but it was a regular court. And I-- I-- why did I get only a month. 

DORI LAUB: Mrs. Luwiski, what did the prosecutors say? What were you accused of? 

EVA LEWINSKI: I was accused of stealing, and stealing food. And that was a very big offense. And I only got a month in prison. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe the court scene in the ghetto that's-- 

EVA LEWINSKI: It was a judge. It was just like a regular court you see here, with a judge, a courtroom, a judge, a prosecutor. The prosecutor was fighting for a bigger sentence for me. It was either to deport me, or that a lesser sentence was to clean out outhouses, toilets, outhouses. It was a terrible, stinky, bad job to be to have to do this for us for a long time. 

DORI LAUB: They were-- all they-- the court was Jewish? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Yes. They're all Jews. Of course, it was in the ghetto. It wasn't the ghetto, all Jews. It was a complete Jewish government. It was-- the ghetto was governed by Jews. It was a separate government, but was ordered by the Germans what to do. And they were puppets doing exactly what the Germans told them, but they were governed-- governed by Jews. It was Jewish police, Jewish firemen. And but they were puppets of the Gestapo, the SS. 

DORI LAUB: So you appeared at court. 

EVA LEWINSKI: So I appeared in court, and-- 

DORI LAUB: You were in jail before that or not? 

EVA LEWINSKI: No, I wasn't in jail, but I had to appear in court, and I-- immediately. And I only got a sentence, a four-week sentence, a jail sentence of for four weeks. Why did I get only the sentence for four weeks was because I got to word from Rumkowski. And at this time, it was before a big holiday, either Rosh Hashana or Yom Kippur. And because of that holiday, he gave like an amnesty for those that have no more than a four-week jail sentence. So since-- that's why I got only a four-week sentence because I also got the amnesty. 

And so I didn't go to jail, but I was already on the blacklist-- list. Whenever there was going to be a raid, the ones that were on the blacklist, those were the first ones to be taken out. So I had to be very cautious. 

And my aunt looked out for me. Whenever there was going to be a raid, they were-- they had a vote of people, so she always let me know, and I hid again. This went down on through the years in the ghetto. And then-- so after this, when my father was sick, I couldn't hide out anymore. I had to go to work. 

And I went-- when I went to work, my-- my mother was working in a-- in a factory where they were making rugs out of old clothes. And it was very, very suspicious because where she was working there was coming back clothes, and they didn't know familiar clothes. And people started suspecting something. They didn't know what-- why this clothes is coming back. 

But she wasn't-- they were-- they were picking it up and making rugs out of it. I was working in a factory no more. Since I had this-- that sentence, I couldn't work anymore where food was given out, so I worked in a factory, a military factory. And-- but we had to go to work because my father was sick. We were changing my mother's stay today home, or I stay today home. But then later, we couldn't. We had to go to work because otherwise they would take away our rations. 

And that day when my father died, I went to work, and my mother stayed home. And when I-- and when I came home, I saw already that he is gone. And then I felt that the world came to an end for me. I had no more reason to live. 

I adored him so much. But I managed to give him a burial, a Jewish burial, a funeral. I got 10 men. And I know exactly where I buried him. 

There still was the Jewish cemetery. And the Jewish cemetery was in the part of the ghetto. And I buried him there, and I put a little tin foil there with his name. And I promised myself that someday I'll come back. If I live through, I'll come back. And I will put a stone there. 

But when I came back, there was nothing left. The Germans managed to level off the whole cemetery. There was nothing left. So there was only left me and my mother. 

My mother couldn't walk anymore. We called them ducks because those people-- because the bones disintegrated in their legs, they couldn't walk anymore. And that was 1943, in the ghet-- they started totally-- eliminating to get there were very few people left. By 1944-- 

DORI LAUB: You were telling her that you were wor-- she was working in the factory where clothes came back? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Yes. 

DORI LAUB: What-- 

EVA LEWINSKI: It was a factory were the Germans wanted braided rugs. So they were ripping clothes, was coming in all kinds of clothes. And they were ripping it into shreds to make-- to make rugs out of it. And familiar clothes was coming back. People that work there recognize clothes from dear ones, and they couldn't understand. 

But still, nobody wanted to believe that anything such, such horrible things-- nobody knew that there is an Auschwitz, or there a Treblinka, or there is a Maidanek. Nobody knew. Maybe if some people did know, they wouldn't believe. They just didn't want to believe that such horrors exist. But they were there. 

DORI LAUB: By that time, your brother and his wife had also already been-- 

EVA LEWINSKI: My-- then later I found out that this time, when they caught my brother, he went to Treblinka. 

DORI LAUB: That was in 1940. 

EVA LEWINSKI: That was in 1940. 1940, there was no Auschwitz yet. Auschwitz was 1942. My friends were taken to Auschwitz in 1942. They were building Auschwitz. And they never came back. I was lucky that I wasn't between them. 

In 1944, when they liquidated already the ghetto, we decided my friend-- my best friend, her mother, and her brother, we decided that we will not-- we will not go. Let's hide out here. Everybody's saying the world's coming-- to war is coming to an end. 

There was very little-- rumors were coming. Few people had radios, hidden radios, and listened some news. And the news was saying the war-- the war is coming to an end. So we decided let's hide. 

So I remember the place where I used to work, in that house, I remember that there was an attic. So we went there. In that the attic was another attic. We found out there is another attic in that attic. So we decided that we will hide out there. 

If there war's only going to take a short time, we will hide there, and we not going to go any place because we don't know where they are taking those people. So that was in-- that was, oh, maybe June or so that we decided to go there. And we did. 

It was unbearable hot there. Was no window. It was nothing. We didn't know whether it's day or night. There wasn't no more rations. There was no more food. We were crawling out in the middle of the night trying to find some food someplace. 

And one night we did find a barrel, a small barrel, of sauerkraut, which we dragged into the attic. You can imagine five people living on a barrel of sauerkraut in an attic what went down. And it was so hot at night we crawled down in the lower attic where it was a little bit cooler. 

And the mothers just-- they couldn't take anymore. They said, whatever it's going to be, it's going to be. We got to get out of here because we're going to die here. And whatever will be, let's go together. So we decided-- it was August already. OK, we're going to do that. 

DORI LAUB: And the ghetto was almost empty. 

EVA LEWINSKI: The ghetto was almost empty. All that was left was the police and the firemen. And, of course, Rumkowski was still there and a few big shots, that's about all. 

DORI LAUB: Everybody else had been deported. 

EVA LEWINSKI: Everybody else was already deported. The ghetto was already empty, emptied out. The streets were empty, and we were going from house to house trying to organize food or things, but was nothing-- nothing to find. 

DORI LAUB: And you were walking through the ghetto streets? 

EVA LEWINSKI: At night-- not walking through the ghetto street, just hiding through houses and through halls hiding. Me and my friend, we were running. We left-- our mothers stay. We were running and looking and organizing. That was a time that we organize. One time we found-- 

DORI LAUB: Organize means getting food? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Yes, or finding some place, something. And that was the time when we found that barrel of sauerkraut. 

DORI LAUB: And where you came into apartments and rooms, and it was empty. 

EVA LEWINSKI: Empty. Everything was empty. People were already gone. Was nothing-- was not a sign of people. Here and there you just heard a shot here and shooting there. And it was just very frightening. 

And we managed to get back. And then we decided that-- the mothers decide that no, we cannot go on. We will die here. We have to get out. We have to crawl out. So we crawled out. And it was August. And the police surrounded us and took us to the-- we marched to the-- to-- to the rail station. 

DORI LAUB: That was only the four of you or more people? 

EVA LEWINSKI: Was five of us that we marched, five-- my-- my mother, my friend, her mother, and her brother. We marched to the rail station. We came to the rail station, and there were hundreds and hundreds of people lying on the ground, lying on the floors, waiting for the transports, for the trains because the trains couldn't keep up. So we're waiting for the trains. We didn't know where we go. We didn't go know, where they taking us? 

Then finally, the trains came. And when the trains came, we saw what's going to happen. They pushed us in like a bunch of animals into those animal carts, hundreds of people, one on top of the other. 

My mother was so sick and so weak. We went for days. I don't know, we didn't see. There was only a little window in the top of the cart. We didn't see where they taking us. 

All it was there was nothing to eat or to drink. All was there a pail in the middle of the floor of that cart. People were fighting to get to the pail. My mother was fainting. She was dying in my arms. 

Oh, I was begging, ma, please just hold on. We're probably going to another ghetto. Hold on. 

And then finally we came to a place. People looked out through the little window. And they saw where we getting. And everybody started crying and screaming, my God, we should have all died together where we were and not come to this. It was horrible. 

There was endless barracks. It looked so terrible. It looked so awful. Immediately they opened the doors and chased us out with sticks. And beat us and lined us all up and immediately segregated. This goes here and this goes there. 

I was separated from my mother. I went in another direction. My mother went another direction. My friend went in another direction. We were all separated. We didn't know. 

Where everybody was crying and screaming, they marched us away. They watched my mother away without a line. And they marched me away. The chimneys were going. 

DORI LAUB: What does-- can you think of anything there? 

EVA LEWINSKI: No, I didn't know. I didn't know what was going to happen. I just knew they separated us. 

But what was going to happen, I cried yet from far away, ma, hold on. We will meet again. This is going to end. Just be strong, and we will meet again. 

She didn't say anything. And I never saw her again. They took us to a bed where they shaved us and stripped us of our clothes. Everybody got them. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember what-- any fears you had at that time? 

CREW: OK, we got to stop, sorry. 