INTERVIEWER: Go back and-- and talk about the fact that you didn't have any clothes to change into and you were growing people. The names of those people around you, the, uh, fact that it was whispering. 

Tell me when. Great. All right. Go ahead. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Uh, in the hiding place, uh, there were eight of us, and, uh, we were trying to occupy ourselves in various ways. One of them was the reading lessons, humor, self-created humor. There was also a lot of bickering, fighting over the two-- the two mothers sometimes on opposite sides. No, you took a bigger piece of bread today. Or, no, you took a bigger piece of bread today. 

Uh, the clothing, we had to wear the same clothing day after day. We washed it in our-- in our portion of coffee. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER #1: The same clothing for how long? 

INTERVIEWER #2: The same clothing for almost two years. Uh, what we were wearing. Occasionally, we would borrow from each other just from-- for change, or I'd wear my mother's. My mother wore mine and vise versa. We didn't grow very much because of the nutrition, the lack of nutrition. Uh, we were very thin and malnourished. 

Uh, when-- as a matter fact, most of us, uh, uh, were walking around a little bit stooped because of the position we were in most of the time. 

Um, occasionally, as I said, it would have a special treat. When my birthday came around and my dad wanted me to have something special for-- for dinner. And he asked me what I want, and I said, I would love to have, uh, some scrambled eggs. So he traded-- he gave the farmer a pair of golden earrings to get me scrambled eggs. And I will never forget, those were the best-tasting scrambled eggs I've ever had in my life. 

INTERVIEWER: How did your mother cook them? 

RENEE GLASSNER: My mother didn't cook them. They were cooked. There was no way we could cook them inside. They were cooked by the farmer's wife outside in-- in exchange for the-- the gold and the scrambled eggs. 

INTERVIEWER #1: What were the-- the names of the members of your family? 

RENEE GLASSNER: My-- my-- my-- my older brother is Dave. Myself, I'm Renee, but I was known as a Rivkah. And my parents, are, as-- as they appear in the book were Janken and Henia. And my uncle and his wife-- my uncle's name was Avram, his wife, Haia, and their two children are Belle and Oscar. 

Oscar is that cousin, supposedly, the hero of the family, and probably if not for him, none of us would be alive. He's the one that, uh, believed all the stories, and he was, uh, the one that would not let us out of the hiding place, and told us that if we had to die, you would die, uh, in that-- in that hiding place under the roof, in the-- in the family house. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Oscar was the who kept the diary. 

RENEE GLASSNER: And Oscar was the one who kept a diary all from-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: Do you remember that? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER #2: His writing? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Yes. I remember his writing, and he started doing that, I think, while still in the ghetto, all the way through the war. And even in a hiding place. Uh, he-- his only problem was paper. And that's when he was trading with me and his little sister for-- for paper. So that we would try to get paper out of the farmer in exchange for lessons. And he wrote, uh, the-- out of which came the book, The House of Ashes. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Did anyone ask him why he was writing, what he was-- 

RENEE GLASSNER: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER #2: Did anyone ask him why he was writing? 

RENEE GLASSNER: He wanted to preserve it for posterity. And I remember even at one time, where we thought we might not survive, because the front was getting close to us and, uh, things were burning all around us. And, uh, he told the farmer-- he asked a farmer to bury it, uh, underground in case we-- we don't survive, to pass it on to future generations for publication. So future generations know what happened to-- to-- a whole-- uh, a whole people. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Uh, one more question about that situation that you stayed in for almost two years. Your interaction with your parents, how did they explain things, keep up your morale, keep from all of you going crazy? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Uh, perhaps, uh, it was the other way. We children inspired our-- our parents. Uh, to them, it was just enough that they were the lucky ones, that, uh, all three of their children were still alive, which was a luxury. It-- it was a rarity. 

Even my cousin, Oscar's family didn't have that luxury. Uh, their older sister-- the older daughter was taken away, and, uh, she eventually ended up in, uh, Auschwitz. We found out later. But she was the-- first she-- she-- her husband was taken away. And, uh, then, uh, she ended up-- she tried to survive as a Gentile woman working on a farm. She bleached her hair but, uh, didn't succeed, because people started getting suspicious. And she, uh, ended up in a ghetto, which was eventually evacuated. Ended up in Auschwitz, and in the gas chamber. 

So we were an inspiration to our parents. My dad did most of the days, just sat there and-- and turned his mustache day by day by day. My mother busied herself with, oh, a big occupation was that we had lice in the-- in the-- in the hiding place. And the big occupation was getting rid of the lice, turning the-- the clothes inside out and cleaning it out. We had bed-- bed bugs one time, and that was the big production, trying to get it cleaned out with kerosene and all kinds of things. 

Um, I remember occasionally, we were trying to make extra food. And the farmer brought us a little flour. We would have flour and mix the flour and-- with some water, and on top of the kerosene lamp, we would put on little pieces of, uh-- of, uh, dough, trying to bake it, and get a little extra, like a little extra food. So that was part of the occupation. 

INTERVIEWER #1: How do you get rid of the lice? 

RENEE GLASSNER: We didn't. We never did get rid of it. 

INTERVIEWER #1: What was the process? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Uh, picking it and killing it. 

INTERVIEWER #1: In your fingers? 

RENEE GLASSNER: The fingers. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Squash it. 

RENEE GLASSNER: With the nails. Squash them with the nails. 

INTERVIEWER #1: How? Show us. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Like this. 

INTERVIEWER #1: So what finally happened? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Uh, the days went by, and, uh, the biggest thrill was when we started hearing shooting. And, uh, we knew that, uh, the Russians were approaching. And one day, we saw planes coming overhead, and we were rejoiced. We knew we could get killed again, because, uh, uh, many of the barns were burning all around us. But as long as we were-- if we were being killed by-- by the Russians, it wasn't so bad. The only thing we were afraid of that the barn would start burning, and we would have to run out into the fields and be killed by the-- by the Germans. They see us-- see us come out. 

Luckily, our barn was not hit. And we saw German soldiers coming back, and what a joy to see German soldiers coming-- soldiers coming back, uh, depressed and just dragging back instead of the ones we saw marching with-- with full force and pride towards the east. And now, they were really dragging back. And on the road, we saw them, uh, just moving back. And we saw the Russians-- the Russian planes, uh, hitting the road. 

Uh, we were constantly-- had we had to run out and stand by the gate, by the door, just in case the barn started burning. Uh, and as I said, it-- it didn't. It was never hit. 

Uh, and the next morning, uh, we still didn't know how soon all this was going to happen. And, uh, the next morning, we-- we heard a strange language outside. It was no longer German, and we heard the Russian spoken and, we said, this is it. This is it. 

We-- we were actually numb. We weren't, uh, throwing our hands up and-- and rejoicing, because it was still hard to believe that we were finally safe. And besides that, the-- the-- the farmer didn't want to let us out during the-- the day-- the daylight. He still was afraid of, uh, of his neighbors finding out that there were Jews, that he was hiding out Jews, because it was still dangerous. He was more afraid of his-- of his neighbors than-- than the Germans themselves. 

So that, uh, next morning, when it was-- no, it was in the evening, when it was all clear and there was nobody around, he opened the gate. He said walk out. So we walked to the highway, and we waited. And a Russian truck came by, and asked us who we-- who we were. And we told them we were Jews who were hiding out. They picked us up, and took us to our-- to our town, let us into our own homes, and gave us food, and treated us very well. 

Uh, my father tried to get some of the goods back that he had before-- before the war. Uh, and there was a lot of resentment. The Polish peasants, some of them didn't want to give it back. But little by little, we got-- we got ourselves organized, and there was a small community of a lot of the leftovers, maybe a couple of hundred people from-- not only from our town, but from other towns that were, uh, that were driven into this town before the-- during the ghetto. 

And we tried to make a living and go back to school, but things were difficult again. One day, I was in school and, uh, uh, one of my friends, uh, told me that a teacher told all the children, while I was out, not to play with me, because I was Jewish. And I'm bad, and-- and the Jews killed Christ and-- and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER #2: That was after the war. 

RENEE GLASSNER: That was after the war, yes. This was in 1944, and, uh, not only that, but, uh, things became dangerous again, because I remember one night I was sleeping upstairs, and a stone was thrown through my window. And, uh, my cousin, the author, Oscar Pinkus, uh, was, uh-- was thrown a bomb. A bomb exploded about two feet away from him. 

INTERVIEWER #1: This was 1944. 

RENEE GLASSNER: It was in 1944. 

INTERVIEWER #1: The war was not over in Europe. 

RENEE GLASSNER: The war was over for-- well, we were liberated. The war wasn't quite over yet, but we were-- had already been liberated by the Russians. And, uh, so we were safe. We thought we were safe, but we weren't safe from-- from-- from-- some of the Polish, uh, underground. There were all kinds of-- we thought they were the AK, the Armia Krajowa, and as a matter of fact, the AK did kill off some, about half of the people in-- in the-- in the forest hideout. 

So we had to start running again. And we-- by that time, must have been 1940-- early 1945. We had to leave the town, and, uh, we went to Lodz, in the hopes of getting out of Poland altogether. And at one point, my father and, uh, my uncle went back to the town to try and, uh, perhaps rescue some of the goods we left over. And again, they were hunted down. Uh, again, they had to hide in one of the attics, because they heard somebody coming, and-- and some of the Polish underground came and they asked specifically for-- for my uncle and my father. And luckily, one of the women said, no. They're not here. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Why did the Polish underground want to track down Jews? 

RENEE GLASSNER: I do not know. There-- there was still strong anti-Semitism from prewar and postwar. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Uh, your father sounds to be-- was a very unusual man. 

RENEE GLASSNER: He's-- he's very brave. He was very brave. Uh, had to make a living at a very early age. Rather daring at times. He risked his life many times. Um, maybe just lucky. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Now, many years later, you went back to Poland. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Many-- yes. OK. A few years ago, for for about-- perhaps for about a good 25 years, uh, people would ask me to talk about my experiences or what had happened. And I would talk about it, but I felt as if I was talking about somebody else, not myself. 

I felt as if I were talking about this little girl somewhere in the background whose name was Rivkah had gone through all these things. And-- and I would talk about it completely dispassionately as if it weren't me at all. I naturally knew it was me, but I-- I didn't-- I could not believe that this really happened, that such a thing is even possible to happen, even knew that it must have been me. 

Uh, I had a-- I-- I had a compulsion, I felt a compulsion to go back to Poland. And I felt I-- I-- I owe it to myself, to my parents, to-- to my people, to my town, to my grandparents, to really go back and-- and touch reality, really see the house I was-- I was born in. My whole family thought that I was absolutely insane, that I was a traitor. Um, they couldn't understand how I could possibly take it emotionally. And I-- I knew that it was something I had to do, that I couldn't, you know, move away from this world without doing this. And I knew that at all risks, I have to do it. 

So when the opportunity came with-- with a study group, I knew I also probably would not have the courage to do it alone. Uh, there was still a certain fear to go into that area and-- or even sleep alone in-- in that area. So when the opportunity came to go with a-- with a study group, I-- I seized upon it. 

And, uh, I-- I decided one day that I was going to take off on my own, and I knew exactly where I wanted to go. I remembered everything. I didn't know exactly what road, but I knew the names of the towns and the village where I was hiding out. So one day, I got up at six o'clock in the morning and I rented a-- a taxi. And I told him I wanted to go to the town where I was born and raised in to see the house. 

And somebody told me, oh, no. Don't go there. It's not-- it doesn't exist anymore. You wouldn't recognize it at all. It's all changed. But I was determined. So I went back to the town, and there it was. There stood the house that I showed the picture before, just the same way, the same way as it was before. 

And when I looked at it at the first time, I broke out crying. Because and it was a-- I had mixed feelings. The-- both, you know, of joy. First of all, of joy to see the place where I come from, where I was born, and where my grandparents were. And of course, it was like a ghost house, but still, there it was. It was real. It stood there, and, uh, it-- it all began to have meaning, a beginning and an end. Sure, they're not there, anymore, but this was a reality. 

I did have grandparents. I did have uncles and aunts and cousins. Uh, it was true that I was running up and down and played with them. And my grandfather at Hanukkah gave me five cents, you know, and all the grandchildren had to line up and-- and get it. 

So it was a-- it was a-- a bittersweet experience that was just great. It was terrific. I felt-- I felt so much better than I had before when I was sort of shoving everything into a corner, uh, like a dirty corner. Sure, it was painful, but it was real. 

So this was my one of my stops. I was also determined, uh, to go to another town, Konstantinov, the one that-- uh, that we also had family in. So I went there. And again, I-- I was trying to recognize, touch upon spots that-- that I knew I-- I-- I had lived through before, that I enjoyed. 

I still remem-- remembered smells, certain smells that drew me to the Polish forest, for example, because I did have a very happy youth. And, uh, I remember coming to in the United States, very often, I'd say, no, this forest doesn't-- doesn't smell the way the Polish forest does or the way the Polish strawberries does. And sure enough, I went to that whole area, and I smelled the wheat and the forest. I said, this is it. This is what I-- I remember. 

And then my other stop that I had to go to was the hiding place. I wanted to know if the farmer was still alive. Uh, again, I was told that you can't go there. First of all, there's no road. You can't go by taxi. You're going to have to go by horse and cart. And I say, I don't care. I told the taxi man I would pay him whatever is necessary. Get there somehow. 

So he drove on-- on plain fields through mud. And, uh, I-- I told him, uh, to ask for-- for the specific name of the farmer. And finally, we arrived there. 

And I came into the house, and, uh, there she was, the lady, the old lady. Uh, and I threw my hands around her, and I started crying. And she says, who are you? And I finally told her. I said, Yankela corka, you know, Yankel's daughter. 

And she said, no. No. You know, it couldn't be. And she started crying. She-- it finally made sense to her. And the old man wasn't alive anymore. He was dead for about seven years, but we had a great reunion. And-- and she was so happy. She started talking how she risked her life so many times, and she thought she would never-- she would never, never be alive or-- or certainly not-- not see anybody from-- from this family again. 

As a matter of fact, before that, when she was hiding out, she used to tell us that her biggest worry was to be buried with Jews together. This-- this-- this anti-Semitism in-- in Poland that I remember as a child, I couldn't comprehend the whys and so forth. But it was always that-- that the Jews-- we were taught in-- in schools that we were different from the Catholic kids. That-- that the Jews killed Christ, and therefore, we are bad. We are different. We can never be the same. 

And the prayers were always going on in the morning, uh, and, uh, we, naturally-- some of the kids tried to be the same. They would try to cross themselves, you know, to try to make friends with the Polish kids. And those who didn't, were different. 

We Jewish kids were always be hit, you know, over the face by the teachers. I remember being hit over the face by the teacher. 

INTERVIEWER #2: When you came back, did it look the way you remembered it? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Uh, which? My house? 

INTERVIEWER #2: The house, the hiding place. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Everything looked exactly-- I knew exactly where to go, except everything looked smaller, much smaller. I thought, uh-- I thought my-- my apartment was bigger. I thought the steps were bigger. Of course, I was smaller at the time. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Did somebody live in the house? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Yes somebody lived-- I could not get into my own apartment, but I could get into the third floor, where my cousin Oscar lived. Again I would-- I didn't dare to tell her that-- the lady who lived there that it was me who lived there, because they'd become very suspicious. They were afraid you'd come back to get your property back. I told her that I knew somebody from this town and-- and from America, and, uh, I want-- they asked me to look up-- uh, to look up people and-- and to look up the house, where they lived and so forth. So she let me in. 

INTERVIEWER #2: With the joy, was there some-- where-- does it-- also disappointed the way it looked. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Was I disappointed? Uh, well, only the fact that-- that the people I knew were not there. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Uh, now, after you left that town, what was in your mind, when you-- when you-- when the taxi drove away. 

RENEE GLASSNER: When did-- I-- I felt very-- well, first of all, I also went to visit a-- my old teacher, the one that used to help us. And he was wonderful. He remembered everything. He remembered everything. He-- he guessed right away who I was when I gave him a few-- a few hints. And, uh, so that was a good feeling. 

And when I drove away from town, I felt good, because I-- I-- I saw what I came for. The house was there. So if-- perhaps I would feel very badly if the house weren't there, but the-- the house was there, and many other things had changed. But the house was there. The street was still there that I recognized. Um, and I-- I left in-- in, you know, very, very excited. Uh, my blood pressure must have been very high. But I-- I accomplished my mission. I touched-- I touched reality. 

I also wanted to go to the cemetery. I wanted to see my-- my grandfather's grave. But when I visited my teacher, he says don't go. He said it will only be-- it will only hurt you. He said, it's all been vandalized. He said, you won't recognize it. Don't go. It's going to hurt you. And since I was pressed for time anyway, I decided to leave. And that's when I went to the-- to the farm to see the hiding place and took pictures. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Any wish to go ever back again? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER #2: Any wish to ever go back again? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Not really. Not anymore. My-- I-- you know, I-- sort of my conscious sort of been cleared. I felt a-- a whole lot better. Uh, and there's no more wish. If I go back, perhaps for research, but not on a personal level anymore. 

Uh, when I left, uh, uh-- when I left this hiding place farm now, some of it's been changed. And I saw the three daughters and-- and the mother. Um, I gave-- we-- we gave them some presents and exchanged news, and, uh, we left there, because I wanted still to touch upon one more spot, which was very important to me. And I was determined that those three spots, I must touch upon, and that was my town, my hiding place, and Treblinka. 

And Treblinka, by the time we got to Treblinka, it was already about eleven o'clock at night. And again, that's another place where I broke down. Only two times when-- that I really broke down. Again, because as I-- as I came upon it, I-- I-- one thing, I felt as if I was walking on my own intended grave. And, uh, also, that's where all my family was buried, um, all the little cousins that I had remembered and some of who-- whom I had forgotten the names, uncles, aunts, grandparents. 

And finally, I-- I had a couple friends that came with me. Uh, wanted to leave because it was 11. It was late at night, and I said, no, I cannot leave until I find the tombstone of my town. Uh, and it-- and it was almost impossible. There were thousands of thousands of stones, and since it was impossible to-- to put a stone for each particular member of the family, every town had its own tombstone. And finally, we found it, and there it was, a tombstone with the engraving of Losice, and I had my last cry, and we left. 