INTERVIEWER 1: When we start. Not yet. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK? 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: My name is Irene Greenberg. I was born in Warsaw. And I think I will start from the time that Poland was occupied by Germans. When the Germans entered Poland, we were in Warsaw. Myself, my father, and my mother. And, uh, there was a week or two of bombing. After which Poland was occupied by German. 

I do remember after Germany entered Poland, at this time my mother was very, very worried. As for myself, I was a child at the time, and I think not quite realize what was coming and entire impact. I have heard that German were anti-Semitic. There were some refugees in Poland who escaped Germany. 

However, I knew also that Polish were anti-Semitic too. There was before, shortly before war the boycott of Jewish stars. And I did not quite realize how much difference the coming of German will do. Shortly after the, the Germans came to Poland, they ordered all the Jews to wear arm bands. White arm bands with blue star of David. 

At this time, I do remember my father brought for himself and for my mother two such arm bands, and they were of silk. I thought them very pretty and I was sorry that I am too small to wear them because the children did not wear them. So as you may see from this, I did for quite realize. 

Some time later, my father went to Zyradow. Zyradow was close to Warsaw and my father was a legal consultant of the mayor office in Zyradow. And he went there to pick some documents. There on the station, he was caught up by the German and sent to a concentration camp in Radgoszcz together with some other representatives of Jewish community. 

Radgoszcz were close to Lodz and belonged to the Lodz district. And in the beginning, my mother and I did not know what happened with my father until we got a message through someone. Yes, until someone brought us the message from Lodz. 

At this time, Lodz was known at this time as being a city where the Jews were especially persecuted. Instead of white arm bands, they were wearing yellow circles. Circles of yellow fabric. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Badges. 

SUBJECT: Yes, yellow badges. Just like during the, during middle ages. And also the gestapo of Lodz was a well known place of terror, and terrible stories circulated about the things that happening there. Well, not withstanding this, when my mother found out that my father was in Radgoszcz, she went to Lodz. 

And there she presented application together with the documents proving that my father was during the first World War an officer in Austrian army, and that he was decorated for bravery. As a result of this, my father was, uh, freed after several days. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like to have him come home? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was very happy, of course. It was quite unexpected. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he just show up at your door? 

SUBJECT: Yes, he just showed up at the door. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it in the morning? At night? 

SUBJECT: It was in the morning, if I remember correctly. Oh, also I wanted to mention that when my mother returned from Lodz, I saw, I did not know about those yellow badges that the Jews in Lodz wore. And when I saw it on her coat, I was quite shocked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Upset shocked? You were upset when you saw that? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was shocked because I thought that the Jews everywhere was wearing those white arm bands. And so one shock follow another. For a while, the things were reasonably quiet. However, on January 20, my father was arrested again, together with 800 other prominent members of Jewish community. 

I remember how it happened. We have been sitting at the breakfast table and at this time, the German enter and they took my father. And what I noticed, that when they left together with my father, my mother started to cry. And she cried very long time. However, she did not cry when they were there. She didn't want them to see. 

This was the worst shock I had since the war started. I mean, my father arrest because I have never seen him again after this. Mother went again to gestapo hoping that she would be able to have father again by presenting the same documents that she did in Lodz. 

But in order to enter gestapo, she had to remove her, her Jewish arm band because the Jews were not allowed to enter gestapo. And it so happened that she was caught. She spent several hours, days in prison. 

It was-- general isn't the word. Poles, many of whom were there from before the war. and I did not know what happened with her. I only know that she did not come at home, and I was very upset. I don't know if I knew where she went. 

What I do remember is that on the second day, there were two ladies who came. Friends, they said they were friends of my mother. They bought some food and they tried to take care of me, I being a child at the time. However, I was so terribly upset that I didn't want to eat anything. I just stay in bed and cry. 

Well, after two days-- I think it was two days if I remember correctly-- mother came back. Well, after this horrible event, another calamity happened shortly after, and that is we have lost our apartment. It was sequestrated for a German woman and we had to move. 

At this time, we move to live with a Jewish family. We had a rented room. There were several families together. That is in, the apartment was rented. There were the owner of the apartments, and the other families had the rooms then. And we stayed there until the establishment of Warsaw ghetto. After this, we had to move again to ghetto. The ghetto was soon surrounded by the wall. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you find out that you were to move to the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was, it wasn't a big shock. It was just that I was leaving the familiar neighborhood, the people I knew around. My best friend also lived in the same house. After this, I do remember ghetto was very crowded because it, it was a small space surrounded by the wall. And it could not possibly be sufficient for a large number of people who inhabit that area. 

Many people were homeless and there was a very great poverty. I will not dwell on this particular subject because probably you know all about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about your experiences there? 

SUBJECT: Well, in a way, I felt somewhat safer in the ghetto because as long as we're outside of the ghetto, the Germans were constantly coming to Jewish homes searching for valuables, often mistreating people, and there was always this fear of they're coming. And in ghetto, this I do not remember a single time of this happening. 

So I suppose that once the Jews were in ghetto, they no longer coming to Jewish home. Also, being only between Jews I found as familiar surrounding. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your understanding of why this was happening? 

SUBJECT: Such a long time I-- strange as it may seem, I don't think that I gave much thoughts to it so far as ghetto was concerned. I considered the negative sides of it and the positive sides. And as I said, I felt more famil-- more of a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: More at home. 

SUBJECT: More at home, yes, when I was in ghetto. However, the financial conditions at the meantime, very greatly become greatly aggravated. Since it wasn't possible for my mother to fight work. And she kept saving whatever the valuables she had. 

And when almost everything was gone, she took work. She supported us partly at least by delivering bread from bakery to the customers. And since there was not the elevator at the time in any of the houses in Warsaw ghetto, it was for her to climbing many flights of steps each day. It was a very hard walk. 

Even so, we were in great poverty. Though, of course, many people were even far worse, there were people dying every day on the streets of Warsaw ghetto. Some time later, Germans occupied eastern Poland. 

At the beginning of the war, Russia and Germany agreed that Russia will occupy eastern part of Poland, and the Germany the western part of Poland. When the started, the German invaded the, the eastern part of Poland where Russians have been and they occupied it. 

Since both my parents came from eastern part of Poland, my father from Lemberg, my mother from Brody, which was a small town near Lemberg. And as a mother saw that she will not be able to support us any longer after the circumstances, she thought that it would be better if we go to Lemberg or Brody, where she had a family and stay with her family. 

However, as the ghetto was surround by wall and it was impossible for any Jew to leave it legally, and to be found on the other side meant to, would have meant instant death or being sent to concentration camp, the only way to leave was if one had to leave as a Polish people. 

Around this time, my mother saw a friend of her, met a young man who sold her a pape-- who sold her the documents of a Polish woman from another town. This woman was killed by the Germans and her death was not registered. At least we thought it was not registered. 

In order to buy those papers, mother sold her fur coat, which she kept until such time for some emergency. Because this was the last valuable thing that she possessed. She bought those papers. The next thing was leaving ghetto. It was eventually arranged. There was a house which one side of the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were the papers for you? 

SUBJECT: No. I was-- I being below age needed only to be mentioned on my mother's papers as her child. This was sufficient. I did not have to have separate papers. Well, there was a house. One entrance was to the ghetto and one entrance was to the Polish side. 

It was not possible to, to take direct way without being caught. Therefore, we had to go through the apartment of a Polish woman, with whom it was arranged with in advance. Should I go in detail? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Please do. 

SUBJECT: Well, I do remember that were two men with us who took me and mother to this house, and then they helped mother on the roof. It was, um, one, one floored house. And then when she was already on the roof, they told me to jump on this roof, but I said I wouldn't. I was afraid how I would get up, but they helped me up. 

And I don't even know, and I was already on the roof. Then they threw after me a little package that I had. I caught my package and I ran after mother. And then I remembered that we entered somebody's window into the apartment. This was the apartment of this Polish woman from whom we could go away to the other entrance. 

The woman was much irritate, upset about our presence and she wanted very much that we should leave as soon as possible, which disappointed me a little because I was very, very tired and would have loved a rest. A little rest. Well, at any rate, we went to the entrance. And in the hall, a man approached us. 

And this man told mother that he knows she is Jewish, which, of course, denied. He said that she must be Jewish because he knows that she did not enter this house. She said she entered it before and she was visiting friends. He said, you could not have entered it because it is now afternoon and I am standing here since 6:00 in the morning and I will have seen you enter in. 

This was, of course, a black mailer, whose occupation was knowing the situation, the occasion of the house, taking his position each day, and waiting for someone to exit from the other side and ask for money. Well, mother paid him then what he asked and we left. We went to the rail station to take the train for Lemberg. No, it wasn't for Lemberg. We took train-- I think it was Rava-ruska 

I have forgotten to mention another difficulty, but maybe I will come to it later. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do mention it then. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. Mention it now. 

SUBJECT: At the time being, when you waited for the train and there was a big crowd, it so happened that my mother's handbag, where she had the, had the documents and also little money that she still had, has fallen from her hand right down to the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] I mean, to the rail. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To the rail? To the tracks? 

SUBJECT: To the tracks. Yes. This was a great misfortune because, uh, she was unable to retrieve it and we could not remain without it. Fortunately, there was a man who jumped down and brought her this handbag. 

Then the train arrived. And we were on it. With this train, we went to Rava-Ruska. There was no direct communication with Lemberg Because even though most parts of Poland were occupied by German, but they could still keep the frontier there and nobody was allowed to cross from the western part to the eastern part. 

I don't know if it remains so. I mean, for how long this remains. So possibly it was this way through the end of the war. I mean, until the Russian occupation. But at this time, such a crossing, legal crossing would have been impossible. 

So the train went as far as Rava-Ruska, then we got out. From there, we had, we were to take the bus to another place closer to the border. But it so happened that the train come late and we have missed the bus. Now we have no place to remain. 

We could not go to any hotel, not any place for the night because everywhere they would have asked where we come from, and we would have, the German have-- and that the German everyone was registered and living in some place and keep moving from one place to another. Have to present the registration from where he or she is permanently living. 

As we have no such document, they only thing would have been to spend night on the railroad stations, but the railroad stations were observed by Germans for people escaping from ghetto for partisans and from all kinds of people for might have wished for some reason to escape from where they were. 

Finally, mother came to the only conclusion. That we would have to find some Jews there and explain the situation and see if it would be possible there to find a place to spend the night. There was not yet ghetto in this Rava-Ruska. The problem was to find some Jews. But as in Poland, in small, in small towns especially, that where the doctor, there was at least one doctor who would be Jew. 

And as Jewish names were a little different than Polish names, my mother asked a woman who was passing by if she knows about the doctor there as she is from the other city and got sick. Would like to see a doctor. Well, the woman mentioned two doctors, one of whom had a Jewish name. 

So we went to the doctor with the Jewish name-- but maybe I go too much into details. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, you're fine. You're doing just fine. Keep going. 

SUBJECT: The doctor was extremely surprised seeing us and seeing what it is all about because he thought at first that mother was a patient, I was a patient. After explaining this, he found us a place to stay with a Jewish family who lived in the same house. 

Well, the same night-- as there was no communication between the Jews from one town and another and they did not know what was happening in other towns, as the traveling was forbidden. So [INAUDIBLE] the doctor who happened to be a man that of Judenrat You know what Judenrat means? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sure. 

SUBJECT: Was very interested what was, what's going on in Warsaw. And he invited the, some of his other, of other members of the Judenrat in this city and he asked mother to come too. And they were all very curious to know what's happening in Warsaw because they knew next to nothing about it. 

Well, we stayed with this Jewish family I think two days because the bus didn't come next day either. They were very good to us. They didn't take any money, though mother offered to them for letting us stay with them. But they absolutely refused us of any money, even though they were poor people. 

From there, we took the bus to a small town. From this small town, we went to the village. There in the village, the village was already on the border. There worked peasants who took talk people across the border either through the foreigners or through some other way that was not observed by the Germans. 

It so happened that the peasant with whom we stayed and who was supposed to take us across, Well, they evidently wanted to steal something this-this this is what I think. They looked into our luggage, and there was my mother's arm band that she has discarded when we left ghetto. When they saw this arm band-- Am I going too long? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no. 

SUBJECT: Well, the next day, the husband of this peasant woman, this woman we stayed with, the mother of the peasant woman come. She and the peasant and this woman had a long talk, and then this mother of her went to my mother and she told her about the discovery of this arm band. And she said that her husband, that her son wants to denounce us. 

However, if we leave, all of our luggage, with the exception of this small, one small package in which there were things of very little value, then her daughter will take us to another family. Other peasants who will take us across the border Under those circumstances, we had to leave all of our luggage, luggage with those people. And this woman took us to this other peasant family. 

There we stayed the for a copy of days in hiding because it was already close to the border. And no one would stay unregistered in anybody's house. During those few days, my mother got sick. She got some sort of infection. And her leg was so swollen that she would hardly walk. 

All the same, we had to cross this border somehow. We made the try-once, but In the middle of the way, this Polish woman decided that it was unsafe and that we will have to wait till another day. The next day, she took us again. I do remember I was very much afraid off this crossing because I knew that if the German should notice us, then they would shot us at once. 

When we are, was on our way there, however, the fear completely disappeared. I do remember running. My mother could not run very fast, so I was running behind the peasant woman. But I thought that my mother could see me and follow. I was also carrying the small package with, uh, our property. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's OK. We'll watch the time for you. Let us have that be our job. 

SUBJECT: In the forest, this peasant woman-- yes, we were-- oh, there were some shots, but whether they were directed at us or at some other people who might be crossing at the same time, it was impossible to know. I do remember just that all of us were ourselves down. And then when the shots were over, we'd start at running again. 

When you were crossing, in one there were the-- oh, I don't know what's the word in English, for this, eh 

INTERVIEWER 2: Barbed wire? 

SUBJECT: Yes, barbed wire. I had long, long curl at that time. And it so happened that when I was passing under those barbed wire, my hair got caught into this barbed wire. Well, I called my mother and she, somehow she managed to free my hair from this barbed wire and we kept on running. 

In the forest, this woman stopped and said that since there is a chance that we would be caught, it is so much better if mother gave her the money now so that in case something should happen, the money would not get lost. 

Well, this was a great risk that at this time she was going to leave us as soon as she gets money, so mother thought best not to give her any money until she took us to the other side. And she thought that should such a thing happen that she doesn't care what happens with money. So the women that did not insist, she took us farther. 

So when we have crossed the border and we were on the other side, she actually took us to some friends of hers who received us well. They offered supper, which I enjoyed very much because I was already hungry, and I have had an excellent night's sleep. 

From there, they took us to the nearest town. And now we took a truck. There were trucks taking people. There were no buses there. Well, to Hamburg where my father's family lived. Then there was small incident. I don't know if it's worth telling about or not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why don't you go ahead and do so. 

Well, it seems that the driver did not follow the traffic or whatever, but very soon we have seen two Germans stopping the truck. They have a discussion with the driver, and then they sat next to him. And we were driving somewhere in a different direction evidently. Seems like the driver was arrested or something like this. 

And the place of restoration where we arrived was the cap, captain of the German police. This, of course, under the circumstances was very unfortunate because there was a very good chance that, that they would have all the documents of all those who were on the traffic checked. 

It seems the rain started to rain very hard and one woman asked the guardsman to let us leave the place. While she was talking with the guardsman, my mother and I have escaped because his attention was kept elsewhere. 

When we arrived to my father's family, we have, it was a great disappointment for me because I remember it always was a very cheerful place. You went there for holidays. We used to spend the part of holidays with my father's family and part of holidays with my mother's family. But now it was a sad place. 

Several of the family members were dead and there were only two of my aunts, my cousin, and his fiancee. They were also very poor at this time because they were all that impoverished during the Russian time. And this situation aggravated, of course, the condition. 

When mother realized that they too are in bad financial condition, she met that doctor. He was a Jewish doctor. There was no ghetto there at this time. And from this doctor, she bought injections against typhus. At this time, there was a ghetto. 

Yes, through this doctor, mother obtained injections which immunized against typhus. And since typhus was then spreading in Warsaw ghetto, she decided to make a trip back there to save those injection and to come back. As those injec-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: She goes back from the [INAUDIBLE] to the Warsaw ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. It was a very dangerous trip. Those injections were not available otherwise in Warsaw ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did she do it? For the money, or to help people? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was both those circumstances. At any rate, this was the only way that we could possibly support ourselves. And she left me with my father's family and she went back all this way to Warsaw ghetto. I was very much worried. It took over a month, I think, or maybe more, and then she came back. 

After this, she decided to make another such trip. She already knew how to, you know, how to cross the border and how to get into ghetto and out. She made one more trip, then we went to Brody where her family lived. As we found out, her family were, were also very impoverished. 

They were already selling whatever they had. My aunt, who was one of the most elegant women in this small town before the war, were already selling here, was already selling her dresses, and there was hardly enough food. So as two more people, it would have been a great hardship. 

My mother made then the third trip to Warsaw with those injections and this time, we really... it took for her so long to come back that we doubted that she will come back at all. We thought that she must have been caught by Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your life like while she, while she was away? 

SUBJECT: Well, when I was in Lemberg, I do remember-- do you mean emotionally or otherwise? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, were you working? Were you-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, I couldn't be working. I was a child. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So what we were you doing? What was your day like? 

SUBJECT: My day in Lemberg consisted in staying in long You know, at this time, the people, in order to buy food, it was, at least in Lemberg, it was necessary to have cards. With those cards, if you stood for hours in line, you could get food. 

Everyone from the family was standing with the cards in some line, and this was also my occupation. Most of the day I was standing, standing in line before some store and I hated it. Part of the time I was going with one of my aunts for a walk. 

And occasionally, she walked-- at this time, I think it was a walk in connection with Judenrat, or was it with some charity organization? I don't know. It consisted on visiting poor houses and it seems collecting informations about their conditions. Occasionally, I have a companion to her on those trips. 

Moreover, I was very much worried about my mother. In addition to which, I was terribly afraid of-- I did mention before that in the places where there was no ghetto and in [INAUDIBLE] Lemberg, there was no ghetto, the Germans were coming from time to time to Jewish houses for the purpose of taking valuables or other i think people and so on. 

Such event occur and my mother was still there. It was between her trips. When the Germans were at the door, my cousin escaped through the other door because it was thought that he might be in the greatest danger. Though later on, I mean, in the later time, women and men were equally in danger. 

And my aunt, who was the mother of my cousin, tried to delay the Germans looking into the apartment and that he could escape. And as she stood so as to stop them at the door, one of the German pushed her away. And as he pushed her, even though she was not my favorite aunt, I was so upset that my leg become to-- well, I was, I nearly fall down. My legs were quite shaky. 

Well, eventually they went out without finding my cousin, but this remain in my memory. I also remember that at this time, mother explains to those Germans that we are Polish and that we are just living there, we have a room rented with them, which kept us safe from any possible unpleasantness. 

Now, when mother was out, I was terribly afraid that the German might came again, and then I could not possibly explain that I am polish and I would be [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] As I said, mother returned and we went to Brody, where her father and her unmarried sister lived, and we moved with them. 

Then she made her third trip. Her return was very long delayed and we all though that she must be dead, that the German caught her. But she eventually came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the reunion like? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't remember till now. When she came in, the first moment I did not recognize her because she was wearing a red, big red scarf which she has never worn before. And it took me several moments till I saw that it was she and I was very, very happy. And after this trip, her family succeeded to persuade her to give up those trips because those trips were extremely dangerous. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: This must have been-- I think it was the third year of war. It was on-- we left Warsaw ghetto summer '43, so it must have been winter '43. 1943. 

INTERVIEWER 2: She made three trips that winter? 

SUBJECT: Yes, she made three trips that winter. After this, she already had some money and the things would have looked a little better. Then suddenly, another unpleasant thing happened. And this was that we all live in a, a, in and small apartment which was rented from a Polish family. 

My mother's false, my mother's Polish documents were there on the, in the basement. It so happened that the wife of the owner of this house found those papers. And since those papers were not theirs, they realized that they must be mother's. So the owner of the house gave us back the papers. 

My grandfather was at this time very upset about danger that those papers can cause. And finally, mother found some place where she hid the paper with a friend of hers. Also, as the situation was for the Jews were getting worse and worse. We already had horrible stories from, uh, Lemberg about the Jews being killed there. This was when the so-called final solution was starting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what you heard? Do you, do you remember what you heard? Do you remember any specific story, or do you remember hearing the adults talk about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I will try to remember the-- I did remember that someone mentioned that in Lemberg a number off the Jews was killed by the Germans. I also remember another event, and this was someone whom we knew was listen-- had a radio. This was in the possession of radio. Radio was also illegal, but all the same. 

And on this radio, he had this speech. I think it was a speech by Churchill when he said that the war will last, uh, two years, exactly the way it did. And everyone was terrified because with what was happening, people thought that they will not survive this long. 

Meantime, the life went to some extent normally for me. I was playing with other children there and you were discussing our own childish problems. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of games did you play? What kind of games did the children play? 

SUBJECT: I suppose the same that they played before the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of games? 

SUBJECT: I just can't remember. What I do remember was that one of my friends had a garden and there were strawberries. And all of us went to this garden. I mean, her parents had this garden and we will sometimes to go to the garden and pick those strawberries, and then we ate those strawberries. 

And we were discussing-- it was a small town so everyone knew everyone. We were discussing different people. And we already started to pay some attention to dresses and things like this. Then you far less they have seen far less than I did and therefore they were more carefree, and our talks were carefree. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have any kind of schooling? 

SUBJECT: In Warsaw, yes. There were no schools, however, there were groups of parents who arranged for their children to have a teacher and to learn together. And I also belonged to such group. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about in Brody? 

SUBJECT: Well, in Brody, there was nothing like this. One day things were getting worse and worse. Well, also, part of the time I spent with my other friend. She and her parents also lived in a big house with a garden, and we stayed in the garden and we were talking and talking for hours. I also read a lot. O was also reading a lot, whatever books I could get, and the books provided kind of escape. 

Around this time, the ghetto was established in Brody. When the ghetto was established, we moved to the ghetto. And shortly afterwards, the stories started that everyone should have arbeitz card meaning-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Work papers? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Work papers. 

SUBJECT: Work papers. Yes. And that whoever does not have those, will not have these work papers, will be in a great danger. It was very difficult to get those work papers or to get work for this matter, and almost no chance for mother. The most that could be hoped for was that my aunt will get those papers. 

And since mother had those Polish papers, she though that the best and the only thing would be to leave Brody then and to move to the nearby city Przemysl, where we could live as Polish. 

Meantime, of course, since everyone who moved to a city and was not registered some, who as living somewhere before would be in a great danger. She asked her friend in Brody to register her under her Polish name in a place where she did not live, but was registered. So in the same town, we have been under both names. 

When the situation was so aggravated, we moved to, we left for Przemysl. In Przemysl, my cousin's fiancee parents knew a woman, a Polish woman. She had an apartment and we thought we could rent a room from her. Well, We move to this house. We had to register, of course, but we have registered as having come from Brody. 

Even so, every newcomer was suspect. Especially there because the lady in question occasionally had Jews in hiding at her place and the neighbors suspected this. so even though this was not our case-- I mean, everyone could see us, we were not in hiding. We could not have afford to be in hiding because not under the circumstances. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you mean? 

SUBJECT: I mean that in order to be in hiding somewhere, one had to pay. Unless one found someone, some close friends of his who would do it without money, which was very, very difficult because at this time, the German, when they found that a Pole hid, had the Jews in hiding-- how do say hiding? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hiding, yes. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In such case, not only the Jews, but also the Pole who had them in hiding would be shot together with his entire family. So very, very few people were willing to take such risk. To make things worse, as at this time, the Jews in ghett-- the Germans started to kill Jews in different ghettos. 

People started to buy those, uh, false documents, which were at that time very expensive also and we would not have been afford, we couldn't not have afford to buy them if not that we already had them from before when we had them at much better price. 