[BEEP] INTERVIEWER: OK, before you went to Plaszow, what you were feeling and what-- 

SUBJECT: Well, it-- it was a constant fear. It was a constant fear, not only for my own life, but my father's and my brother's. And uh, the atrocity were still going on. From time to time, they would catch a Jewish boy or-- I remember my cousin, my father's sister's daughter, who in another camp. She came in. She was at that time about 17, a very pretty girl. 

And she was very distraught because they were attacked by the black Nazis, which are the Ukrainian Nazis, and raped six girls. And she was very bitter and very upset and frightened. As a matter of fact, the second time it happened, one of them killed her because she-- she said that that time when she came to visit us, she said that if ever happens again, she would rather-- he should kill her than actually rape her. So she was killed in one of those attacks, where they attacked. There were several Jewish girls that-- it was a camp like a farm, where the Jewish girls were working. 

So to me, at that time, you know, I knew about these things. I knew what was going on around me. But as I said, actually did not happen. I was frightened when, uh, we went to Plaszow. That was the worst time at this time. I thought that, you know, my father just turned 60, the fear of losing him in Plaszow and the shocked coming in and seeing, you know, that people were just like animals treated, even because-- as I said before-- I was hidden while I heard all of this. I was-- I didn't actually witness any death. 

Uh, I did not actually see that person until I came to Plaszow. And then there were three Jewish boys-- 16, 17-year-olds-- who-- who were working in a potato field and being hungry. They stole three potatoes, each one a potato, and ate it raw. And to teach a lesson, they were hung in the marketplace. And we all had to walk parade and watch them being-- you know, how they executed them. 

And-- and then more and more occurs, more and more death traps. And there was a kindergarten still, about 30 some odd children in Plaszow. One day, they came in and took all the children to Auschwitz, with the exception of one child who was 10 years old. She managed to escape. She was a survivor. She-- at that time, she knew enough to jump into a outhouse. And that's how she survived. She did not survive. She was died eventually in Auschwitz. But uh, she survived for a few months longer. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you were thinking when you saw the three boys who were hung? 

SUBJECT: I was in complete shock. I was numb, nothing. You know, there's-- it's very hard to even describe my feeling because the fear and the day-to-day existence in this camp was just more, you know, than any human being could imagine. Maybe the fact that I was only 15 years old help me, you know? And sometimes you say, you're young and stupid. 

Now my sister came out and it were-- it affected tremendously, mentally, physically. But at that point, all I could think of is well, maybe tomorrow it will be better for that miracle that you're waiting from day to day to happen. Maybe tomorrow it will happen. So actually, well, I lived only from day to day. And as I said, from-- it got progressively worse as I-- it went. The next year between 1944 and 1945, the worst anyone can ever go through, any human being can ever go through, mentally and physically. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? 

SUBJECT: Uh, in 19-- in November, 1944, they took us to Auschwitz. Now they were all young girls selected over and over so many times already that I think that, oh, this person was 33 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean, selected over and over? 

SUBJECT: Usually for work, they selected young, healthy-looking girls or women. And we were all young. And so at that point, when we arrived in Auschwitz, I remember on the train with this-- so we knew once we came close to Auschwitz, the smell of human flesh was unbearable. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew-- 

SUBJECT: Burning human flesh-- we knew that we are going to Auschwitz. Till that time, we didn't know where we are going. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew what the smell was? 

SUBJECT: We knew right way, because we heard already about Auschwitz from people when we came to, uh, Plaszow. So we knew. And I remember-- we decided that if we have to die, um, let us not give them the pleasure of seeing us cry. So we decided that we are going to sing a song, a Hebrew song or so. 

And believe it or not, between 89 girls that we were on that train, there was only one that knew the "Hatikvah" or a similar-- a Hebrew song. There was nothing that we knew as far-- you know, some kind of, you know, affiliation. We were brought up in Poland at that-- at my age already as Poles, or maybe because I was brought up in a non-Jewish neighborhood. It's possible. 

So we got out of the train. And the German, the Nazis were waiting for us. And one girl started singing the Polish national anthem. And believe it or not, we all picked it up. And there we stood, Jewish girls, the only crime committed was because we were Jews, singing a Polish anthem. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember it? 

SUBJECT: Some words, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you sing now? 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't think so. I remember the words, marsz, marsz, Dabrowski, z ziemi wloskiej do Polski. Exactly, I-- I don't-- you know, I forgot already the words to it. It was-- but that time, as I said, we were singing this Polish anthem, despite the fact that, you know, in Poland, we are still considered as Jews. But we just wanted to show our resentment in some way, our pride in some way. 

And we were surprised to find out that they seemed to be so pleasant and-- until actually, we got into Birkenau, until they took us out from the trains into Birkenau. And then again, the segregation started-- children on one side. There were not too many other women. I think there was one that was in her 30s. But she looked a little older, so they put her aside anyway. Uh, that was for crematorium already. 

And Doctor Mengele was staying, you know, one line to crematorium, one line to work, one line to crematorium, one line to work. And that was the selected was. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know-- how did you know who he was? Uh, 

SUBJECT: At that time, I knew only that he was the camp's doctor. I did not know his name, actually, who he was until later on. You know, there were people already that were longer there. When we came in, there were a lot of people from Yugo-- Czechoslovakia and Hungary, a lot of girls. And I remember when we came in and they told us, you came in through that gate but you are going out that chimney, pointing to the crematorium chimneys. And I was 15 years old at that time and also in a complete shock. And I don't know how-- come to think of it, how was I able to survive one shock after another? 

There, I met my sister who I thought she was hidden by a Gentile couple. And I thought she's safe in where she lived in Boryslaw in Poland. But evidently, they refused to hide her and her husband together because they were afraid. They didn't mind her, because she was blond, blue-eyed. But they were afraid that if they catch them, her husband, being so easily identifiable as a Jew, uh, will actually bring some repercussion from the Germans. So they were afraid to hide him. And she made that decision that she's going to go wherever her husband goes. She did not want to live unless she goes with her husband. 

So they separated them. They sent him to Mauthausen. And they sent her to Auschwitz. And that's where I met her. And, um, it was quite-- you the worst so. Every one of-- every one of the concentration camps held some horrors. But I think Auschwitz was the worst. 

We-- this child that survived, this 10-year-old girl, of course she was separated from her mother. And that experience I think haunted me for years to a point where, you know, mentally I, uh, transferred that somehow to my own child. When they took her away, she was screaming and fighting. And it took about three brave, husky, Nazi soldiers to catch her. She was kicking and scratching and-- and running. And they were chasing her all over the place. And she-- her mother was there, too. And she was screaming and asking her mother not to let-- not to let them kill her. 

So one of the German walked over to the mother and ask her if she-- and she was about 27, 28 years old at that time, a young woman herself for a 10-year-old child. And he ask if she wants to go with the child. And she said no. And this left a tremendous effect on me, the fact-- you know, as they led the child away bodily. Three guys had to led-- led this 10-year-old girl away because she was fighting so desperately to live, that at that point in my mind, I blamed her for not going with her child. Then I thought, who am I to blame her? What would be my decision in a case like this? 

And of course, years later when my daughter was born, Susan-- the firstborn-- I had nightmares, and continuously the same nightmare over and over again, where this time, I was faced with the decision that I have to make. And it would be Susan that I have to make that decision about. And this continued poorly. I would wake up every night. This continued for a-- the child was almost a year when I went to see my doctor. Of course, I was ashamed to admit like what's wrong with me. I developed ulcers and lost a lot of weight. 

Finally, I told him the story. He was very understanding. He stayed with me longer than normally he-- he did. He even offered if I would like to go and see a psychiatrist, which at that time, you know, it was something that, you know, that I thought, I'm not going to. I was a close person, where I-- I would not divulge my feelings openly. He was the only one, the first time that they ever discussed it with. And he explained to me that it's quite a normal reaction, uh, to have after what I have witnessed. And it evidently stayed with me in back of my mind for so many years that it came out when my firstborn, a girl, when she was born, that-- and at that point, I al-- the fear for her life was so great that, uh, every time the same dream would reoccur. 

And I saw him several times after that. He was internist. He was not a psychiatrist. But yet, he was able to help me understand a little bit more and to relax of my own emotional turmoil at this point over this one scene. Uh, then after that, of course, were other incidents. And-- but this one was one of the worst that I never wanted even to think of until a certain time later in life. 

INTERVIEWER: What other incidents? 

SUBJECT: Well, there were incidents in camp where I would see, you know, people get sick. And uh, they disappeared. And I was told, you know, instead of go-- there were no hospitals or anything else. So they would give them injection, uh, and put them to death. 

There was-- then also at the same time, you know, the second one when we were selected for work. As I said, I was 15 years old and very naive at this point. I was protected too much by my father and my brother at this point, too. Despite the fact that I was in concentration camp already in Plaszow, I came into Auschwitz not prepared for the horror that I have witnessed there. 

So when we came to-- for selection to work and she asked me how old I am, I said 15. And of course, she put me aside. Now I realized that, uh, I was there left with a few girls who were very sick. Some of them had this, um, skin disease that is very contagious. And that's the only reason they put them aside. It was contagious at that time and that I'm in a line for crematorium. 

So after that, I-- there was one of the men, the German, uh, officer who did say, but she's strong. She's young. She's going to be 16 in April, and that was November. Ah, well, it didn't make any difference to her. The law is the law. And the law says 16. You cannot work before-- under 16. Well, anyway, I managed to escape and rejoin my group, and until I saw actually the number on my arm, which gave me the right to work. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what number. You have it now? 

SUBJECT: I-- you know, have a tattooed number on my arm which meant that I-- 

INTERVIEWER: I-- I don't think-- I couldn't see it. Do you remember your number? Can you read your-- 

SUBJECT: No. That's like a mental block with me. I can read that if I look at it. But I just refuse to memorize. It's something that it's there. But I just cannot memorize that, no matter how many times. You know, I tried. An hour later or so, I forget the numbers. 

I know it starts with A. I can read it now. I know it's 26547. But an hour later, if you ask me, I will not remember the number. 

INTERVIEWER: Did it hurt when they put that number on you? 

SUBJECT: You know, emotionally, I was so happy at this point to see that they are going to give me the number for work, to tattoo the number to mean join the workforce, that whatever physical pain there was, I did not feel it so much because sometimes the emotional feeling takes over your physical pain. 

INTERVIEWER: But it's on the inside of your arm. 

SUBJECT: Right under the skin. 

INTERVIEWER: No-- but most of the numbers are on the outside of the arm. Yours is on the inside. Was there a reason? 

SUBJECT: No. My sister has it on the outside. Some people who came in earlier have it on the outside. I have it on the inside because when I came, the transport I came in, we all were tattooed-- the numbers were tattooed on the inside. Uh, and then I-- they put us in Muster Lager. That's in Auschwitz. And that's where I worked there for a while. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of work? 

SUBJECT: We were building a highway. There was farm work, but the Gestapo overseer on that farm was a very cruel man. So we always tried to avoid that task as much as possible. Sometimes it didn't help. I know a couple of times, I-- they caught me forcibly. And I had to-- one time, I got hit as a result of that-- to work on the farm. The work itself was like any other work, except that the man was a sadist. And uh, you were in constant fear of getting hit and actually physically abused. And many girls have been in a very cruel way. 

So-- and then I remember having a toothache. You know, during all those years, my teeth were neglected. And I developed an abscess in my-- on my gum. The abscess went right through my cheek. And uh, I remember one of the Jewish girls, uh, who was the-- what they call-- call them. She wasn't a kapo. She was an overseer in our room-- fi-- managed to get me to see a dentist, to get to a dental clinic. 

Now, the dental clinic was not for the prisoners there. I don't know how she did it really. But she managed to get me there. It was a young student, a dental student. And he pulled the tooth and cleaned it up a little bit and sneak me back to camp, into camp. This was on the outskirts of actually our compound there, where we stayed. And uh, there we were till January of 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: If they hadn't pulled that tooth and removed that abscess, what would have happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, my face was swollen completely. My eye was closed. And uh, I don't know how-- at this point, they wouldn't bother. Because a lot of girls that h-- had lesser disabilities than that and they were put-- they were not bothered with, just put in crematorium, you know, put to death. Because they didn't want to be bothered with doctors or-- I don't know why in that case it so happened that this girl had a pull there or, uh-- sometimes I think it's a miracle, to be very honest with you, you know? 

There's-- I-- since that time, I never questioned why. Because if I would, I would won-- I wonder myself, how did I ever survive it? I was not very strong. I was not physically strong. Uh, I was not one of the brave ones. Uh, you know, I was a mere child at that point. How did I survive? I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Who chose the kapos or the superintendents? How did someone become, uh, in charge? 

SUBJECT: Well, when we came in, uh, the kapos, the superintendents, usually-- they were already there. A lot of them were Hungarian girls who came in before us. Um, sometimes a very aggressive girl-- one girl I remember, a Polish girl, who was a very aggressive type of a person and, um, and not a very nice person that, you know, they could distinguish right away who would cooperate or not or so and who was easy to cooperate. So they would select such a person for cooperation. 

And uh, I spend there, as I said, till January of 1945. The Russians were advancing. And they decided to, uh, move us. Now they had no facilities of moving us. And the Germans are the type of people that unless they have an order to kill-- like a dog-- an order to attack, they didn't know what to do. And the orders did not come through because the communications were very poor at that time already with Berlin. The wires were down. 

And so they started moving us by foot. So we walked for three days and three nights. Whoever couldn't walk was killed wherever they stood by the roadside, on the road. Uh, amazing as it might sound, it were men who gave up easier than women, maybe because they were braver. They did not-- they were not afraid to die. It's possible. Only women, most of them, they just fell dead or really were on the brink of death before they gave up. And see, the road was scattered was bodies. 

And until we reached Breslow, or outskirts actually of Breslow, there they had trains waiting for us, cattle trains. And they put us on those trains and brought us to Bergen-Belsen. Now Bergen-Belsen, when I came in, you came in to die there. There was no way-- first of all, they had a large group of Hungarian Jews. And while the Polish Jews systematically were mistreated for so many years, they were already prepared to it, they took the Hungarian Jews right straight from their homes. They brought them in in their furs and jewelry and high heels and threw them into this hell. And of course, they started dying out like flies. Typhus was ravaging throughout the camp. 

Somebody came in. And we were sleeping on the floor, like body to-- like sardines in a can, one head this way, one head that way. And uh, I remember one night, I had to go to the bathroom. I could never get back to the space where I slept. Because as I was tripping over people, you know, they would get angry. And tempers were short. People were hungry. So I stayed at the door outside and sat there and slept the rest of the night until morning to get back to this little space that I had a blanket on. 

Uh, when they came in to register for work, uh, I and another girl who were-- we were both, at that time 15, the youngest one in camp. We registered for work. There were about 160 of us, I believe. I don't know exact number. But I know over 150 women that registered. 

And we went to work in a factory, a munition-- it was, uh, parts for-- airplane parts factory. And uh, there were already 500 girls, Hungarian girls, when we arrived. And we worked there for several months. 

Then April, 1945, they started to move it. How do I remember it? It was my birthday. I was 16 years old, April 3rd. And uh, I came in. And I announced that today, I'm 16 years old. I came from work. And that day, they gave us for supper a slice of bread and a cup of soup, which was only water with some leaves floating around, and a tablespoon of mustard and a teaspoon of, um, jelly. And everybody, oh, the girl is 16, my god. I admitted my age at that point, you know? I reached finally-- I managed to reach 16 birthday. 

Uh, when I went to wash around, when I came back, on my bunk, each one of the girls-- and we were about 20 some odd girls in that room-- took a-- a piece, a little, tiny piece of her bread. And uh, they put it on a napkin and on my bunk. And of course, I had everybody's mustard. And the first time in a long time that I went to bed that I didn't-- went to sleep, didn't feel the hunger pains that I usually did every night since I was in concentration camp. Because those little, tiny pieces amounted to probably an extra slice of bread. 

And that night, I got ill. So uh, at first I thought maybe I overate. But it was typhus. And my girlfriend had it first. And I took care of her. She was also-- as I said, we were both very-- the youngest two girls there. So I took care of her. And when she felt better, she helped me out while I was sick. And they made us-- they moved us because the English-- this time, the British were coming. So they moved us again. And you know, she was helping me up, you know, carrying me on her shoulders. We were on those trains for three weeks. During the three weeks trip, they fed us three times. 

INTERVIEWER: What trains? I-- I-- 

SUBJECT: They put this on the, you know, train to move us from camp to camp. They uh, wanted to-- they didn't know what to do with us. 

INTERVIEWER: You had the typhus then? 

SUBJECT: And I had the typhus. And at some place in a big city, another train of people, Jewish girls, that joined our train-- by that time, we were close to 2,000 women. Uh, that was within few days after we left Gelenau. Uh, was-- and three weeks, we were traveling from place to place. Nobody would accept us. They didn't have facilities for us. Uh, I remember we were in Prague, Czechoslovakia. I don't know how we got there. That's the time that they fed us, because the pop-- the Czech population stood around with food. And then they wouldn't move until they let them give us some food. Uh, so uh, that was the second time that they gave us food. 

Then the third time, I don't remember exactly. I know that we were fed three times during the three weeks of traveling. By the time we reach our destination, which was Mauthausen in Austria, from the 3,000-- 2,000 women, we were about 300 of us that were alive, a little over 300. Most of them died during that trip. The only thing that saved me, I think, is the fact that I had typhus, very high fever, and that didn't-- my body did not require food. I don't know why and how. 

But it was raining. My girlfriend would stand at the bars, the rusted bars, and catch some rain water into a can and feed me the rain water and wash me around with it to bring the fever down. Uh, and we finally they reached Mauthausen. And as I said, one camp was worse than the other. But that time, it was already the end of April. We started the beginning of April, right? April 3rd was my birthday still-- birthday. So within a week or so after, we were liberated in Mauthausen by the American forces. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that time? 

SUBJECT: Yes, because uh, first-- you know, as a result of typhus, uh, it left me completely-- I was dying, actually. I was on the floor. I could hear voices around me. I couldn't see anything or anyone. And uh, this girlfriend of mine, uh, they left-- the Germans left about a day or two prior to the-- when they en-- the American forces entered. And she managed to-- to get out into a farmhouse, a German farmhouse. And they escaped because they knew actually that eventually, if somebody comes in, that they were aware of what was going on in that camp. So they escaped and left the farmhouse empty. 

And she found some sugar there and a piece of cheese and some tea bag-- not bags, loose tea. And the first thing she did is give me some sugar. And I will never forget that as long as I live. When she gave me sugar and water, I felt like somebody would lift a train, some-- a curtain off my eyes. All of a sudden, I could see. Till that time, I couldn't see. I could only hear. Uh, evidently, this tablespoon of sugar and water must have done it in some way. 

And then she made me some hot tea with sugar again after that. And I had a piece of cheese. And suddenly, I was able to lift my head up. Till that time, she had to pick my head up to feed me. 

And about-- within two or three days after that, I remember when, uh, a truck full of American soldiers came in. And uh, one of them was a Jewish officer. And he spoke a beautiful Yiddish, better than any one of us. And as he was talking and he says, I have heard rumors. I have heard, but I was never aware of the real, true story of-- actually, the truth of what was going on. And in middle of his speech, he broke down, started to cry. That's, you know-- it was a terrible thing to watch at this point and also to see a man break down completely. 

Um, one of the guys, a doctor who graduated from a medical school in England, spoke very good English. And he right away translated what was going on. And at first, I understand I missed that because I was too sick to get off that floor. But I understand the first truck of American soldiers that came in, they got scared. They thought that they are in a mental institution or some place-- something they have never seen before in their lives, skeletons, you know, walking skeletons. And of course, people, when they realized that they are American soldiers, they wanted to, um, show them how welcome they are, and they got scared. They couldn't understand what's going on. So this doctor started explaining to them what this place is and what has been happening here. 

So they-- well, by that time, you know, they evidently went back and brought some more people. And then the Red Cross came in. And then, of course, everybody wanted to go and see where, you know, some-- somebody is alive. Uh, I really didn't think so my sister is alive. Because when they took her out from Auschwitz, they-- she was with a group of women from our home town and the surrounding towns. 

And I found out right after the war what happened to that transport. They put them on a boat and sunk the boat with the people in it, so-- on a old boat. So the first-- I remember in Mauthausen, the first service they had, I said Yizkor for her and went on back to Poland to look for my brother and father. And you can imagine my shock when I found my sister alive. 

Evidently, she had the feeling that they are not taking them where they were sup-- where they were saying they are taking them. She says, I'm not going in that transport. So she and five other girls-- she was at that time in her late 20s-- uh, jumped someplace that they had like the outhouse and a-- and a bathroom there together. And they hid there. And that's why they are the only ones, the only survivors, from that group. The rest of them were drowned. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel when you went back to your home? 

SUBJECT: I did not go back to my home. I reached Krakow. And when I announced that I would like to go to my hometown, I was told that it's not Poland anymore, that now it's Russia, that Russia took that part of Poland. In exchange, they gave Poland Niederschlesien, a part of Germany. And therefore, I can't go there without a special permission from the Russians. Now I didn't want to go to Russia. I did not want to live under a communist regime. 

So I put together a telegram. I knew wherever there are couple of Jews left, wherever there are two Jews left, there will be a Jewish Committee right away. So I addressed it to the Jewish Committee, saying that I am Dola Steuer, daughter of Solomon Steuer, alive and in Krakow, in case somebody would return for my family. Sure enough, they received the telegram. 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister? How did you-- 

SUBJECT: Not my sister-- that was-- my sister, my brother, he survived. They both were in a camp which was Niederschlesien, Germany. But Poland took it over. My brother was a translator for the Russian intelligence right after the war because we were two years under the Russian regime. And at that time, he was in business school. So you know, he picked up Russian as well as I did. And then to his surprise, somehow always every place there was a camp, he was looking for me or my father or-- he found out that my sister is alive. So they found each other right after the war in 1945. 

And uh, they decided they are going back to their hometown. Because my father, any place else-- you know, if he survived, he will go to the home where he built-- you know, the properties he both for 30 some odd years. And we knew that he will want to go back home. 

And they put him in a camp, in the Russian camp, for processing before they go. And they were surprised to see that there were no Jews and that they were the only Jews there. And they couldn't understand it. And my brother says, you know, there are still some people that were alive, a few of them, in Galicia. That's where we came from. I can't understand it. 

So they sneaked out of this camp. And they were walking down in Breslov-- which is now, it's called Bratslav down the street to see if they can come across somebody. When they came across somebody that looks familiar, and my sister stopped him. And it was my younger sister's husband. And of course, it was such a shock to them. And-- and my ex-brother-in-law knew that I am an Krakow. So he told them where I am, where I'm staying. 

So my sister stayed on in Bratslav. She opened the store with was my ex-brother-in-law. And my brother came to get me. And while he came to get me, he came down with typhus and spent six weeks in the hospital there, where I had to take care of him. And I had to take care of them. At this point, you know, he was the only person in the whole world that I cared for. I was always crazy about my brother. But at that point, he was my father, my mother. 

And uh, I was, you know, very happy to see him. And when he got better, we went back to join our sister in Bratslav. And I joined the high school system there, where I finished two years in one year. And then the anti-Semitism in Poland started all over again. There were a lot of Jews killed, the ones that returned from concentration camp. 

A friend of ours, her husband was working for somebody in a jewelry store. And they walked into rob the store. And they said, you know, you're a Jew. And they killed him. And more and more of it, you have-- you started hearing here and there and the disappointment that's-- that a few thousand Jews return back to Poland. 

And I decided that I had enough of Europe. And I said to my brother and sister if they want to stay in Poland, go ahead. But I'm leaving. I just-- I have no ties, no-- in Poland. The-- the country did not mean anything to me. I was very disappointed and very bitter. 

So uh, they picked themselves up and left with me. By that time, my sister remarried. Her husband died in Mauthausen, her first husband. So she remarried again. And we all left Poland and came to Germany. And we lived there in DP camps for four years until we were able to apply for, uh-- actually, we applied earlier, but until we were able to come to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever think of going to Jerusalem, to Palestine? 

SUBJECT: I did. About 12 years ago, when our oldest was 16 years old, we went to Israel. Of course, I cried the first time I arrived. I have seen the Star of David on the ambulances and all over. And I thought, you know, they use it with such a pride, whereas here, they tried to make us wear it with a-- in a shame. So we went to Jerusalem. And uh, I will be very honest with you. We went over, where we have seen everything but Yad Vashem. My daughter went in, but my husband and I refused to go with in. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think of going to Palestine directly from Europe? 

SUBJECT: Yes. When I was young, at one point only-- I always wanted to come to the United States since I was a little child. My mother had a brother and a sister here. And from time to time, I would get-- you know, she would get letters from them, a picture of my cousin when she graduated high school. My aunt, I know she died in 1939. She lived in Chicago. She didn't have any children. 

My uncle, my mother's brother-- I don't know what happened, really. I never was able to locate him. I tried, maybe not hard enough. But I wasn't able to locate him. I know that he had two children. 

And I-- for some reason, I always wanted to come to the United States until the war broke out in Israel, 1948-- '48, the war for the independence, I believe. And that's when I registered to go and fight in Israel. And my sister was a very sick person. She spent 13 months in a hospital in Heidelberg, or clinic. And when she found out, she passed out. 

So after that, uh, you know, they did not-- several people, they called in. But they kept postponing with me. I was 17 years old. They kept postponing. And finally, when the war stopped, I saw no reason going to Israel. I thought I will go to the country I always dreamed of. And so I came to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you, Mrs. Goldberg, you mentioned that when you were 16-- when you were 15, there was this girl. And she said, you're not 16. You can't work. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: This is the rule. How do you feel now about obeying the law, law and order? What has your experience, uh-- 

[SIGHS] 

SUBJECT: I-- without law and order, I feel our society would be in a complete chaos to a certain degree. We all have to follow the law and order. But I feel-- like for instance, this Dr. Levy who objected to teach soldiers who were fighting in Vietnam, in a way, I-- I feel a certain admiration for this man for the simple fact that he felt he was right there. He knew that there is something wrong. He felt it's the wrong thing to do. And he stood up. He did not follow the crowd. He did not follow blindly. 

But let's be very honest. Most people do follow very blindly-- most law enforcement officers here, too. That's the order I have. And that's the law I-- and I-- without any, any thought to actually, is it the right thing or is it the right idea? 

INTERVIEWER: Did ever, uh, hear again from the soldier that spoke Yiddish and cried? 

SUBJECT: No. I never-- I probably would never have recognized him. It's just it left a impression on me, seeing him so emotionally involved. Of course, when I think back, the way we looked-- and as a matter of fact, as we watched, um, on the movies-- what was the, not television, the movie that was so watched a few months ago, can't think of-- 

INTERVIEWER: Holocaust. 

SUBJECT: Holocaust, I, uh-- as they were showing marching woman in-- women in Auschwitz, and my son who is 19, just turned 19 that time, and my daughters were sitting. And without thinking much, I said to them, uh, you see the third person in the row? That's me. And they looked-- you know, to them, it was just a picture until I said, the third person in the fourth, row, it's me. That came as a shock, that actually, I was one of the-- it was not. I said it without-- you know, as a joke at this point. But it's to bring the point that I was there. I could have being the third person in the fourth row. 

So it came to them like such a shock. He was-- he couldn't believe it for a second. He stared. And he, like myself, always avoids the unpleasantness of things that are, you know, associated with war-- World War II. But likely more and more, he reads and questions and which is, till now, he didn't want to hear about it. And I never really bothered. 

I didn't want to make them feel very conscious of it, or maybe-- you know, in a certain way, maybe it was wrong. But yet, they are very much aware of that, what we went through. They much more appreciative, I think, of their parents and very-- if he studies, he would like to get good grades, if only to please us, like compensation for the things we went through. 

INTERVIEWER: Is your husband European? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he suffer? 

SUBJECT: Well, he was born in Poland but brought up in Hungary. So he was also in Mauthausen, but only a few days. He was a young boy at that time. And he was in the underground when he got caught. And they discovered he's a Jew, of course. They sent him to Mauthausen. And uh, he came in, took one look at it. And he said, I prefer death to that. He was only 19, I believe, at that time. 

So he escaped and in process of escaping was shot. His legs are very badly. He was wounded. And of course, within days after that, the American forces came in. He was found semi-conscious in the woods. So-- and since he spoke, they couldn't make-- actually understand him well. But one of them understood a couple of Hungarian word-- words they used. So they sent him to Budapest, to a hospital there. They took care of him as much-- operated on him immediately. And this-- and then they sent him. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you meet? 

SUBJECT: After the war, we met in a DP camp, displaced persons camp in Germany. After he felt better, he managed to get out of Hungary and come to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: You were with him from that point,? 

SUBJECT: We knew each other for about a year and a half, almost two years. And then when we came to the United States, we got married. I lived in Buffalo, New York, at that time. And he came to Buffalo. And that's where we were married. But we settled in New Haven. That's where he was working. And I thought New Haven is a smaller town. I-- somehow, I preferred New Haven to Buffalo for the simple reason that it's smaller. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. OK. You know, I have a-- Yeah. OK, Paul-- you're leaving? No. Oh, Mrs. [INAUDIBLE] is here. Yes, I realize we're running behind. It's just that the whole justification for the-- 

SUBJECT: listed, I find a lot of incidents that are never reported, a lot of things that-- like my son tells me, mother, why didn't you fight? Why didn't Jewish people fight? And I-- it's hard for him to understand when I explain to him. 

INTERVIEWER: Wait a minute. I'm sorry. We just have to get this. I'm sorry. 

CREW: Are you rolling? 

INTERVIEWER: John, roll. OK. Your son asks you-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, like you know, my son asked me, why didn't you fight? Why didn't the Jewish people fight? So it hard for me-- I did explain to him that majority of the six million people that died were women and children anyway. Whoever was able to escape joined underground any-- you know, Russian army. I have some place still here a Russian newspaper that in 1946, beginning of 1946, uh, they were distributing medals for bravery to their armed forces. 

And of course, they distributed under nationality. Now, Jews are considered a nationality in Russia. And the Jewish population of Russia consists of only 3% of the entire population, or 4%-- of that time, anyway, in 1946. And yet 40%, of the heroes who received medals for bravery-- Lenin medal for bravery-- were Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you tell your son? You just-- what do you tell your son? 

SUBJECT: That exactly-- you know, that first of all, it was done in such a conniving, clever way where we did not even know what was happening around us. Secondly, there was nowhere to go for help, no place to turn. Because-- 

