SUBJECT: Don't know what you call it, dysentery or something. It was just awful. I had to lay next to her because she was dying. And she said, Helen, please stay next me, you know, warm me. And she was the last one. She went, too. 

INTERVIEWER: She died in the bed? 

SUBJECT: She lied in my arms, just like my brother did. It wasn't a bed. It was a bunk for five people. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't have a mattress? It was straw? 

SUBJECT: Straw. And she was laying there and she was-- the smell was so awful I was dying. But she was so scared. She was all-- that's all. She was crying, I should stay with her. So I did. I stayed till-- till she became cold and stiff in my arms. 

INTERVIEWER: She had to lie there. She were to lie there. 

SUBJECT: She was shaking, and she was-- she was just the most beautiful girl you could ever imagine-- beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER: No one could help her but you? 

SUBJECT: Nobody could help. We couldn't even speak. If you said that you were sick, then you sure, for sure were going to die. So I was hiding her because she could get up from bed. So I was kind of, a few or more days, I thought maybe she would get over it, you know? But once you get this-- um, you know, when you have this-- this durance, you just couldn't stop it. 

INTERVIEWER: But the Germans inspected those camps. And how come they didn't-- 

SUBJECT: Well, you see-- 

INTERVIEWER: --smell it, or-- 

SUBJECT: They-- they did some of the, you know-- a block-- a block was 500 people in a block. And some of the women who were the-- the leaders of this, they were good people. They tried. They tried to help. So we used to hide and we used to, you know-- sometimes you were able to do it for a day or two but you couldn't do it for very long. 

INTERVIEWER: Wasn't there a rule keeping the place very clean and-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, but we tried to clean. I tried to help her. I tried to clean her. But ah, yeah, we cleaned. I don't know how clean. You know, they came, they looked. Every day there, they-- they-- every day they inspected the place. But we tried. And she was not the only one with they were-- they, they were hiding. We were able to, for a few days. But she died anyway. 

INTERVIEWER: And you didn't catch it. You didn't catch the dysentery or the others. 

SUBJECT: I had dysentery too, and I had typhus in the concentration camp. Not-- not there. I had it in Auschwitz. But somehow, I told you, I remember when I was going to work with this dysentery, this was already at the very end of the war. I used to be able to go to work but coming home, I developed TB in-- in Auschwitz. At the very end, I was very, very sick. My friends used to drag me home. They used to carry me, literally, because I just couldn't-- I was able to go, but coming back I wasn't able to-- to make it. And I remember, it used to run to my legs. Couldn't hold nothing in my stomach. 

INTERVIEWER: And you couldn't change your clothes? 

SUBJECT: No I washed whatever water we had there. Ah, you know, listen, this was already at the very end. Ah, but I-- I really was, must have been mentally very, very strong. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, yes. Ah, when you talked to us, not in person, that something happened to you. 

SUBJECT: But I talk now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. Eh, you just, you talk of uh, smuggling food, of smuggling arms, of picking up German helmets, of res--, trying to keep your friend, of other friends of this, they said so. People, Jews, doing something very active to keep alive and to help others. 

SUBJECT: That's right. That's right, we did-- very much so, very much so. Of-- you will-- you do what you have to do. I'm sure, you know, everybody reacts different. Some people were paralyzed. They couldn't do nothing. But some of us were able to do. And you did what you had to. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And there was-- you maintained contact. You were friends. 

SUBJECT: Oh, extremely supportive. Extremely supportive. I remember when I was in Auschwitz, and at the block where I was there was a girl who had had a baby. Would you believe it, if I tell you this? She had a baby. We were able to hide this baby for months. We delivered the baby ourselves. I-- I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us about this. 

SUBJECT: I-- I-- I-- you know, I-- I-- I don't know. I-- I really cannot-- it's very hard. It's very hard to explain it to you. It's very hard to explain. We just did it, what we had to do. We did. Our aim was to defy Hitler, to do everything we can to live because when you lived, this, he wants us to die. And we didn't want to. We didn't-- we didn't want to oblige him. This was our way of fighting back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you find out she was pregnant? 

SUBJECT: The girl was pregnant. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What, eh, what did you do before she delivered? 

SUBJECT: She was so skinny you didn't even know, or you didn't even notice. You know, she was very skinny. And the baby died a few days later, which was-- the baby couldn't possibly live on that nutrition what she said. But she delivered the baby. 

INTERVIEWER 2: She kept working to the end? 

SUBJECT: She kept waking to the end. In middle of the night, she had great pain and there were women who, some of them were nurses. The baby was delivered, I'm telling you. With a knife we cut off the umbilical cord. We didn't have a drop of alcohol. We didn't have nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the mother survive? 

SUBJECT: The mother lived. She was very, very depressed after, extremely depressed. She was a young woman, but she was a mind block. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she live-- is she alive now? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I was-- you know, then I was-- I was in Birkenau originally for about, uh, quite a long while. And then I was taken into Auschwitz. You know, they were divided. I don't know if you know, they were two camps. 

And I was working at an ammunition factory in Auschwitz, ah, at the very end. And, um, I don't know if anybody told you that this is also a most interesting story. I mean, it was written up in Odessa. You know that some of the girls blew up to crematorium. Do you know that? Do you know that story? 

Ah, I was working in ammunition factory. The name of it was Union Fact. We were making, uh, hand grenades for the Germans. And you know, we were hoping that the Germans would come in bombers with the ammunition factory, because there was a lot of-- we heard , that was already 1944, the end of 1944 that, uh, I don't know if it was American or Russians or whatever they were, flying around over. And we were hoping that they would blow up the whole ammunition. 

I don't know if anything, the ammuni-- of this factory came out good. If whatever sabotage we could do, we did, but it was a very good job because it wasn't a job in the field, it was a job in a building. So we weren't exposed to the weather elements, because nobody had shoes and we didn't have clothes, and it was very cold and we had to march five miles to work and we worked 12 hours and march five miles back. And they wake us up 3:00 in the morning, or 4:00, and you had to count. I'm sure you heard this from other people. You had to count, the prisoners-- you never heard this? The appell. 

INTERVIEWER: No, tell me what happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us again, please. Doesn't matter, everybody has a different-- 

SUBJECT: In Auschwitz, the day started 4:00 in the morning. 4:00 in the morning, you had to go outside. You stay five in a row. The block was 500 people in one block. And the Germans had a compulsion, and that's why they had such fantastic records. Had to be counted, every single prisoner to be counted every single day. 

INTERVIEWER: By name or by number? 

SUBJECT: By number. Every block, so many people, they had to come and count you. We used to stay for hours. This is the way they worse us down. They wanted to wear us down. And we used to huddle our bodies together because, you know, the bodies gave out some warmth. For hours we used to stay under the appells. And then after this, the orchestra started to play and we went to work. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean, the orchestra started to play? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we had-- we had an orchestra coming. An orchestra coming up or going to work and an orchestra when we were left. You never heard of that? 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of music did they play? 

SUBJECT: German marches. We should march. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember them? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't remember them. But I know they-- we had an orchestra leaving to for work, and we had an orchestra coming home. 

INTERVIEWER: Who were-- who were the-- 

SUBJECT: Prisoners, some of-- whoever had ever played an instrument had to, you know, they had an, ah, I would say about 10, 12, people in the orchestra, leaving in the morning and coming-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: If you heard any of these marches now-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, please. You know, I went-- I went, I was in Florida this week. And I was-- I looked for a room. And a lot of German people come down to Florida. This is not relevant, but I-- I just hear the German language and I-- it's-- if they give me the room for nothing, I wouldn't stay there. 

I just walked out. I couldn't bear it. Ah, you know, I would certainly recognize it. I'm not a-- uh, a music lover. But ah, there are things you don't forget. Sometimes we snuck in a little bit of a Jewish melody to, ah, some of the players. But um, I think a lot of them maybe were Jewish women of-- of who played. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There were Jewish melodies? 

SUBJECT: Some of them, they, they, you know, they-- they-- they sometimes snuck in. I remember we used to march. I remember one time we marched with the Germans, and when we marched they-- they were Germans with dogs, with the big-- so if somebody runs away, ah, the dogs would-- it was just terrible. Anyway, um, we used to sing. I remember-- what did we used to sing? Um, The Germans didn't know it's a Jewish song. But it had-- they wanted only melodies which like, you know, lend itself to rhythm of walking. So we-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Jewish or Hebrew song? 

SUBJECT: A Hebrew song. Um, I don't remember right now. But I remember we used to sing that song a lot when we were marching. Um, Zog nit keyn mol, az du geyst dem letstn veg or some other songs. You know, they didn't know it was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you sing it? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, I-- I'm not good with singing. But this was one of the songs, Zog nit keyn mol, az du geyst dem letstn veg. Do you understand what it means? 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

SUBJECT: Don't tell no one that this is your last, last march. This is the partisan song. Zog nit keyn mol, az du geyst dem letstn veg. You understand what it means? Don't-- you know, in there-- there were some other songs. We used to march. 

They didn't know it were Jewish melodies. And this-- this is the way they did the working day was. But this is-- this is an interesting story. If nobody else told you about it, I think that um, you see, I bec-- we became very-- we kept together. We really needed each other's support. 

And on my bunk, there were two sisters, also from Warsaw. You know, if you survived the first few months, if you survive in Auschwitz or Majdanek the first few weeks, somehow it was easier. If you survived the original-- most of the people who died, died the first few weeks. I remember, you know, being there a year and a half, the transports used to come from Holland, from Hungary, from-- from-- beautiful, big women, strong and husky. They went like flies. Like flies-- they could not-- the shock of this, you know, affluent society, and then to come into this concentration camp with the dirt and the-- and the lice and the-- the, the-- the food, and no, uh, facilities. 

They just couldn't survive it. They were dying like I have never seen anything like it. They really did. But if you were able to survive the first few weeks-- and you see, being in Warsaw ghetto and being in-- it kind of made you, uh, maybe stronger. Prepared you for-- for what was coming next. 

So some of us survived. But from Warsaw, I want to tell you there's very few people who survived from Warsaw-- very, very few. I see a lot of people from Lodz. I see a lot of people from other little towns. But from Warsaw-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were going to speak about this up-- 

SUBJECT: This uprising. You know, I was sleeping with five girls on my bunk. Two of them were twins from Warsaw, and we became very, very friendly. This is a-- a, you know, it's a little-- nice little story. When I was working this ammunition factory, there were men working, too. 

So we had a contact with the men. And one of the men asked me, where do you come from? You know, we had to bring those-- those grenades to the men. And they were doing other work. And then we had to pick it up. 

So we-- we talked. You know, we were always passing around letters. Who are you from? We wanted to know who the families, maybe somebody, they know someone of from where you come. So this guy asked me, where do you come from? And I said, I come from Warsaw. 

And ah, what's your name? And I told him my name is Helen Kopman. And I guess he talked there to some men. And one man, I told you about this, my sister-in-law, my husband's brother, her name was Helen Kopman. And this fellow-- it's such a story, wild story-- this fellow, he was the head of the bunker in Auschwitz. 

In Auschwitz there was a bunker too, in the men's camp, not in the women's. People who were-- they were not only Jews. There were other political prisoners. And if you did anything to step out of the routine or the rules, you were taken to this bunker. And he was the head of the bunker. 

This guy was there many, many years. And he got into this position. He was a very good man. He really tried to help a lot of the prisoners. And um, he found out that my name is Helen Kopman. 

So he was born in the same house that my husband used to live. So when he found out, he thought I'm Jules, my husband's sister. So-- and he had such a position that he really had a lot of influence in-- in-- in the-- in the camp there. So he sent me an apple. He sent me a piece of bread. 

And I tell you really, thanks to him I was able to get a little bit-- you know, I was able to last a little longer because he really helped me a lot. He sent me packages of food. Sent me a pair of shoes. It was just absolutely, um-- if you had a pair of good shoes. Not the wooden shoes, the lipped ones, you-- you were just, um-- it was a matter of life and death, a pair of shoes. 

And this guy, this is why I had a contact with the men's camp, with the men. And those girls were sleeping with me together. And one of the-- one of the sisters worked in this ammunition factory. There were like five or six girls who were working the pulver, where they put actually the ammunition, you know, the-- the, what do you call it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Powder. 

SUBJECT: The powder into the grenade. So they were every day searched from head to toe naked. And um, when they were going into work and when they left work. But they were able to smuggle out some of the pulver. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: In the vagina, in the mouth. We were able to smuggle out some of the powder. 

INTERVIEWER: The powder was in something? 

SUBJECT: In a capsule, very small capsule that you would put, insert it into the grenade. So they-- they-- and then we gave it to the man and we blew up one crematorium in Auschwitz. So I want you to know that there was, in the camp, in the concentration camp, with Germans surrounded, with-- really the impossible, we did blew up-- we did blow up one crematorium. When the Germans were looking to the ruins of the crematorium, they were able to find the shells and they saw it was from our factory. 

This was in 1944 at the very end of the war. It was-- you see, I was liberated in Auschwitz. I was liberated in 1945, in January 1945, by the Russians. So this was already-- the war was going very bad for the Germans. And they took the five girls, or the six girls who were working in this ammunition factory and they hung them. As we were all 18, 19, 20 years old, one of them was, I told you, I slept with her on the same bunk. 

One sister was not working there but the other one was. This was written up once in Odessa magazine. I have this article because I-- I was carrying the story was so heavy with me, I just-- I just never got it out of my mind. It was so painful. And the whole camp had to watch. And they were hanging there for three days. 

You know, when I talk about it I just have such pain. We had to watch when-- when they were doing it. This man that was helping me, his name was Abraham. He had the girls in the bunker before they hung them. They put them in that bunker. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he Jewish? 

SUBJECT: He was Jewish, this man. And he really, when they were going to be hung, I had this feeling when I saw them that they were heavily drugged. They really didn't know what was going on. He was trying to help them. He was trying to work with the Germans. They were such a beautiful young woman. It's just unbelievable. And the sister had to stay and watch. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you escape? 

SUBJECT: I was just-- I was bringing back the mail to, you know, to the-- to the men. I was able to keep in touch with the girls. We were able to write letters to the men and the men gave it to this man, Abraham. And he was the head of the bunker, I'm telling you. I was not in the pulver. I was working in the ammunition factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did anyone-- did more people know about this smuggling? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. But, you know, the people from Warsaw, anybody who was from Warsaw, anybody who worked in the sem--, I mean, we all knew because we all watched it. See Auschwitz wasn't a big camp. Auschwitz was a very small camp. Birkenau was the big camp and there were thousands of people. But I tell you-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What we're asking is, did more than those five or 10 girls know, was the-- about the smuggling operation going on? 

SUBJECT: Uh, yeah, I think we-- we-- I think, I don't know for all of them. I knew because I was involved with this man. I told you how I was involved with him. I'm sorry, I didn't know that had something pinned there. I was involved with him because he knew-- as a matter of fact, when he sent me the packages, you know, I was-- I really have an overdeveloped sense of-- of, of conscience or whatever. 

I felt so guilty in the beginning when I took these packages from him because I felt like I'm taking it under, uh, as false-- you know, I was not the girl he thought I was. So you know, it was-- we didn't have any paper in-- in-- in the concentration camp. So I finally found a little piece of paper somewhere. And I wrote him a note and I said to him, look, I am not Helen Kopman who you think I am. 

And I told him who I was, because I couldn't live my-- it's-- it's really, I think about it too, so stupid. I couldn't take it on this false circumstance. He never saw me and I never saw him because he was in a different camp and I was in a different camp. But we had this going through the man working in my ammunition factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So all this happens at the end of '44, and with bombing by allies going on. 

SUBJECT: But they didn't bomb the camp. Not the camp. We were hoping-- I didn't care if I was killed. But they didn't bomb the camp. We were-- we heard the airplanes going. 

We heard, but they didn't bomb the camp. And not the-- and not-- and not the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] either. And I want to tell you, in 1944, at that time they went into Hungary and they went into Romania and there was a lot of-- you know, sometimes at night, I lay and I can't believe what my eyes have seen. I really cannot believe it. You know, I wasn't-- in Auschwitz, whenever I got up in the morning, the lines were unbelievable. 

The kids used to come in, stay in line waiting to be burned. Whenever I used to get up in the morning, I said my god, how can God allow this? The kids were standing in line. They didn't know. You see, they-- what they did, they showed the-- when you went into the crematorium, you saw our camp. 

So they saw that people are working and they were, you know, in like a camp going on. So when the people get off the boat-- the train, what they saw, they saw our camp. The crematoriums were a little bit, you know, like around the corner. There were lines. Every day, there were lines of people and of kids. 

They bought a transport from Hungary once, such little kids. They were waiting there. I just wanted to God should strike me dead. I couldn't bear. I have nightmares about those lines. Waiting to be cremated-- cremated. And the world to allowed this to happen. 

INTERVIEWER: You say they were waiting. Were they waiting quietly? Were they waiting-- 

SUBJECT: They were waiting quietly. They didn't know what they were waiting for. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: I was trying tell you that when they saw a camp with people working. You see they saw us. They saw the barracks, they saw people. So they thought they're going to go into the-- in, into the showers and then they're going to come in and work in here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this is happening when, I want-- was it clear that you're going to be liberated? That the end is-- 

SUBJECT: We didn't know. We didn't know. You see, what happened, I was very-- at the end of the war, I was really very, very sick. I was really at my-- I just couldn't, uh-- I wasn't able, really, to-- I was just, I had very high temperature. I was spitting with blood. 

And I just couldn't, after this when they hung the girls. This was the last thing which I really said to myself, well, I really was trying to hold out. But I knew that, um, I was up to my last. Um, I-- I just, I was very sick. I had advanced TB. 

And you know, after I was liberated, there were some doctors, Russian doctors and Czechoslovakian doctors came in with first, you know, with the first front. And then I was examined. He said to me under normal circumstances, I don't know how-- it's impossible. You're just a-- a medical miracle that you survived. 

But I told you, I-- I really wanted to live. I said to myself, I want to live one day and be free. And one day after the war finished, and then I don't care because I really didn't care if I lived or died because I knew that for my whole family, there's nobody going to be there. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you find your husband again? 

SUBJECT: Would you believe it, that my husband survived. 

INTERVIEWER: In Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: No. He was in 10 different camps. My husband, towards the-- different camps. From Majdanek he went to different-- 

INTERVIEWER: And you're together now? 

SUBJECT: We are together now. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you talk about this at all? 

SUBJECT: No. My husband cannot cope with it. That's why I didn't want to-- I would have never taken him here. He-- he wouldn't be able to. He-- he-- everybody develops a different coping mechanism. I guess, I don't know, maybe I'm masochistic. 

I watched the Holocaust and I read all the books. I have all books about this. I just feel like I don't want to forget it. I just feel that if I lived through the real thing, I can live through-- I just a need to do that. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you tell your child-- do you have children? 

SUBJECT: I have two children. And I was just telling ah, your friend there, that I have a daughter who's in-- in University of Massachusetts, U Mass. Ah, and she is extremely, ah, involved. She wants to know much, very much, about the Holocaust. She has like an obsession with this. 

And as a matter of fact I promised her that this year if she graduates, she's a senior, I will go back her to Poland, to Auschwitz. She just doesn't have-- she wants to feel it. I can't tell her. I didn't-- and you know, she-- there's a book. I was just telling your friend, which Helen Epstein read. 

You were-- you are-- the children of the survivor? She bought it for me. And I read it and she read it and my friends read it. And one thing I came out from that book is, if you tell your children or if you don't tell your children, the result is same. It's amazing that she is so involved. 

My son, on the other hand, became very religious. He lives in New Haven. And he cannot talk about it at all. So um, everybody reacts different. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you bitter? Are you-- 

SUBJECT: No, I'm not bitter. I am very disappointed-- you know, when the war-- when the war was finished, after I was liberated, I was two years in a sanatorium. For two years after the war, can you imagine? So it's like, was five years out of my life. I was never young. I never had-- I never, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you hoped that they-- that they would bomb Auschwitz, and they didn't. And we know now that they might have, or could have. 

SUBJECT: They didn't do it. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. What do you feel about that? 

SUBJECT: In the beginning, I'm trying to-- when the wars finished, I was very, very resentful. And I was very bitter. And I was very angry. I was all together-- how was I, 1945? I was ah, born 19-- 21 years old. 

I was very-- it took me a few years, a good few years, to get it all out of my system. I was really sorry that I lived through the war, because what happened after the war, I went-- I wanted to see if my family is alive. I wanted to see somebody-- you know, you had to go back to the city you were born. So I had a very high temperature, I told you, and I was in the hospital. And I decided to go back to Warsaw, to put my name in the Committee, you know, the Joint Committee there. 

So the doctor didn't let me go because he felt I was very sick. He gave me a nurse to go with her to Warsaw. And on the way back, they put me in a-- in a hospital in Krakow. I was-- I was liberated in Auschwitz, and in Auschwitz they had a hospital there. 

There was pogroms after-- after. Do you understand? In Poland, there were pogroms after the war. They were-- they didn't like the Jews coming back and-- and asking for their houses back and for their-- so there were pogroms. And I was extremely bitter, resentful, and hurt. And I really didn't-- I was sorry I had survived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the way you described that hanging thing-- 

SUBJECT: It was just awful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But I think for you, it was as if time had stopped. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That you were not willing any longer for the end of the war. 

SUBJECT: No, I just-- I didn't want to-- at that point, I really gave in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And how did it begin again? 

SUBJECT: You see, it was-- the Germans, after this-- after this happened, the Russians, ah, made very great-- the Russians found out that there was a concentration camp, a big concentration camp in Auschwitz. So they were really, uh, using a lot of-- they-- they-- they made great strides. They were, ah, great forceful to-- to take over this spot. And the Germans evacuated Auschwitz. This was in 1945 in January. 

And older people, everybody who could walk, they just took. And I said no. I'm not going. I don't care. And what we-- they-- what we were made believe that the whole camp is mined. That once the Germans will leave, they will blow up Auschwitz. 

I didn't care. I told you, after I saw those girls hang, something happened to me. I really was-- this was already-- I was so close to those girls. I just, it was just very, very, very terrible. So I, um, decided, um, you know, I-- I couldn't anyway physically. 

And I had that pair of shoes, I told you. And I told you, I had a friend of mine who, we left from the ghetto together. So she came to say goodbye to me, because she was leaving. She was going to Ger-- you know, with the Germans. And I said to her-- her name was Frania. 

She still lives. She's in Canada. I said to her, Frania, take the shoes. Uh, you know, they might save your life. Take them. 

They were like, you didn't leave the shoes under the bed. You were sleeping on them, because if you didn't sleep on the shoes, somebody would take them. So-- and I was so weak already, I said to her take the shoes. And-- and she took them. 

And the interesting thing about it is I told you, I went to Warsaw after the ghet-- after-- after I was liberated with the temperature and everything. This was already like May. You know, I was very sick when the war finished. Very, very sick, had very high temperature. But then they gave me medication and I was kind of, had a low temperature like maybe 102, which was very good. 

And I went to Warsaw because I felt compelled to put my name. And there was no mail and I wasn't sure when the letter is going to arrive. So I had to go to Warsaw and put my name in that if somebody, my brothers or maybe somebody by any chance survived, they should know that I am alive. And ah, I met my friend, Frania, who came back from Germany. 

She wore my shoes. I didn't have any shoes, but she had them. She didn't offer them back to me, but I didn't care. Really at that time it wasn't important. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did life begin again for you? 

INTERVIEWER: The war? 19-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no, no. When did you begin living again? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it took me many years. I don't know if I'm-- if I'm alive today. But, ah, I-- I came to the conclusion after many years that being bitter and resentful and hurt and hating is-- is going to destroy me. And as long as I'm alive, ah, you know, the war made from some people beasts and some people became ah, saints. I don't know-- I don't know what, what-- didn't make any sense to me to go on. 

I know that, after all, I was offered from the German, uh-- I'm getting a pension from them. A very little, little bit money. But if-- they said to me, if I come to Germany, and I stayed trial-- I mean, if they can examine me and be a witness, I would get a lot of money. And I decided not to go. I didn't want the money. I didn't want to go. I didn't want to get-- I just couldn't face them. It just-- 

INTERVIEWER: How has it been for you here in the United States, in Hartford? What has your experience been here in this country? 

SUBJECT: I have, ah, two sets of friends, which I describe this-- well, I have friends who are Americans, who are very supportive in my little town in Manchester, who are very nice people. But I have a need to keep in touch with my friend survivors. I wouldn't give this up for anything. I have a great need to be involved with them and to be with them. I go every year to the commemoration of the Warsaw ghetto. 

I-- I do what I can. I feel if I survived, uh, I guess maybe I-- it's a rationalization, um, which is-- doesn't make sense to me, though but, the only way I can justify that there was a special purpose for me to live. And if I should live out my life as a decent human being and do something worthwhile, then I've done-- you know, I try to do what I can. Let's put it this way. I'm involved with the UGA. I'm involved the bonds. 

I'm involved-- whatever I can do as a Jew, I do. I'm involved in Jewish living. And I guess I overdid it with my son because I gave him such a conscience my son is so religious now that it's unbelievable. That he somehow in his own way has to pay back something. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you come to the United States rather than to Israel? 

SUBJECT: You see, I was very sick. I told you, I was very sick. And I-- I-- my husband had a brother living here. And we had a great need to have someone. We had a great need to be with some family. 

When you have no one, it's just a great, uh, pain. He had one brother and he wanted to be with him. And also, um, I don't know if I could have lived in Israel. I was very sick after the war for many, many years. 

Took me a long time to get, ah-- I have learned that, you know, I had, after this I was two years in, I told you, the sanitorium. I had thoracoplasty, I have only one lung. Um, I-- I must be emotionally very strong because otherwise I wouldn't have survived. 

INTERVIEWER: What was reunited-- what was being reunited with your husband like? Where did you find him? 

SUBJECT: This was also interesting. You know, you can hardly think fiction-- life is stranger than fiction. He didn't know I was alive. I didn't know he was alive, ah, because he went to Warsaw. When I went to Warsaw, his name wasn't on the list because I was liberated before him. He was liberated after me. And when I came-- when he came, I don't know, he didn't know, ah, that I was alive. I don't know if he ever went back to Warsaw, or something. He didn't know. We didn't know. My husband went to Czechoslovakia. We left-- he left Poland. I left Poland, went to France. There was the Red Cross came in in Auschwitz, and they picked up their prisoners. And there was a nurse who took care of me, a doctor there, and he said, don't stay in Poland. If you stay in Poland you're going to die. So they were able to take me with them to France and I lived-- I was in Paris. And then I was in the Rothschild hospital. And the Rothschild had a sanatorium. And-- and-- on the Swiss border, and that's where I went for two years after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: And he? 

SUBJECT: And my husband was in Czechoslovakia. And he was looking for his brother. And I was looking-- I had aunts and my, you know my hus-- my father's family was here. So I put in, at the Red Cross I put in, in the paper, my name, and I was looking for family. And he was looking for-- for his brother. 

And somebody read it. And he went to his brother. And also, he thought I'm his sister. And he got us together. And then Joe came. They didn't let him into France. 

And I was in the hospital, I told you, in a sanatorium. So he came to see me from Czechoslovakia, smuggled in to the-- to the border. They didn't-- you know, we were stop and goes. We didn't have any passport. We were no-- we didn't have any state. 

We didn't belong to anyone. Nobody wanted us. America didn't want us. Nobody, except for Israel maybe. And also to Israel you had to smuggle. You had to go on boats, and I wasn't in condition to do that. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say when you first saw your husband again? What did you say to each other? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't know. It's, um-- you know, the man I married and the man he was after the war wasn't the same person. And I'm sure I was not the same person either when I was at 16. And later on, ah-- but somehow we had to need to each other, because he knew who I was. He was the only person who-- who knew. You know, you feel like you come from nothing, you are nothing, nobody knows you. It's-- it's-- it's a very strange feeling. You need some contact, some connection. And he was my connection. And he was-- he knew who I was. And I knew who he was. And we stuck it out. We married, I don't know how many years. I don't know, we're going to be maybe 35, or whatever. We had two children. And he's very different. He-- he copes differently than I do. And we're here. We're here to tell you the story, which is-- I don't know. I don't know if it was worth it. I don't know if it was worth it because, you know, when I was in concentration camp, and even after, I said to myself, you know, after the war people will learn. They will know. They will-- they will see. You know, we-- we will learn. But did we really learn anything? I don't know. I don't know if we learned anything-- if we ever will. Listen, you are psychologist. You are psychiatrist. Can you understand how a human being can take so much, and come out saying? 

INTERVIEWER: I know we're way over time and I didn't care. 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry if I took up too much-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, no. It was the greatest gift you could have given. 

SUBJECT: I don't know. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE]? 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, we'll do as many as we can. It's not a matter of-- 

SUBJECT: How do people take-- how do people able to take so much [INAUDIBLE] and come out half-- half normal? 

INTERVIEWER: Did this once before. 

SUBJECT: Are we normal? I don't know. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: I'm saying, I would like to know what it was like to talk to a group of young people. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I tell you, that was something. That was my first time I ever did that. I went, my daughter's is in a class on the Holocaust. And she asked me-- she has a teacher who isn't Jewish. And she asked me. 

She said no, but he cannot answer the questions. You must go. I said Judy, I can't cope with it. I can't go. But I picked myself up, and I went to this class, which was a couple of weeks ago. And the guy, the whole class-- it's interesting. It's a-- they're seniors. 

This is in U Mass. And half of them are Jewish and half of them are not. They send me flowers. They wrote me a note. They couldn't get over this-- it was the first contact. You know, when you learn as history, when you learn from a different perspective. 

INTERVIEWER: It's the reason for the project. 

SUBJECT: I said to him-- 

INTERVIEWER: Wait, wait-- 

CREW: Oh, yeah. 

SUBJECT: I said to him, if somebody would give me $1,000 I wouldn't go. But I felt that, ah, it's important to tell them. They have a need for it. 