SELMA E: How you call that people, like military, people coming together, on the night, you have to go up, the German take you out, and you have to go stand there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: On a roll call. 

SELMA E: Roll call, yeah, roll call. Help me remember. I forget all the time that name roll call. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Most people call it an appel. 

SELMA E: Appel, that's what I can mean, yeah. 

CREW: Roll it, Craig. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I just wanted to ask, what happened, then, when you came back, the night that you were dancing, and you heard-- somebody told you that they had burned those old people. 

SELMA E: No, it's not the old people. See, I told you, lager one, lager two, lager three. And when the people coming to Sobibor, all the people went to the gas chamber, straight, for [NON-ENGLISH]. But the woman, the young man, and the children-- the children stayed with the mother. And the men get separated. So one set come the woman, and the other set come the man. 

And then come the German, and he say, now you are here in a camp, and you have to take a shower. And then we give you clothes. And when you go farther to another shower because you have to be clean. 

And sometimes the German give a card to the Dutch people and say, write back-- write that you come here in the camp, that you are here, and that we take good care of you. And you can write home that you came all right. And a lot of people did that. 

So the men went left, right, left, and they were sitting three days in a train, so they were very dirty. And they say, you go to a shower. And I remember seeing that the men running to the shower say, oh, we could take a shower in such. 

And when they had to take the clothes off, and have to next to these shoes. And they're running to the shower. They run into the chamber. 

So first the woman went with the children. And they went to a room. And they had already, in the other room, took all the clothes off. 

And number four on the end is a door, and there stayed the men. My husband had to do that, too. And cut the head from the women. That hair is also sent to Germany. 

And the women were all not nude. And they went out and there was the gas chamber. They went straight to the gas chamber. So they didn't know. 

So and then, when they were-- they were gone, then the men came. And I remember seeing them running nude. Oh, we're going to take a shower! And they went to the gas chamber. 

Actually, the men didn't-- they didn't cut the hair from the men. They had too short hair. It was not worth it. 

So that was the fire that was burning three days. I don't know what I was thinking. I know for sure, I didn't think they burned-- because I remember that smell. 

When I was a girl, and there was a cattle market, and they burned the heels from the soles from the cows and from the horses, that smelled also that burn. I couldn't believe it. And that was a little bit the same smell, but I know remember. That took a few days for me to think about it, that they're burning there your brothers, and your sisters, and your father, and your mother, and your uncle, with the five children, and all the people for your hometown. 

I mean-- I still don't-- I think when we were in camp, we start living with it. And we know when there was not a transporter, we go. And we know that the Germans were killing the Jews, I think. So we saw it, when they're killing them already, let him come to Sobibor. 

I mean because-- I don't that nobody can understand. Nobody can understand that, what it is to live day and night. You exist. You exist. 

And I think because I met Chaim-- that is my husband's name-- met, that I close my-- we closed ourself a little bit of from what exactly was going on. We lived really pretty much for each other when we were longer in camp. 

And I got typhus. So when you have typhus, you don't know much about what's going on anyway not. And he helped me going to the bathroom. 

And he was not allowed to be sick. If you were sick, you went to the gas chamber. Sick, you went to the gas chamber. 

I remember I was sick one day I was home-- home, I was in the barrack in the locker room-- and one of the SSs-- Frenzel is his name. He sits now, for life, in Germany. We went to his trial. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would you say the name again? 

SELMA E: Frenzel Frenzel is his name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: First name? 

SELMA E: Who knows? I know his last name. Perhaps, Frenzel is his first name. 

And he-- he came to locker room with his whip, and he went into the barrack where the people were laying sick. And he say, up, up up, up, up, up with the patch, out of bed, out of bed. And he put them all together on a line. I see enough people that I know from the little town where my family lived. And I visited them. And I know the boy was from my same age. 

And I know from zionist organization. And I know a whole bunch of them were standing there. And he saw me. He said, you sick? And that was the same man that took me out of the transport. And he says, you sick! You should go to work. And the other one, he all shot them. He took them on the side and shot them. 

You know, I mean, that was one-- when they were just in camp, there were a lot of Dutch Jews there. Of course, Dutch-- 72 Dutch men were in camp when I came. And somehow, what I think it was-- everybody write different. 

There was a German Jew was there. And he was-- he tried to be better than the Pope, my husband always say that, you know? And he tried to put that we get a number on our arm. You know, he wants to be with the German on the top. 

And I think-- they say that they want to ran away. And I think the German did it. The others say there was somebody what, what-- that the German got to know that they want to run away, the 72 Dutch Jews. 

So I remember what I told you when I came in camp, I saw some Dutch boys. And there were men that were really close friends of ours. His pals were my pals, best friends. And they had to go on appel, all together, all 72 Jews-- Dutch men. 

And I remember that this mouthpiece-- [? Zahand ?] [? Lei ?] is his name. It's a Dutch name. And he came to me and said, here's your little piece of butter. Take that. When I come back, I take it from you again. 

And they had to go on appel, And they sent-- they took them away, and they all shot them. When they shot, that they would-- that they would make an uprising, which was not true. I don't think that was true. 

And they took out one man what had a-- he was a painter. He was a very famous painter Van Dam. I have a book-- some paintings from him and his-- he was a very famous painter. 

And he was painting and-- painting for one of the SSs, and it was not ready. So they took him out because the painting was ready. So they didn't shot him. They shot him later, but they didn't shot him on that day. And they-- the 72 Dutch Jews was all shot. 

And you know-- and once-- once we had to go middle in the night of appel. And one of us-- the Sobibor was-- around form it mines and that iron thread. How you call it? Stacheldraht, how you call it? Mines, and mines, and you know, barbed wire, and mines, two times mines. 

And one night good enough. So in the middle of the night, we had to go up appel. We had to stay the whole night of appel. And the next morning-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Standing in line-- 

SELMA E: Standing in line the whole night. That was nothing. That was just-- that was nothing. I always managed to stay with my husband. 

And the next day, we had to stay in appel again. And every 10 of every 12, if I remember, they took them out and they sent them to the gas chamber. And I said, oh God, I hope that's not Chaim, you know? And thank God it was not Chaim. 

You know, that was-- that was-- you know, it's I cannot tell you what was going on there. It was just every time was it that somebody-- I remember one day-- I think, I think I was sick, typhus. And I looked out of the window. And saw one of the SSs. 

Wagner was his name. He sits in Argentina. And the Wiesenthal knows about him. Everybody knows about him. 

And We cannot get him out. He sits, I think, and we can get him out. I saw that Wagner with a shovel just hit, split the man's head in two. He had cut them off, the whole thing. And I see this man still standing for me, you know? 

You know I have to go out tonight? I don't want to go out anymore. That is whole storytelling. 

No, that's-- You know it was ev-- it was, I mean, the whole-- and it is-- you know, it was not like a-- that was just like a concentration camp in Auschwitz, but that was something. We were a very small group of people. You got to know each other. And every day was somebody missing. And every day was-- was something going on just to be killed. 

And life was nothing. Killing was nothing. He was happy when, after work, you saw each other again, that I saw Chaim again. I was happy when one day we didn't see each other, we could see each other again. 

I mean a day was an hour. An hour was a day. And day was a week. 

You know, when somebody asked me, how long you was in concentration camp? I said, six months. Six months was six years. 

I mean, that-- it was a death camp. You know when its own sport came. Every night, every-- once a week, was somebody-- something and came-- and transport came with new people, all from, from, from from Warchauer Ghetto or, or from from something. You know, I don't remember exactly all the things what was going on. 

Of another kapo I remember once I say I was a wild runner always. And my husband calmed me down. And I say once, he-- to the kapo-- it was a Jewish kapo-- said, he's a sick [INAUDIBLE]. And I didn't know there was an international word. 

And he came. And he hit me with that pipe, get them with the whip. I mean, you would had sometimes to be afraid for the people. We band all camp too because they tried to save the life. 

I remember once because the German once say to me, you go to work, when I had typhus that one of the women say-- and I went with Chaim, and she was once-- she-- Chaim went over to her for lunch. And then Chaim went to me. And she was jealous, so she say to the other girls, you know, Selma's not kosher. We should get rid of Selma, something like that she say. 

And then the girl where I was together with, but also lives now in Israel, [? Ujlastan, ?] Less what she say, are you crazy? I know that Selma is nothing-- is kosher and is nothing wrong with. I mean, things like that was happening in camp. 

Yes, everybody was constantly fighting. You was fighting for your own life. You didn't trust, really, anybody, only a very small group of people. 

And you know, it's-- you know, it's just, I can go on and on and on to tell all the episodes what was happened in camp, you know. Till then was an-- the camp, then we didn't get any transports anymore, and end. And the Jews from Minsk, the German came already up to Minsk. 

You know, the Sobibor is-- that it's unbelievable, what I cannot tell exactly how many times that somebody came and was half dead, hit from the-- from the part-- pig when dead. These men can tell you in New York about that. 

And you know, that when a pig dies, they kill a Jew. What is a Jew? Nothing. A Jew is nothing. 

So then in the end of October, we run away, made uprising at Sobibor. September, they came Jews from Minsk. The German went already more up. The Russian went more up to Wassel. And so they came already to Minsk. So the Jews from Minsk then to Sobibor. 

And it came a big-- lot of Jews. And they made bigger transport-- made a bigger. And they didn't-- a lot of them didn't get killed. They didn't went to the gas chamber. A lot went also came to us. And we sort of have to make them work camp fun or something, we didn't know. 

But it came some Russian military, a Russian officer. And then he came to Sobibor, he was planning to run away the same night. So the Polish Jews calmed him down. This story is exactly hidden in that. And he was-- and the up-- the plan for an uprising was always there, but the courage was not there. 

So when he came, they starting secretive to come together, met, I don't know how many Jews. I didn't know about it. The Dutch Jews, they didn't tell them because we didn't know Polish and we-- I didn't know. They held the Dutch Jews out. 

It was just a very small group. It's like really like a government, that is a war comes, and just the government knows about it. You know, it was like that was the same thing, a very small group of Jews know about this plan. 

And Chaim, they didn't tell Chaim either because Chaim went with me, and they was afraid to tell Chaim. But Chaim had a friend what was involved in it. And this friend told Chaim-- and I was sick. I had typhus. Maybe I was already a little bit better. I've also a little bit better. 

So Chaim told me the evening before the uprising, tell Matt put a lot of clothes on. Tomorrow we're going to run away. And you have to come to me tomorrow afternoon at 4:00 to barrack that is-- barrack is that English-- barrack and there was all the medicines. I will meet you there at 4 o'clock. They have a planning to do this way. Then day that the camp goes on like it is normal. 

And when we working, we had always of every group is an SSer with you. So everybody-- one worked in-- there was-- it was like a little town, little city. There was some tailors that made the German's uniform for the German. There was a boots-- boots maker. There was a goldsmith. There was-- it was like a little town for the German, to serve the-- this SSers. 

So they made appointments with SSers. One SSer has to come to try on a suit. And in that time that he tries on the suit, somebody hit him off the head. But we didn't have any guns or anything. And they killed him and put him under with the couch. 

And that's what they did. They killed 11 SSers. I think they start about 3 o'clock. That's written exactly in that. 

So when I came at 4 o'clock, when I came to my husband, he wasn't there. I said, where's Chaim? What was now happened, one of the men what had to go and kill one of these SSers, the last minute he got scared. So Chaim knows already that there was five killed, so he knows there's no way out, or we going now altogether. We're going all together anyway. anyway 

So he went and killed with the other people. And he didn't had a knife, a bread knife. And he was with more people. And he say, this for my father, and my mother, and for all the Jews that you killed. 

And he-- and then I went looking for him. That's what I told my husband later. I went looking for him. And heard screaming like somebody-- have you ever heard of product killing? No, you never hear that. And no screaming, screaming, and then he walked out. We went on appel. 

And you know, everything went normal. I went looking for him. I've went quickly back to the barrack because it had to look normal. And I was not allowed to just walk somewhere. You know it has to look of everything goes on very normal because when the Germans smell anything that is wrong, then there where 150 Ukranians around this concentration camp and inside. 

And forgot to tell there was Wagner, what sits now in Argentinia. He was not there. He was such an animal, his name, we called him [POLISH]. It called "calling you." 

He smelled-- when something was not kosher, something was not 100% true, he could smell it from far. So we know-- he was the one that I told you what men and shovel hit somebody-- he could somebody give a hit which his hand and he died. He made that camp till the perfection that it looked like the nicest of Hollywood thing what is dead. That was him. 

All the modern excitement things that would go on, that was this Wagner, but sits now still in, and 70 years old, and had a beautiful life. He was the one that was the biggest animal what was there. He was the one that killed this boy, when he opened a can of sardines. He was the-- so he wasn't there. So that's the reason we could make this uprising. We thought we could make it somewhere. 

So, I went quickly back. And then we went up appel-- not with the German. The Jews did it themselves. And we walked-- Chaim walked out of this office. And there was all the blood, all the blood. And I started cleaning this face. 

And we walked farther. And on the same on the that we walked, an SSer comes and-- a truck comes with an SSer, and he goes through this office already. So two other Jews, what were couples, Jewish couples, there was a father with three sons. And they jumped up this car, and they killed him. What happened exactly, I don't know. 

But this boys never came out. But they killed a lot of these SSers. And this father we later in life, we met in Israel. We lived in Israel several years. 

And we, we, we walked to the value outside. We walked to the flag room. And there we came-- all the Jews came there together-- what I remember, main story. And we say, hooray! And the last member that came, who came from the Ukraine on the bicycle, we cut his head off. And we start running to the wire where was mines and mines. And when we start running, the German knows already what is going on, and they starting shooting. 

And everybody stopped, you know, when you hear shooting. And Chaim takes my hands, and his-- he pulls us. And coincident, I think we went through the main door. Around us, everybody fell on the mines. 

You, you know, so everybody falling. But you running, you're running. And only thing that we did, you ran. You ran. 

I remember I had a lot of neck-- gold necklace from the Jews that went to the concentration camp. I had [INAUDIBLE] and all jewels. And I just took it off and said, nobody is allowed to see the damn jewels. And I had too many clothes on, and I took everything off. And we ran, and we ran, and we ran. 

And when I'm nervous, I get the diarrhea and had to stop every time. And we're hearing shooting in the back of us. And we ran. We ran hours, and hours, and hours till middle in the night. And we came middle in the night. And we saw a bunch of people from Sobibor. 

I saw also one man, what was his girl-- girlfriend was sleeping next to, I said, where is Minnie? He said, you have to ask me where Minnie is? You didn't take her with you when she had trouble with her legs. 

Chaim was the only one that took a Dutch girl with him. That's the reason I'm alive. When he wouldn't have taken me with me, I would be alive. 

But there's another girl that lives in Israel, but she knows it from somebody where you read this paper, what was friendly with one of the couples. And she told Ula. Ula is one of my best friends. And we came together through the war. 

And so we went middle in the woods-- God knows where. And the Jews, some Jews had guns, what they stole them from the SSers. And we were in the woods, and they say, what you're doing here to Chaim? Essentially the same thing as you do here. And they want to shoot Chaim because he had me with him, middle in the woods. 

So I start-- I go in front of Chaim and said, Chaim why don't you go over there and leave us alone? So we-- Chaim and I-- we went away alone. And we walked, and we walked, and we walked. And we started shooting nearer, coming nearer, and dogs and everything come nearer to us. You hear the noises. 

So we had a lot of money with us. From the Jews that went to the gas chamber, we did to sabotage, only sabotage what he could do as Jew in a concentration camp, when we saw a lot of money, and the Jews didn't see it, we try to hide it, to slow it from the Germans, to take it away from the Germans. 

See the Dutch, the Dutch Jews, and the Polish Jews, especially, took a lot of money with them. Sometimes they came bottles full, with butter on the outside and instead was full with gold. I remember one day we opened a bra, and it was full with diamonds. I didn't know even the value of them. When a German saw it, right away we catched it. 

But what we could get sabotage we did. Because when I was in concentration camp, I had to sort clothes. And I always cut-- when a German didn't see it, I cut every piece in pieces. I never-- I tried to cut it in pieces not that it going to go to Germany because that was my sabotage, in small way I could do. 

And so Chaim had a friend that told him about the uprising, was also a fireman. He had to burn always all the papers. So many things that I forgot to tell you, like one day Chaim had a jacket with all the clothes in it. But the fireman-- I think about the fireman-- that all the pictures and everything went to the fire and would burn it. 

See the pictures from the rabbi. I remember the rabbi from my hometown with the whole family came there. And all is fair. And so many times I saw pictures from people from my hometown, you know. 

And I saw them going to the gas chamber. And I was afraid that everybody ever saw me. When they see that I saw them, they say, oh, you want to go there, too? And they just take you. 

So you know, you couldn't show any emotions. You was not allowed to show-- when you show emotion, they say, OK, emotions, fine, go. We don't, you know? 

So, so one day, they took Chaim's jacket, and they assorted everything. I remember how panicky he was. It was the last thing, this picture from his father, from his-- from the-- from his brother, and how upset he was. And thank God, finally we found it before it went to the fire. 

But anyway, when I don't know how-- I was not interested in gold. I don't know anything that the people did that. But Chaim and the more mature people-- he is older than I'm, more mature-- I was not three years at all, not at all, ever. And I think I'm still not. 

I was-- but they, they-- this fireman took money together and put it in the ground. And he shared it. When there was the uprising, he shared it with Chaim. So we had a lot of money with us, gold and diamonds. 

And so when the first night we, we were away, not far away, a little town, not far away from Sobibor, and we say to the man, Chaim-- he speak Polish-- that he gives them a gold, $20 gold. I don't know how much gold. And he gives them. And we can-- can we sleep up the attic? And the man did it. 

And you know, the German came. And they went to every house and took all the Jews out. And they skipped our house. It's just unbelievable, you know? So that was the same night. 

So in the morning, before dark, for light was, we went away. And we walked at night in the woods. And in day time, we hide. We hide in the fields or-- we didn't sleep after that with any farmer anymore. We sleep in the fields, or in the woods, or. 

You know, that's a story by themselves. I remember I was very scared. And I-- when I saw a bush, I saw an SSer. And Chaim, I made Chaim nervous, so he said, don't say it. You make-- I think about it that it is an SSer, you know. And I saw a expressional event where they went always with a big cape on. And you know, you have to go into a very big woods. I come from a very little town. I was a little country girl, you know. 

And you know how you walk at night, and nobody knows that you're alive, you know. And dog barks at you, and you're scared to death. Somebody knows you're walking there. You're like the biggest criminal. You going out now. 

You're not in freedom. You know, when them Poles see you, and he says you have nice boots on, he kills you for the boots. And that's true. That's no. 

So we walked at night, and the day time we hide. One day, we hide in hay-- hay thing. And we make-- made ourselves a hole in it, and we were sleeping over there. 

And little girls were playing. And they say to each other, let we go on that hay-- how you call it? Hay thing. 

INTERVIEWERS: Haystack. 

SELMA E: Haystack. And they went on the haystack and went on top of us. And they saw us. So again, we had to run, of course. Because this-- everybody knows from the uprising from Sobibor. And so we could never be that far away because we just walking. And we didn't know-- we walked on the stars. 

And Chaim was hidden-- Chaim worked in 1941 by are farm for you to a farm. And he wants to go to this farm. And we went to-- we didn't-- that was the reason we walked on the stars, so we went just the wrong side. Anyway, we walked on the star that we know what way to go. 

And so we run off, we run away. I remember, I was very thirsty. Chaim say, you don't look Jewish. Chaim looked Jewish. He said, why don't you go to this farmer and see they give you a little bit water? 

So I came in a very nice farm. And I see a nice pharmacy with a woman sitting, like a picture, in front of the fireplace. I say, can I have some water? She says, no, and she shut the door. 

And I walk-- I had boots on, and somehow I went in the water. And I couldn't get my boots on anymore. So I walked on the side of the boots, on the side of the boots-- boots. So I walked like that because-- and we have to walk, and walk, and also I was completely wet. I had pants on. 

And Chaim had wounds from that he hit this German head, just slipped out this knife in his arm. And he had a big deep wound here. And he could almost no go up the haystack. He couldn't come up there. 

So, so when we walked, there were two farmers coming down with the carriage. And Chaim said, let me try to go with them. Perhaps they can take us. And I went in, and Chaim went in the other one. 

And he start running, the first one, so fast, that Chaim say to me, Selma, jump off! And I had to jump off because they want to take me, you know, like I don't know, also. 

You know, and every Pole is-- they don't care about a Jew to live. They-- you have a-- a Jew is nothing, nothing. So we jumped off. And we walked farther. We did that two weeks, two weeks, something like that. We walked at night. And how long? 

So we tried to find, perhaps, somebody in the woods. We didn't find anybody, partisano, or something like that. Somehow we didn't find anybody. We were not that lucky. 

So some-- one day we come to a farmer-- and the man was very nice to us. And said Chaim to him, can you hide us? And said the man, no. We slept in his haystack, and he brought us food, and he was really nice to us. 

Said he, I have little children and a lot of little children. I know, perhaps, somebody that can do. So he brought us in a hay-- in a farmer's wagon. And Chaim had to lay on the ground and put bushes over him. And he dressed me as an old woman. And he brought us to his brother. 

And we came to his brother. And the brother let-- we could wash ourselves. And the brother saw how much gold Chaim had. 

And he-- Chaim asked him if he could stay here. And said, man said yes, you could stay here, but you give all your gold. You give everything that you have. Said Chaim, yes, of course. 

I forgot to tell that I had-- we were under the lice, and from in that camp. And we had scabies. This is a skin, skin disease from dirt. And that is is a disease what that is little blisters, and your whole skin goes off. It's unbelievable. 

So, so we went to the-- show where we, the farmer, this farmer took us in. So we-- he-- that was in, in a barn. The cows were on the bottom. And at top were beans. And there was straw on the top. And on that, we were laying. We went. 

And we were laying there. And the pail in front, it was our toilet. And on top was a wood-- straw roof. So like straw roof. And we were not allowed to move, not allowed to talk, and not allowed to walk. And when he slept-- when he snored we found out, I had to be awake. And when I slept, he'd been awake. 

And the farmer was a very poor man. And sometimes we were just Jews. I don't know. He saved our life anyway. When I say something about him, my husband gets very mad. 

If we didn't get much to eat, I was very sick. I had-- I couldn't even sit straight. And we were under the lice. And we had boils. So under my arm I had 12 with lice. And, and I had scabies. And I had the skin all gone from my-- on my-- that was our honeymoon-- from my breast and from my arms. 

And, and we give the farmer, really, everything that what we had to go for medication. There is some kind of a medication that you can put on once and it goes away. But I had it so bad it didn't go away. He went once, and we give him our watch, and we give our pen. We give everything what we had, everything. 

And and we get-- and it didn't go away. He, you know, this man didn't know what it was. He-- when I see in that time, I was very-- I had a-- I have a diary what I wrote. I was very depressed, always. And my husband say, write in the diary, so. And the whole diary goes about that I complain about this, what I had. 

Now I'm older, these people really saved our life. And how many not Jews did that in Poland? Nobody because if he know somebody, this man, where there was the fireman, went to a farmer, and he was in a haystack, and the farmer came at night, and killed him, and took all of his money. 

And we know from the-- we here shooting one day when we were hidden there. And, and the farmer told us that there was a farmer that wants to have the boots from the Jew, and he saw a Jew, and he killed a Jew, and he also have the boots. 

So we had-- it was a very hardship. Nine months we didn't talk, we didn't walk. We didn't get enough to eat. We didn't wash ourselves. We didn't get any time to never to wash ourselves. 

Very primitive people, very primitive. He give us to eat. I didn't die. So we got to eat. 

We-- he didn't believe that we give him all the money. So one-- a few days, we have to lay with the-- with the porks, together with the porks. I remember, there was a cuckoo going around. And they say in Poland, a cuckoo brings lucks. So I write in my-- I write it in my diary. 

You know, it was for me, I was a spoiled little girl from a nice, Jewish family. And I still couldn't understand that that all was happened to me, you know? You know, I said always, God, would my mother ever know, you know? 

So the farmer found out that we didn't have anymore money, that that was all we had, so we then back to this hiding place. And I couldn't walk anymore. I was so-- I got pregnant too. So-- but I didn't know. 

So at one night-- at one night-- oh yeah, we didn't have anything to do. I wrote him poems, and he wrote me poems. He studied Dutch, and I studied German. And he studied Polish. You know, that's what we did. 

So he's-- he knows languages. He's very good. He fits-- so he-- in the train that we were hidden, I taught him Dutch. When he get to Holland, he spoke Dutch. 

So there was a little hole, and there were storks on the roof. And we didn't do anything then watching this storks. One day the storks go away. So the farmer say, you have to go away from here. When the storks going away, that means that something happened. There was something happened to this farm. And we say because you are here you have to go away. 

So sitting-- then the next day he come say, do you-- do you watch the storks? And we say, yes. He said, stop watching the storks. Thank God the storks came back, and we didn't have to go. 

And the same thing was many times happen. One day, she saw that I was pregnant, too. But-- and I didn't know I was pregnant. 

And she say, you have to go-- you have to go away from here. We cannot have you anymore. We cannot have you anymore. You have to go away. 

Where can we go? We have no money. We didn't know where to go. 

And the same night, we had the army coming nearer, and she told us. The next day, the army came nearer. From the brook, we had it shoot in the front, you know, the bombing like you hear now, the bombing we hear it coming nearer. So they say, let-- they say it was let we wait another day. And the family that lived near to the brook came already to live with them. 

And one day a little bird-- it was starting to be Spring. And birds jumped off our bed. And a little boy jumped after the bird, and jumped over us. And the boy runs in the house and says, oh, the people there, people there. 

And it's just luck. The same day, the Germans starting running away. And we could see the German running away. And the next day, the war was over. And the German-- and the Russian came, and then we were free. That was in 1943, in July 1943. And then I went up-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean July 1945? 

SELMA E: 1943. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 1943? 

SELMA E: July 1943. No, no, 944, July 1944, '44. October 1943, we run away from concentration camp. We were nine months hidden by this farmer-- eight-- eight and a half. 

Then I went up. And I was-- the first day I went up, I was like that. I was pregnant. We didn't have anything, nothing, no clothes, nothing. I didn't know even if I was pregnant. I said I couldn't walk, I had sore legs, and nothing. 

So I was sitting a few days that I could come to me in front of there, in the grass. And then one day the farmer comes to me, I have to bring you away because the Poland Pole, they want to kill you. They want to kill you. They're mad at me that they took two Jews in, and they want to kill you. 

So he brought us to Helm-- Helm from Sholem Aleichem story. We went to Helm. We thought that we were the only Jews for real life. We didn't think there was-- that we thought that Sobibor, that was-- every camp was like Sobibor. 

So he came to Helm, and he came to a house. Coincident is that the house from man, he lives here in this-- he lives here in America, his father's house. And there was a lot of Jews there, and a lot of Jews from Sobibor. And lot of Jews were there. But there were already Jews also what was longer free than we were. 

And we went to that house, and that was also not easy. Chaim had to go in the army. He had to go in the army, in the Russian army, fighting for-- against Germany. And I was pregnant with no money, and he had to go in army. 

So somebody told him, you go and work in a hospital. Perhaps you don't have to go in army. So he started working in the hospital as nurse. Oy, Chaim is a man that doesn't see-- can't see blood. 

And it's very primitive there. Helm is a town, where there is one house in the whole town. It was one street. It's very, very small, primitive little town. It's just unbelievable. Perhaps in the far away in the West Coast is something like that exist. I don't know. You cannot imagine how that look. 

Anyway, he had to work in the hospital. And it was once a train and all the people were bloody and everything. He come back and said, Selma, I cannot take it anymore. But he did it anyway. And then we found out he had to go in the army anyway. 

So we start traveling. We start-- we went away with-- oh yeah, no, there's a story I have to tell. Somehow Chaim got some connection. He's a businessman. And he went traveling where he could go and live. Where we could go-- what time is it? I like to know. 12 o'clock. Where we want to go. 

So he made some connections somehow, perhaps that he could change money. So somebody had $100 bill. What they do, the people went to Sobibor, and they went and go graving in the ground and tried to get-- find money because we all were-- there all were hiding money in the ground. And they tried to find money. So they were killing each other there. 

I didn't say to Chaim, you don't go there. We came through this war, and we can live without this money. So he didn't go there. But a lot of people did. A lot of Jews went there. 

And when he-- somebody had $100 bill. And this $100 bill was-- because in the moisture, was the number was gone. And Chaim thought he know somebody perhaps-- oh yeah, somebody that run away from concentration camp lived in Lublin, and we found out about him. When I told you once that somebody had run away from concentration camp, and these people, Dutch Jews, got killed, this man stayed alive. And he lived in Lublin. 

And somehow, I don't know exactly, Chaim could change, perhaps, this $100. At night, Chaim put it under his pillow. And what happened, somebody stole it away under his pillow. 

So the man didn't believe us, of course. Who believes you? So when Chaim made a little bit money, I'd think he was handling in gasoline, selling it, or pumping it, and bringing it, we had to pay off this man. An adult would have to tell you. 

20 years later-- 15 years later, we live in Israel. We come together with a whole bunch from Sobibor. All the Jews come together from Sobibor. And the man is there, what from this $100 bill. He said, do you remember the $100 bill that they stole-- I'm a Dutch-- that they stole it away under our pillow? Do you remember? Yes, I remember. 

The next day, who was in front? Of We had a business in Israel. In front I say, you owe me $100. I said, Chaim, yeah? Yes, I said the $100, do you remember from Sobibor, the $100 you never paid me back? So after 20 years, we paid him the $100 back. I mean, how-- that-- you know, any day it was-- it's-- you know, things like that help-- that's-- that's-- that's. 

So we went to Helm. And then when we were in Helm, we start in freight wagon. We were hitchhiking on the street. And we went from hitch a freight wagon. And we sleep outside. 

Jews were like family together, of course. When you saw a Jew, and you say, where you live? We live with a bunch of Jews in this little town. And so you went-- we went from one place to the other place, just to run away from the army. 

And then one day we met a guy what was from Sobibor, and he say-- Chaim tells him this story. We don't know what to do. He said, you know what, come to Parczew. I live there, and there's a Jewish woman but own some houses. And I changed my name. And I grow a mustache. And, and I live there. So that's what we did. We went to Parczew, very little town, with no bathroom, and no water in the houses. 

And Chaim grows a mustache. And he changed his name. His mother's name he took. And we went to this little town, very. 

And we went, and there was a Jewish woman that say, you can live in upstairs in an apartment. And there was an apartment, the holes in the wall that could put your hand out and it was colder than here is today. It was-- it was no heat. And we had-- we had nothing. We had no pots, and no pans, and, and we had nothing. 

So anyway, we moved in there. He made a bed. He stole a little bit wood to make a bed. And in between, he started making some money. 

He started making money that was on-- everybody spoke Yiddish. I didn't speak Yiddish. In Holland, the people don't speak Yiddish. I spoke German, but not Yiddish. And the German Jews-- the Polish Jews somehow didn't understand German, so I couldn't speak almost with nobody. So I was in freedom, and it couldn't still not speak with anybody. 

And he went always away because he went-- when the German went away, he bought things up, and then he brought it back where we lived and sold it again. That's the way he made a living. So he sometimes away for six week. 

He went sometimes and he-- how he traveled on the open trains in the snow, on the snow where guns, and freight with guns, and the open trains where you see this, this gasoline, outside he was sitting. And there was just our freedom. 

He was sitting-- and he traveled six week he was sometimes gone. And I've-- and then he came back. And then I was so far pregnant. Then I-- so then he stayed home. 

We didn't have anything. Of course, we didn't have clothes. We didn't-- we had just enough. He-- we just had enough for us to buy food. He bought-- he made enough money to buy food. 

He bought enough money-- I think I bought a coat-- only a dress. We had money to buy a dress. Yes, I bought a dress. And he bought, I think, something too. I don't remember. 

But anyway, we had in between already some pots with holes in it. Then we could put it with bread in it. And you get from one person did, a person that. And then I got this baby. 

And then we-- then we got married. No, we got already married. We got our papers met that we got married in Poland by the town hall and everything. That was the second name. You know, everything was done organized. 

You know, somebody that doesn't know, doesn't know that-- how can you get pregnant? How can you be pregnant? I mean, that's something-- we didn't-- it's something that it's funny now-- that was a terrible thing, of course. 

Anyway, I got this baby in a school, on the floor, with no doctor. I was five days in labor. And once and then a doctor came and said to me, you scream so hard, just throw you out in the street, all anti-Semites, all anti-Semites. And the Red Cross thing was in the school. And, and every time they came looking at me of the baby, it was already you could see the baby? No, you couldn't see the baby, so scream more. 

And a Polish woman told me how I should press, perhaps I can get the baby. But they spoke Polish, and I didn't speak Polish. And after five days, they saw the head coming from the baby. So in two minutes the baby was dead, of course, then. 

And I went back to that things. And then they came to you, and they look and says, you don't bleed enough. You can bleed a little bit more. And 24 hours later, my husband still didn't know there was a baby, that he had a child. 

And I was-- the doctor didn't want to know about me because my, my scabies that came back, that skin disease came back. Somehow that never is very hard to get rid of because I didn't-- I tried very hard. And I'm very clean, you know. And the Pole never seen was cleaner than clean. 

And so we had this baby. We didn't-- we made a little pillow. We made from our own underclothes I made clothes. I didn't even have looks clothes for baby. I didn't know anything about babies. And I was-- I didn't see any babies around me when I grow up much. 

My mother was the oldest, yeah, from the family. And somehow I never-- I don't-- so I made baby clothes. And we had a little pillow where the baby could sleep in. 

And we didn't have-- when we were in freedom, we didn't have any blankets to put-- we slept-- at night, we put our clothes over. That was our blankets. We didn't-- we were already months and months in freedom, and we didn't have any blankets, nothing. We slept in-- and it was the-- our own clothes was very-- that was very-- that was our blankets. So even when the baby was there, we didn't have. 

Oh yeah, then Chaim made a bed. And there was-- some Polish Jew give us a feather thing. And it was full with fleas. I never forgot. Oh, it was full with fleas. I had it the whole day hanging outside. At night when it gets warm, all the fleas came out. 

Anyway, then we came-- then when I was-- when I got the pain that I thought the baby, I had to walk five miles to that school. But the school-- you know, it all-- I mean, I come from a from a really civilized country. And you know, you can not-- I could never believe that-- you know, you cannot believe it that your first child, we could think of it. You know, I was thinking all of it. 

So anyway, I didn't know that my mother was dead. And all the time that I didn't know that nobody was alive from the whole family. I still didn't know, same when I lived in Poland. 

So when we got the baby, we went home. And now Chaim made of bed every-- double bed. And he traveled a lot. And the baby slept always in our bed because we didn't have a bed for the baby. Then he later he made a bed for the baby. 

And then this Ula, but is alive, also from Sobibor, she's also Dutch. She is a-- comes originally from Germany, but she's also from Holland. She's more Dutch than I am. 

And she was alone. And she-- and she-- so we-- she didn't know what to do, so she came and lived with us. So Chaim went away, for a time traveled a lot. And I was a lot alone, and she was alone, so, so we had nothing, so you-- we shared it together. 

So when Chaim bought one underpants, he bought two underpants, and for her and one for me. And we had both together one pair of boots and one winter coat. When one went out with the winter coat, the other couldn't go out. But anyway, we had company and each other, and we lived together. And Chaim went away a lot. Because when he went away and I was alone, I cried so much that the people next to us-- the walls were so thin, they started crying-- making the same noise what I did, the crying. 

I was like in jail and in freedom because I didn't have anybody to talk to. But nobody talked to me because they didn't understand me. And I didn't speak Polish. And I didn't speak Yiddish. They honest learned to speak a little bit Yiddish. 

So then Ula came to live for us. And Chaim went out, and I made some money. And did the Russian-- I remember, once he brought a Russian captain home. The Russian Jews were very good. And we-- they came in. 

Oh yeah, and we lived in a very poor neighborhood. Once came-- a Russian came up, and he thought it was-- the public woman lived down. And they thought that we-- I was a public woman. And he came up and I held the child in front of me when he went away. 

They went away. And we didn't have any trouble with the Russians whatsoever. I remember the Russian was singing in the street, and it was the whole occasion. And it was so beautiful, the sound, when the Russian was singing in the street. 

And I remember when we got free delicious custards. And we kissed-- we kissed us, and we kissed them because they freed us. And then we live there till January '44-- '45-- 1945. 

One day, in January, I think something like that-- I don't know exactly the month-- we hear that the Polish Partisan want to kill all the Jews in Parczew where we lived. So middle in the night, we had a truckload with all the Jews, and we went to Lublin. And we went to a family-- this man that run away from the concentration camp. We went to his house. 

In-between, Chaim hid from the Dutch-- he met some Dutch people. I was always sitting home with the baby. I couldn't go out. It was freezing cold. And I have-- I didn't have any clothes, one clothes. So I couldn't go out. I was always sitting home with this baby. 

He met some Dutch people. And he heard this Dutch people want to come together. And they're going away because the Russian was standing in front of Warsaw. So they want to go over Russia to Holland. So we-- we went to Lublin. 

And Chaim found more out from this Dutch Jews. And we stayed in this-- Patchlevnik what's his name-- house. And one night, Chaim-- somebody owns him some money in Parczew. So Chaim went to Parczew to get some money what people owes him. 

And the same night-- I tell you, there's always a lucky star on top of me. The same night, somebody comes-- and there was this very big apartment houses. And it was half in the middle. And most of the Jews lived thee. A lot of you Jews lived there. 

And somebody knocked on the door and said, Patchlevnik, Patchlevnik. And they-- they didn't open the door, made the lights out. And everybody ran to the baby to-- we had them in between already the baby-- and put all the money what I had under the baby's blanket, and Patchlevnik. And somehow they didn't-- decided nobody was there. And they killed all the Jews in that whole building. And they skipped our room. 

So the next day, there was a Dutch transport that went over Romania in [NON-ENGLISH] to Russia. And we went with the baby with hundred people in a [NON-ENGLISH] in a fee train-- in a train, in a freight train, a freight train, two layers they made, a top life people and a bottom. We had a little baby. But had it diarrhea, how you call that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Celiac? 

SELMA E: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Celiac? 

SELMA E: No. And very contagious diarrhea sickness I forgot-- dysentery. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dysentery. 

SELMA E: Dysentery. And the baby had it. And I had it. And I nursed the baby because that was the only way that I had food that doesn't cost anything. And we went in this train with hundred people, no bathroom, nothing. Not only Jews, a lot of folks German were in there. 

We held very much to each other, Chaim and I. In between, Ula was a little bit estranged from us, but she was with another group, with younger people. We were already old. She was four years different than I. She was 16, and I was 20 with a child, so it was [INAUDIBLE]. So Chaim and I, we were very close. And that we did. 

We went through Romania with a sick child. We get to eat the stuff that when they want to stop them. Somebody went out and got some food. And Chaim went in the front and took some hot water. And I went to a farm to get some milk. 

And I remember once we were cleaning some pots, and the train stopped running, and we ran after the train. But the baby was in there, and ran after. And that went on for months and for months. I don't know how long. I really don't know how long. 

Then we came to Romania, to Czernowitz. There was a camp, a concentration camp. That was a camp that was already not under the German anymore. We were already in freedom. This is freedom. 

We came to Czernowitz. And our kid was very sick, and I was very sick. And were all the Jews were there together, a lot of Jews-- a lot of Dutch Jews too. We held together with a few people together. We held together with a few people. 

Anyway, the people-- what we didn't have any ever so stripe uniform. The people that had that, they had it very good. There was a lot of Jews in Romania left over. 

And they were very good to them. And they got a lot, and they were fantastic. They were really-- they helped everybody. But Chaim has always very big pride, and he will never-- we never got anything, medicine once for the kid. He never want to get, you know, charities, never, never in his whole life. 

And so we were in Romania, and I had to go to the hospital with the kid. So we went to the hospital. And the Russian hospital, I never forgot, there was no blankets on this bed, and Russian doctors. And I lay together with kids that had syphilis in one room, and I didn't know even what syphilis was, you know. I was brought up so-- I know there was very something terrible. 

And middle in the night, the transport went farther to Russia. So Chaim had to sign out and take the garant and by himself. We signed out. In middle in the night, we went to the transport with the sick child, and we went farther. 

And we went to Odessa. It took another few months, stopping, and going, and no eating. And sometimes they give us something to eat. 

I remember-- what I remember from it is that we run to get some warm water, to clean the diapers what we have from the baby and-- 