CREW: Cassette number four. Cassette number four. 

INTERVIEWER: I just want you to start when you want to start. 

SUBJECT: Well, I was born in Frankfurt, in Germany. Frankfurt am Main, which was a very well known Jewish community. And my family was upper class, upper middle class, upper class family. My father was in the metal business. A very established business. And it was a very big family. 

My father-- there were five children from three types of marriages. Actually, I'm the product of the second marriage of my father, an the second marriage of my mother. My mother came from Hungary. Vienna. Vienna. She was married in the first marriage in Vienna. And my father-- German. Typical German. 

And I was brought up in a very protected orthodox Jewish family. And very well-established. My brothers were already grown up. Both brothers were married when I was still small. And I have an older sister, half sister, and a younger full sister. 

The Germans came into power, the Nazis came into power, in 1933, while I was still the preschool age. But the impact was immediately felt. And my family, very early, prepared to leave Germany. But as I said, it was a big family. Two married brothers with children. And my own parents and three children. And the whole idea was to emigrate to a country where the situation was more or less similar, and the standard of living was more or less similar to what everybody was used to. 

So for various business reasons and so on, the immigration took place to Holland. And in 1934, we moved to Holland, to Amsterdam. And as I said, we continued our lives in a more or less the same style as we had left in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: You recognized the signs very early? Most people did not see the danger in Hitler's ascendancy to power. What did your family recognize that made them want to move? 

SUBJECT: Well, the attitudes towards Jews. My family was not an exception in becoming very anxious and concerned about the future of the Jews in Germany. Some thought it was a passing affair, some thought it was the beginning of the end of the Jewish community. But in any case, the purpose of emigration at that point was to protect the members of the family. 

But still I think the awareness of what the emigration means, a real change of life style was-- this was not the case. I mean, the choice of going to Holland was dictated by the wish to continue, more or less, in the same kind of pattern, meaning economically and also-- the Jewish community in Amsterdam was also a very rich in Jewish life and a very well known community. And it was a very congenial kind of transition. 

So with all the temporary kind of problems, after a year or two we settled in Amsterdam very well. And we liked Holland very much. So perhaps, you know, Holland was a very liberal and hospitable country towards foreigners and certainly towards Jews. And had a tradition of being pro-Jewish. And we went to a non-Jewish school. And it was a very happy time in my life between 1934 and 1940. This was perhaps-- these were the happiest years of my childhood. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in school, and did you integrate well into the school? 

SUBJECT: Very well. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the language-- no problem? 

SUBJECT: Well, at the beginning it was a difficult one, like moving to any new country. But it took a year, and we got absorbed very well. We went to a school where everybody was very sympathetic and very positive-- a non-Jewish school. And I think we integrated very well. And I wish you could say the same thing of new immigrants who come to Israel, in terms of successful absorption. 

INTERVIEWER: And then what happened? 

SUBJECT: And then the war broke out in 1939. The World War broke out in 1939. Holland was neutral. And Holland was traditionally neutral, although in the First World War, Holland was not involved in the war. And the majority of the Jewish people in Holland did not really come to grips with the potential danger. They thought-- they didn't think of a German invasion to Holland. They thought this would be a repetition of what happened in the first World War. 

There were exceptions. There were exceptions. A certain percentage of people, not very small, but not big, who between 1939 and 1940 left Holland. For instance, my own family-- one brother, whose wife had five children. They had five children. Whose wife was a very anxious person. She insisted that she wouldn't stay in Holland, and they emigrated to Canada. They emigrated to Canada in 1940, just maybe two months before the German invasion. 

But my other brother, and my mother-- my father had died in Holland in 1938-- they resisted this move completely. And for the typical Bourgeois Jewish reasons, and I want to really emphasize this. The Jewish community in Holland was a very Bourgeois community, and resisted any kind of upheaval. Self-initiated upheaval. So the human mentality is to ignore, not to confound the reality. 

And that's why we stayed. We could have left. And that's true with many people. In effect, it's true with regard to the Jewish leadership. I still remember like today in 1940, maybe two months before the Germans invaded Holland, which was in May, the chief rabbi of Amsterdam-- the chief rabbi of Amsterdam, making a speech in the synagogue on Saturday warning Jews not to leave the sinking ship. Meaning not to leave the country. Which had a tremendous impact on people who looked for leadership. And they got that leadership. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? I mean, you were a young girl, obviously. About how old are you at this point? 

SUBJECT: At that point I was 14, 15. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were obviously a thinking young girl. 

SUBJECT: I wanted it to stay where I am. You know, the next inclination was we were happy there. We were in school. We had our friends. We had our activities. We didn't want to really-- we didn't want to be bothered. And it's also a family kind of thing. We were closer to this brother who was staying, and less close to the brother and his wife who had been preparing to leave. So we stayed. 

Now, you know, in May 1940, the Germans invaded Holland, and the picture changed completely. The first year was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was the first thing that happened that you noticed when the Germans invaded? What happened in your life? 

SUBJECT: There was a very short war-- maybe a war of a week-- when people, of course, were terribly panicky. And people still tried to escape through all kinds of means. They went to the ports and tried to board ships which were leaving for England. Very few succeeded. Some succeeded. And then they came back and everybody was in deep depression. 

And I remember very well in the first months of 1940, after the occupation of the Germans, which of course went together with the French occupation, the Belgian occupation. There were in our own environment a series of suicides of friends of ours and of people who all of a sudden realized what had happened. And they committed suicide-- families who committed suicide, because they thought this was the end. 

INTERVIEWER: The end because war was coming or the end because-- 

SUBJECT: The Germans were coming. Not the war was coming. The Nazis were coming. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they know in Holland about the Germans? 

SUBJECT: Everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Everything? 

SUBJECT: Everything except-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did they know about the concentration camps? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. We knew about concentration camps. It was after the-- one of them landmarks in this whole development was November 1938 when the Germans committed what they called the Kristallnacht. They burned synagogues and it was one big vandalism. And they took also many-- in Germany-- many Jewish prisoners and sent them to concentration camps. That was a very well known event. 

And in fact, after 1938 we rescued-- in Holland-- many Jewish children from Germany. In our own family, we had four children at the time when the Germans came whom we had rescued from 1938, after November 1938, whose parents were in concentration camps. They were with us. So we were fully aware of the whole development, which at that time was already a very serious development. It was not just, you know, anti-Jewish laws or what had happened from 1933 to 1938. 1938 was a turning point. 1938 really told everybody that the Germans mean business in terms of eliminating the Jews in some way. 

Of course, nobody thought of extermination, but certainly a sort of extreme maltreatment and making life impossible. And when the Germans occupied Holland, that was the image-- that they would make life impossible, and they would be a real threat. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened-- you were in school. You're a young girl. You're in school. And then this week, I suppose, school was stopped? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: School stopped. And you were at home with this refugee family? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Living with these children? 

SUBJECT: Yes 

INTERVIEWER: What did they tell you? 

SUBJECT: Well, we all were very, very panicky. Everybody was very panicky. And then after two weeks, the Germans had established themselves. They established their military installations in Holland, and they established a civilian kind of control. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were they doing? 

SUBJECT: Then things, for a while, on the surface returned to normal. We went back to school. People went back to work. And it was as if things, more or less, would remain normal under German occupation. That was the first couple of months. 

INTERVIEWER: In the week that you were home, knowing what you knew, were there any preparations being made at home for running away or escaping the German domination? 

SUBJECT: Only in the first-- during the war and right after the war. Once the Germans were firmly established, this was impossible, virtually impossible for families at that time. It was possible for single grown ups. For single-- I know we had some friends who tried during that first year to get illegally, again, through for the sea to England. Some of them were caught. Some of them-- very few succeeded. But for a family to try to escape after this initial period of war, it was impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: You made no attempt to hide? 

SUBJECT: No. Not at that stage. At that stage, there was no reason to hide. I'll come to that. At that stage, actually people hoped that somehow life will return back to the normal routine under German occupation. Of course, rationing and all this kind of things started. And the first year was a year of, again, invasion. And flight from reality. 

But through that year, the Germans actually, they tooled up how to organize the extinction of the Jews in Holland like they did in the other occupied countries. The first step was that all Jews had to register. All Jews had to register in a certain registrar. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go? 

SUBJECT: And here again-- everybody went. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see when you went? 

SUBJECT: We didn't see anything. We had just put in our-- 

INTERVIEWER: I meant what did you think? 

SUBJECT: Well, this is-- I mean, in retrospect it's hard to understand that they got all this cooperation. But everybody-- and this is again what I say, the middle class mentality, especially Germans and Dutch, who are very orderly people, if you tell them to register, you register. Very few people, probably only the offbeat people, thought that on shouldn't collaborate. And the result of this legislation-- 

INTERVIEWER: You mean cooperate? 

SUBJECT: Cooperate. 

INTERVIEWER: Cooperate, no collaborate. Collaborate-- 

SUBJECT: It's collaboration. I mean, I'll come back to that. It certainly was the beginning of the collaboration between the victims and the suppressors, or those who terrorize the victims. It was a slow process of collaboration. 

It's not only cooperation, because at that stage when you're at the point where you register-- because for instance, the Dutch never asked whether you are Jewish or not. It's not like here, for instance. Nobody was registered as Jews. So if at that point Jews would not have declared themselves as Jews, probably the Germans would have a very difficult time to locate all the Jews. Except for those who were members of the Jewish community, but not everybody was a member of the Jewish community. 

So theoretically, this was one point where there was a possibility of not cooperating. But it did not occur. Everybody registered and everybody got a-- what do you say? 

INTERVIEWER: Identification? 

SUBJECT: An identification booklet. Every Dutch resident, including the Jews of course. And the Jews immediately got into their identification booklet the stamp that they were Jews, with the addition of the name-- Sarah and Israel. For the man it was Israel, and for the woman it was Sarah. This was the first step. We were marked. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? Do you remember what you thought at that time? 

SUBJECT: I don't think that-- we certainly were concerned, but I don't think we realized, nobody realized the potential implications of this first step. 

INTERVIEWER: When you stood there and received your identification booklet, did you feel frightened? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Because I was upset that we didn't keep fighting, but it was, you know, something which was not so completely different from all kinds of other procedures. If you arrive in a country, you have to register. I mean, it was nothing completely novel. What was novel was that stamp that you were Jewish and that you have a Jewish name. That was novel. 

But I don't think we were frightened. We weren't bothered. We laughed at it. This was our defense mechanism. At many of these things we laughed at the beginning. That was in, I would say, at the end of 1940. It took six months until this first step was completed. 

Now again, there were always, you know, there were a couple of people, a couple of families during this period, who were very, very rich-- the Von Leer family-- who during this period still succeeded with very much money-- very much bribe and money to get out. But there were a couple of dozens. Not more. From that period on it was like you were cut off completely from the outside world. No mail anymore. You were completely cut off from the Western world. 

INTERVIEWER: The Jews didn't get mail? 

SUBJECT: Nobody. Nobody. There was no contact with the outside world. Meaning with the world which has nothing-- which was enemy territory. We had contact with Germany. My mother had relatives in Hungary and we could correspond with Hungary. But we could not correspond with my sister in New York or with my brother in Canada. We were cut off. And this was a much worse feeling than registering. That you were cut off from the outside world. This was a very frightening feeling. 

INTERVIEWER: But you continued to go to school? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we continued to go to school. And we continued to, again, all the regular activities. 

INTERVIEWER: You weren't singled out as being Jewish in school? 

SUBJECT: Not until 1942. In 1942, maybe beginning of 1942-- I am not sure anymore. End of 1941-- in any case, it took about a year and a half after the Germans occupied Holland to legislate Jewish-- legislation against Jews. And that was the second step. The second step were a whole series of laws which pertained to limitations for Jews. 

One was that Jewish children could not attend regular non-Jewish schools anymore, which started in 1942. The second was that Jews could not to use-- this was a continuum. I mean, it didn't all come simultaneously. But during the whole period-- 1941, 1942, this legislation was passed. We couldn't use public transportation anymore. We couldn't use tramways, public buses, and so on. 

INTERVIEWER: How would they know if you got on a public bus? 

SUBJECT: Right away. Afterwards we couldn't use with even bicycles anymore. We used to have bicycles, and we were not dependent on public transportation. 