[TEST TONE] CREW: --tape. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Well, uh, I guess you want to know about me, right? My name is Leo Gutreiman. I was born in a city named Bedzin, in Poland, in the year 19-- 1923, 17th of March. Tch. But to tell you about the city that I remember, as-- when I remember it, uh, around, uh, starting to go up, uh-- thinking back, as far back as four or five years, the regular, usual thing, you go to school, cheder, whatever it is. And, uh, cheder or school-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, what was the cheder like? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Uh, cheder is a Jewish-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your cheder? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: --Jewish, uh, cheder, in which they taught secular school half-day and half-day religious school. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the room, the Melamed? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Ah, no, I can't remember names. But, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What they-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: --at-- at times, I do remember. There were-- there were a few of those, uh, schools in that city. The city was a city of just about 15,000 to 16,000 population and 80% Jewish of sorts. And we had a couple of schools. One, a Talmud Torah, you know, which was sort of on the conservative side. Everybody knew it was a religious school, which is Agudah, which is Hasidic, mostly. 

And at times, I think, uh, one time or another, I'd been going to either one of them. And this, uh, was the norm, you know? And remembering, uh, from the year about entering school, which were usually early. It was four or five you enter school. And to begin with, uh, you start off, right away, with the-- another language. 

And by the time you're five and six, you're involved in three languages. You've got your native Polish you have to learn. You've got the Jewish language, which you know to begin with. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: And you got to learn the Hebrew. So, uh, that was a big order, right then and there. And as you grew up, as a kid, uh, in a city, and you go to religious school. Of course, we had public schools for those that did not-- didn't participate in religious schools. For those, life was a little easier, because at half a day, they were out and playing ball. And this, uh, religious sch-- as I was brought up, it took, usually, most of the day. 

And, uh, you know, always, a kid, you-- all-- all what you know is school and play and go home. And after on, you start going up. And when I say going up, uh, comes the age of 8, 9, and 10, you're already up and around town. And, uh, you're up and around town. You get conscious of one thing. 

You're conscious, you need money to be around town. And that time, you start off sort of, where do you make a penny? And you get involved in doing things, chores. You already start working. You hire yourself out to either-- huh, what, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, what do you work-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Where do you hire yourself out? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you work at? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: That's interesting. Anybody can do-- uh, it was a common trait for kids to want to earn extra money, just sort of go at bus stations or train stations. You know we didn't have a-- a system like today, with buses and taxis. People came in with their luggage from the train. You just help them carry it home. It was two miles, three miles, you-- and fill up both hands, and you walk along with the person. You carry his luggage. And then you earn yourself a-- a small amount of change. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How much? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Eh, it can be between a quarter and $0.10, the equivalent, you know, in zloty-- in groszy. And that was good. This was already enough to buy yourself either candy or a ball or something like that. You could hustle for that. You could hustle in doing a chore for women that go shopping, you carry a bag of potatoes even. You get something like that. 

So if you hustle-- and you always did, because you never expected anything like pocket money from home. Because there wasn't enough. In most homes, there wasn't enough to give a kid pocket money. You-- you just, uh, were, uh, well-off if you came home, you had your meal three times a day or sort of. 

So, uh, you were conscious, I tried to say, about eight, nine, that money-- work is important to you. You thought already then that, uh, after school or by school or in between school, you had to earn something. And if you get to be 9 and 10, you were already full grown-up to the point that you know you got to bring home some money. 

Because I don't know if I-- if this is a personal experience or there were-- or the kids that I've been around with, there is always-- there's always a need at home to extra money. Most families were big. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your family? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: My family, we were is-- a family of seven kids. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Seven kids? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Seven kids of my-- plus my father my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were where in the family? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: I was somewhere in the middle. I was the third-last from the bottom. And, uh, money was always important for food. Grown-up kids, the oldest ones tried to work, here and there, whenever they could. And my father, part-time worker, a religious man-- a religious man. And to what extent he could, he provided. But, uh, it was not enough to get around. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kind of work did he do? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Ah, my father was a teacher, oddly enough, a religious teacher and a secular teacher at time-- at the time that I was very young. Later on, he went to something else, I understand. But, uh, that was his basic trade. And, uh, even emp-- being employed with a salary considered decent then, but to support a family of seven, there's no way he could do it. 

And, uh, most of the time, the older ones, a brother-- two brothers, actually, one, uh, tried to be a tailor. And the other one some-- some sort of light industry, part-time work, and also both religious. And there was a handicap, already, right there, because anybody that give out work or wants to work, had to do as pleased-- as he has to, as demanded at any time or so and so on. 

But, uh, I'm trying to tell you that, uh, for youth-- and, uh, basically, you-- when I say "youth," every youth had to struggle. There were some-- very few-- which were already from the upper-middle class. And you got to understand, at the time, that don't-- those two never mixed. If somebody was in the upper-middle class, uh, didn't mixed with the lower class. So we never got to know them. We just heard from them. 

So in the vicinity, we had, always to go and-- I said that, to begin with, for ourselves and 8, 9, and 10, you're expected to bring home something if you made it. And, you know, you have to. You went. And you were lucky-- sometimes you were lucky, unlucky another time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The home was very religious? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Eh, the home was religious, right. The home was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was a Friday night like? What-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Friday night, there is the time that you expected-- you expected that you own-- or you almost conserved the whole week to the point of a minimum as far as food. So you have Friday night, Saturday enjoy the Shabbos, you know, if you could. 

And you kind of ex-- waited for it. There was already atmosphere, you know, Shabbos atmosphere in a religious house? Uh, the preparation of food and, uh, enjoyment, uh, to prov-- it was part of the religion, you know, that you have to enjoy the Shabbos. So you conserved and you hustled all week just make sure you got for the Shabbos. 

Having a Shabbos without food, which were many, you know? Because there were many, many places, uh, it was sad affair, you know? It was sad. But, uh, you could live through it, partly. We would-- we would-- we did, and for the better ones, the worse ones. And so-- so we're one-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do on a Friday night? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Went to-- went to services. We went to service, the family, the men, the men in the family, father, took a walk, naturally. And we would-- it was in-- in the vicinity of a mile, mile and a half walked, whether summer or winter, both ways. There is no-- no ifs or buts. In snow, rain, or sleet, nothing will stop you. You got to go to services. And you come home. And you expect a-- you expect to see, uh, what the-- you know, how a Shabbos looks like at home, with the candles and desserts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the room at home, coming home from Shul? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Eh, the home? Home consisted of a kitchen and a-- and a bedroom. And you might ask-- uh, I mean, it was not unique that you may ask, how there's so many people live in two rooms? It's manageable, believe me. It's could, uh-- there was worse situations than that, two-room apartment, uh, fifth floor, even, walk-up. Uh, it was considered, that's livable. 

But your comment, uh, as a kid, eh, you come into a kitchen, different than every day. You got that table set, with candlelight, and the table covered. And you've got dishes at the table. What came on the dishes-- what, uh, had been put on the dishes is something else again. It depended. But the atmosphere was there. 

You-- you-- you-- you practice a-- a religious, uh, function, you know? And that atmosphere was there. And if you were brought up to believe in it, you enjoy it, singing and the-- the whole vigil, you know? And that was Friday night and, of course, the Saturday day, until it was over. And then, you know, everybody got to go do something. 

And, uh, as a youngster, you-- I felt cheated, in a way, that, uh, I couldn't do what other kids did most of the time, which is, uh, being, uh-- go play ball. That's about the only activity that you could do. And, uh, that's the way you grew up. School, work, and help out. That's what they demanded of you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you talk about other kids, are you talking about less religious Jewish kids or are you talking about-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Well, religious? The other kids, they could mean both ways. They could be conservative in-- in a way that they didn't have to attend school or Shabbos services. And other kids could also mean one of the more better-off financially. 

They had a-- they had a, uh-- they could get away without, uh, hustling for money, you know, do chores. That I somehow knew, if they come from a family that had a trade, in order to practice a trade, someone in the family, be it a tailor or a shoemaker or anything else, or some sort of a merchant of sorts, you know salesmen, then they had sort of like a salary to fall back on. And the kids knew there was going to be something home, and there wasn't that much demanded of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, did your father, eh, speak to you, try and give you a particular message? What did father try to do? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Yeah, fathers. Yes, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: I know you're talking about my father. And, uh-- and I keep, uh-- as much as I admired my father, I know he was a knowledgeable man in so many ways that, uh, later on, that I even found out. He was very, uh, intellectual. And I don't know however-- wherever he learned all this. 

So much so, later on, I remembered he was, uh-- you know, today, any legal stuff, you go to a legal-- not to speak about my father, anything in particular-- but, uh, you go to a legal person to write, uh, whatever it is, uh, court summonses or appeals, so far and so on. 

He was known, uh, if anybody needed, uh, an appeal, uh, legal papers, something written down in a-- in a way that's no-- no-- it's like hand-printing, sort of calllag-- calligraphy, I think. He could do it so nice that the professional people came to him, give him papers to fill out, and send it out. 

Eh, he was that kind of person, yet he was fanatically religious, to the point that, uh, it was almost a drawback in our life. That, uh, when my sisters, my older sisters, they grew up, and they wanted to go to work with my brothers. And he just turned to them from-- if it anyway it would interfere with their religious belief. 

And that was our-- it was a big drawback that we could never be self-- self-sustaining. He could come in the home and found out somebody took a job, and it's not quite, uh, the way he want it, especially as far as the sisters' concerned. He just went and took them off the job. And he didn't care there's no food in the house. 

Now, in one way, he was knowledgeable, intelligent. And the other way, he was fanatically religious. That I hold against him. But, uh, I know he was a man that many people admired and many people came to ask all kinds of questions of him. He was available. But for his own family, so religious, that anything interfere with it, he just didn't allow it to happen. 

I know later on in life, uh-- uh, later on, I talk later on, year 11, 12, when I already quit school, quit school. I-- my schooling is, uh-- although, later on in life, way later in life, I went back to school and, uh-- and for my education, which is a lot to talk about at that. But, uh, as most of the-- most of them, uh, worked already during school hours, through school. 

I completely went out of school and went to a neighboring city, earned myself a full-time job. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At the age of 11, 12. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: 11, 12, right, the neighboring city. I know the place. I know the-- the-- the things that I'd done. And, uh, so-- but he-- my father, at that time, was a very, uh, traveling man for some sort of a business, which is not important to talk about it. Not much to talk about at all as far as income. 

But he was away half of the week or a whole week. And he could come home and found out that, uh, I skipped school and went to work. And it was already two weeks hence. And he knew that I had to work in Shabbos over there, Friday late, so far and so on. He just came to the neighboring city and packed me back up and says, come home. Go back to school. And for him, school actually meant a religious school. You know, preferable? 

So in that way, he hindered all the way until I finally left house for good, which is about a couple of years later. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would-- would you consider yourself rebellious or sort of-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: No, it wasn't a question of rebellion. It was a question of necessarity. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Absolutely. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Uh, religion was good. And it's still good for me but to a point that if it doesn't interfere with life, with necessarities. Uh, although, today, in this day and age, everybody will tell you if-- the religious point of view, well, you can make everything manage, you know? If you're don't-- you don't have to work on Saturday, you can reschedule things, so, so far and so on. 

But I suppose it's easy from the other side to tell me how-- how to manage. But, uh, it's a-- it's a big handicap. Yet, uh, for religious people, themselves, I see them every day. The people that I know are them, they're satisfied. They're happy what they're doing, how they're doing it. And partly, they have found a way to manage, uh, which is everybody, uh, does things different. 

I-- I have nothing against religion. I'm religious when I can. And, uh, when it interferes with my livelihood, I'd have to do something. So it was not a question of rebellion. It was a question of, as I said, you-- I was home. He wasn't home all week. I was home. And I knew, it's just not manageable. 

I had a mother. And she went through hell, you know, as far as managing to feed the kids. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was she like? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Tch. Ah, you go into very personal things. So a mother is-- I got a Jewish mother back home. And, uh, as much as I know the history of my mother and my father, they both married at 17. I believe that he was a student at the city. 

And as I've been told, he-- he roomed or he boarded in my mother's house. And-- and he came from a-- a different city in Poland, way far away, but he was, uh, sort of a student in that particular Yeshiva, in that city. And so that's what I've been told. They met. And there is the family. 

She-- my mother came from a more conservative house, religious but conservative. Ah, but as I know now, from my own personal experience with my kids, once you are married to a religious man, there is no compromise. You-- you got to-- you got to go in there all the way. There is no compromising, you know, with the religious people. 

So she adopted whatever-- whatever he said he wanted. And that's the way. And living in poverty, at times, sprigs here and there, he bought some home, and we lived for two weeks, three weeks, four weeks with enough food. And as I mentioned before, uh, being well means having food at the table. And I don't mean-- and I don't mean extravagant food, I mean necessarities, uh, which is, uh, bread, potatoes, and, uh, anything, uh, in the meat, once or twice a week. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned that the neighbors, other Jews, were-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --doing what for a living and what-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Ah, you mean Jews of that city? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they more wealthy, less wealthy? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: All right. We had a-- a-- a great portion of the city subsisted of, uh, tradesmen, tradesmen and some merchants. And some, uh, religious people, some of them, were also involved in some type of business. And, uh, ah, when I said, uh, people, philanthropic people, that they had something to be philanthropic with to begin with, and, uh, were of a fiber, religious fiber, you know, that they believed in help. 

That-- there were those, many of them, considering, uh, the-- the city size, that poor people could fall back in time of need. There were other institutions, you know, the free loan institutions. But this is, uh, not much help for the duration, just now and then. 

Ah, but, uh, there was organizations or community people that knew, if anybody really in dire need, you know, that direct-- they directed them to, either at times they outright bring something. But, uh, most of the time, there were those that you can depend on. A number? I don't know what the number is, 10, 12, or 15, or 20, but there were enough poor people to go around that, uh, you didn't have enough rich ones to keep up with it. 

But now and then, a need, you didn't get all the help you wanted, but you got some of it. You got some of it. And that's the way the city was run, actually. You-- poverty is such thing as, uh, you have today. You're satisfied that you-- tomorrow, it comes maybe. You know, you get it somewhere. Somehow you survive. 

Eh, if you-- you just don't think about it. You keep on living. You can't do nothing about it. There isn't, uh-- you see, Poland wasn't a city that, uh, if you go out and you want to work for less, you got it. If-- you-- you can almost, uh-- you at-- at times, you actually hire yourself out just for the food. 

Uh, you ask, uh-- you know there's some of the ladies or the houses-- you call them houses-- that they're middle-class or half-way rich. If you know them, you come, and you offer to do anything for them just for a meal or for a leftover meal or something like that. It's already-- it's sometimes, uh, beneath somebody's dignity, but, if necessary, you do it. 

I would not say anybody was starving but poor and hungry all the time, many of them. Yet, uh, I will speak of that city as a model city in spite of it. It's the condition. The conditions weren't brought up by the people. The conditions of the-- the poverty because of no opportunity. There was no work. 

And, uh, no work, I could get into that at length, why it was no work, because city and government management. But that's another story all together. But the city is a model city. It's a model city that's been talked-- they talked about it, worldwide, eh, for it's diversity of people. 

I said, uh, we had, uh, religious, very religious, big cults, you know, Hasidic cults, and the conservative religion. And we had non-religious people, which, uh, in-- a lot of-- and everybody active in something. There isn't anybody that-- that just, uh, stagnates. 

If you either for or against, either with this group or with that group. Is, of course, the biggest activities were Zionism in our time. Because this is-- was part of a hope. We know in Pole-- in Poland, then, uh, the situation besides the situation of poverty and work, we had other problems. We had discriminatory problems and problems that we, uh, suffered from other people. And I could go back to particular times that I remember if you want me to. 

Our city was also known as a city-- it was known over the country that a fighting city we named it. I don't want to mention the-- the right word they used to call us as a city of fighting back. Uh, we weren't going around fighting anybody for any cause. But if anybody, uh, came look for trouble, such as group pogroms-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one of-- or [INAUDIBLE]. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: I remember-- I remember just one particular part of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Yes. That-- that was in the year somewhere around '28 or '29. I was a kid. And mostly kids, they get caught up in that. Something alive is going on, you know? And it's been known then that a group is going to come from the outskirts. Uh, we had been warned, somehow. I imagine we had been warned, uh, by some so-- sort of authorities that there are going to come a group, non-Jews, uh, in the numbers of hundreds. 

And they're going to come in. And when I say, come in, it's not like today, come in from the-- a specific-- specific street that leads from one town to another. You know, that's the way you went? The major street that leads one to another, they're going to come, and they're going to raise hell in the city. 

And so it happened. And the preparation for it? We had to-- I said, a fighting city, men, physically strong and, in contrast to other cities, they didn't mind getting into a scuffle. On the contrary, if you come ask for trouble, you get it. The city, the youth armed themselves. And-- and I don't-- I don't mean, uh, guns. Sticks, sticks and bats and waited for that group at the edge of the city. They waited for them 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember seeing? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: And, uh, in seeing the preparation for it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Preparations. Group huddling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: We got together, and we go over there. We'll wait for them over there, so. I knew the men. I'd seen them around the corners, you know? And, uh, you saw-- you saw the prepare-- the prepare-- preparation for it, the bats and talking and organizing. You're just a bystander as a kid-- a bystander. And it came to be, two days or three days later, they waited for them. 

And they came. And if you can imagine a-- a battle going on, with sticks and clubs, they repelled them. They repelled them. They didn't let them into the city. Now you can ask me where is government, where is police, so far and so on? Uh, and, uh, sort of mob-like, you know, pogrom mob-like? 

While this was maybe one of the latest in later years, which I-- I am talking about '28, '29, maybe even '30, because I remember it vividly. And others will testify to it. And, uh, I wasn't surprised at all. Growing up later, I learned and I knew that this city, the men in the city, they were stand-up fighters for anything of that sort. 

So, as I told you before, at the age of 10, I moved to a neighboring city. I-- I could dwell more on the city, if you want me to, but just to show you the contrast. The-- it used to be very common that somebody, in a city like, uh, Bedzin, I was, that if some-- a couple of troublemakers came and try something, and, all of a sudden, you saw four, five probably youths, you know, run after them. Chase them. Grab them. And give them the business. 

And the neighboring city, just about five, six miles away, you can see one of the hoodlums chasing the whole city around. And they were famous for-- uh, you call them something like a name like chickens, you know? They never want to stood-up and fight. 

And myself, moving to the city, neighboring city, starting to go to school, you know, again, 10 years old, right? And all the way up, I'm pointed, oh, stay away from him. He's from over there. And you go through the usual things in the city, in a school or in a place where you live or on the street. 

And you go through it. And you almost got to-- you fight your way to-- As a newcomer, you know, you got to fight your way to get some respect, some authority. And everybody tests you, you know? One from here, one from there. But my name alone, just that I come from that city was enough to earn me the respect. 

And getting back to the city, the city of Bedzin, I told you before had something unique in it. That, uh, not only were there the youth involved in everything, involved in everything politically-- 

[KNOCKING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: I have to change tapes. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: Awesome. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ahem. It's only, um-- 

LEO GUTREIMAN: It's OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --two minutes. 

LEO GUTREIMAN: I don't care if it runs or not. Uh, I-- I'll talk if you turn me on. 