SUBJECT: I was black and blue. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Really? 

SUBJECT: Mhm. Got a little more time. Oh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Go ahead. Well, let's finish her cigarette. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You want to finish your cigarette? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, could I? Is it OK? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, it's fine. 

SUBJECT: I don't want to smoke in the camera. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, it's all right. Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: My husband doesn't know I smoke, in case he sees it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have you on tape. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now he'll know. 

SUBJECT: No, I'm joking. So where-- where should I continue? 

INTERVIEWER 2: So we were talking about-- 

SUBJECT: After the liberation? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The liberation, yes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, when we separated from my brothers, we said that, in case anybody survives, we meet in Radom. So our destination, my sister and I, that we wanted to go and find our cousins, or mainly my brothers. We thought that maybe they are alive. Because during the camp, there were certain groups that they came in and they said, oh, this one is there and this one is there. And from the oldest brother, we knew that he survived till '44, you know, beginning of '45, so there was a lot of hope. And from Bergen-Belson we went-- they changed the three zones. We tried to go. 

Now, let me think. From Bergen-Belson, we went to some place. I don't remember-- to the American zone. Because the Russians took over Bergen-Belson and we didn't want to stay with the Russians. So a Jewish chaplain came in and he said, whoever wants to go in the American zone can go. And we went to some city near Breslau on the border in order to put our way-- push our way through closer to Poland up to get to Radom. 

It was very hard because we had to go on freight trains and we had to ask the American GIs to take us. You know, to let us, and many didn't because they were military transport. We walked a lot. We would take-- and in between-- at that time, a friend of my sister's survived, men from-- that they were in Buchenwald. And they came looking for family, too. So we sort of doing-- there were about six women and, I think, three men, and they were really gentlemen. They took wonderful care of us. We're friends till today. 

And with them, we traveled to Germany, which took us about two months. And finally, we arrived in Lodz in Poland. And we came to Lodz and we met people that knew my brother who survived. And he told me that my brother, two weeks before the liberation, they saw already the Russian towns, he and another man decided to escape. And they hid in a Polish farm, and the farmer gave them up and they shot him. It was, I think, less than two weeks. And the second from the oldest, he died in camp. 

So this we found out in Lodz. My sister also found out that her husband is alive and he is in Germany, in Garmisch-Partenkirchen. So we didn't want to go back. As far as taking back, you know, from the Poles, but we had left material things. They didn't matter to us. There were also, in that time, a lot of people that they came back to Poland, that they started killing Jewish-- Jews again. There were incidents of three or four people, that they were killed. And they had leaflets that the people that they came back from brought them, that they showed us, that if any Jew would show up in Radom after the war, they would kill them. 

So we didn't go back to Radom. We worked our way back to Germany. And it was-- again, it took us about six weeks to two months. We went through Czechoslovakia. By the way, they are the most wonderful people. I have to say, with felt-- we got so much warmth. In every place we went in, we had no money or anything. If we went into a small restaurant, they would feed us. If we went into a bakery, they would give us coffee and cake and all that. We came out with, really, an entirely different feeling about the people in Czechoslovakia than in Poland. 

And we came to Garmisch-Partenkirchen. And I stayed with my sister, then I met my husband very shortly. We fell in love and we got married in 1946 in Garmisch-Partenkirchen. It wasn't a big wedding. I remember I had one chicken and a bottle of liquor. And then I saw through the window that two more people are coming and I figured, gee, what am I going to do? How am I going to feed them? But it was a happy occasion. 

My husband had relatives in the United States. He had an uncle, his mother's father, his mother's brother. He didn't remember-- he knew their name, but he didn't remember the address. But he remembered that their company was called Krafthat. And in Garmisch, we had-- we became very friendly with and American GI. His name was Harry Saber. May he rest in peace. 

He was just marvelous. He helped everybody, every Jew, who survived in Garmisch-Partenkirchen. He saw the way that we should have a good house and a good life, and we started working. Like, my husband worked for the GI, for the American. And he had enough food. He had enough food to bring home, whoever, for the women, that they didn't work. You know, they let him. It wasn't stealing. They gave him, take home bread and take home food and take home all that. 

And true-- Harry Saber, that GI, wrote home to his mother-- he had just-- his father wasn't alive-- to put an ad in the Jewish Foward, and that the Rosenzweig is alive and he's looking for his uncle. He knew-- he told that he reads the Forward, but he really did. But before that, they were very close, the sister. The one that was in Europe and one was in the United States. 

Before that, he had a friend, who his son was in the army. And the friend told him that he's going to be in Germany, he's stationed in Germany. So as soon as he heard about it from-- and we, in the paper, it said that he's in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, with the others. He came to visit us. So we had the first, you know, live person who told him that he has an uncle and he has cousins and all that, and he can come to a family, and that made us feel very good. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is most of your family-- you said you had-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: We didn't have any family, just my husband's family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like, after having come from such a big family, for you to be the only one. 

SUBJECT: It was-- it was very, very hard. It was very hard. We, you know, we made family. We really made family. My husband has an-- through marriage, that, you know, how do I explain it? It's not the man, you know. His mother, in that end, was stepsisters. And yet, she's now, she's my mother. She's still alive. She lives in New Orleans. Every week I call her. I mean, we made family. We made good, very close friends. And we have to have it, otherwise we couldn't exist, right? Just, again, to be alone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what did you feel like, having survived? You and your sister were the sole survivors of your family. 

SUBJECT: In the beginning, we felt bad and guilty, very guilty. It was very hard to adjust life. And I think the better materialistically, the better we got-- you know, if we got the nicer apartment, if we got the house. If we build our lives nicer and nicer, the more we suffered, the more guilt with felt, until I had to work it out and say, you know, it's good to be alive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you work it out? 

SUBJECT: You should know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, it's worth living. You know, pain, you forget. You have to forget. You can't live 24 hours with pain. Even things that happen now and they're very painful. I mean one moment of good life supplements for many years of suffering. And that's why-- you know, even if I remember. I remember the good things. I remember the childhood, the love that my parents gave me. 

And I realized that nothing can be forever. It was a cataclysm, you know. It happened-- it didn't happen in history this, what had happened to us. We should never forget. We shouldn't forgive, definitely, the guilty ones, but we cannot live with hate the rest of our lives. And I think I don't have any hate. I hate the people who are directly, who were directly, involved with it. 

But I can't say that I hate every German. And I think that helps me a lot, too. It's the same thing with the Poles. And I can express myself, they're anti-Semites, definitely, more big anit-Semites, even, than the Germans. Because during the war, we could hide from a German. We couldn't hide from a Pole. They sort of smelled out the Jew. It was instinct with them. They were raised with it. With the Germans, it was more political. It was the times. But not that I forgive them. 

And that's why I, you know, rationalize with myself. I read a lot, who could help me, you know, things that could help me solve the problem. And I tried to adjust to life, because otherwise, what do you do? You have to up on the Empire State Building and jump down. And if you decide that's your decision to live, you have to make the best of it. You can't go on hating and remembering all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you say you remember the good times, you remember the times when you were a child that were nice. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember? Is it a particular event that you remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember my grandparents going in the Friday nights, you know. The light and the candles and the love, you know. I remember holidays. I remember the smell of food, how good it smelled Friday morning, getting up before school, you know. 6 o'clock in the winter when it was still dark, going into the kitchen, my mother with an apron. You know, the a big smile, here making something first that I can have before I leave. I mean, these are things, they stay in my memory. There were so many. 

I would also like to bring something that Sally's connected with, because when you said what I remembered. Fridays, usually in Europe, especially in big cities and especially in small towns, there were a lot of beggars, people that they came around. And Jews are known for contributing money to different, helping one another. And I remember one Friday, I don't know, it was probably before school, because I must have been about four or five years old. Because I remember how small I was that I had to pull my mother's dress in order she should listen to me. 

But I do remember things quite well way back. And the door opened up and the woman came in and she, my mother reached in her pocket, and she gave, I don't know, a penny or five cents, or whatever the amount was. But I looked at my mother's face and she was very mad, you know, sort of angry. And I said, hey, mom. If you're angry, why did you give the woman money? And these are things that, really, parents should give their children, because they remember it. 

She was baking. She washed her hands, wiped her hands, took me in the other room, and she said-- she called me Khayel, Come on, I want to talk to you. She said, listen, according to Jewish tradition and Jewish religion, giving-- tsduke is the most important thing. And she said, if I don't give that woman, there are some people that they don't need it. They're beggars. 

But there are some people that really need it. They need to feed their children. Unfortunately, they can't find work or they can't go out to work. Who am I to judge whom to give and whom not to give? And in order not to insult, not to make that person who really needs it, feel bad, I give to everybody. As much as I can afford, I distribute to everybody. And I hope that when you grow up, you can do the same thing. 

Well, I grew up. I went through hell. I, you know, I moved to Rockland County. And Sally was in that time, things were going better and better. Sally was, at that time, about five years old. And in Rockland County, there are a lot of Orthodox Jews, that they sort of bring back the European way of life. And the woman came in. It wasn't like Europe, but the woman came in and she said there was a young girl who is an orphan and they have to marry her off, could I contribute something? 

I reach for my pocket book and I give her a couple of dollars. Oh, Irene, wasn't at that time an infant because they're five years apart. And I heard Irene crying, and evidently I looked like I was annoyed. And Sally came over to me and she said, hey mom, if your face looks so angry, why did you give that woman money? And you know, it was like a flashback. I got-- I really, I felt like I'm falling apart, because it's happening again after so many years. So I quieted Irene down, I gave her a bottle. I said, Sally, wait. I want to talk to you. I sat down with her and I told her the story, what I told-- what my mother told me. 

Well, Sally grew up. She went to Boston University. We gave her a checking account. And you probably know, all the checks came back to the parents to see what she spent And I looked at the checks. My husband looked at the checks. We almost died. What does that girl think, we are the Rockefellers? $5 this one, $10 for this organization, $2 for this organization. 

So when she came back for Thanksgiving, we sat down with her and we talked to her. Listen, we have a business. We give. We can't afford it. And at that time, things weren't too easy for us yet. And she said to me, you know, mom? I'm really surprised at you. And you know with that, I was angry. I said, what do you mean you're surprised? She said, do you remember when I was about four or five years old, what you told me about Jewish tradition and about giving-- [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

And we both, my husband and I, my God, we took her around and kissed her and said, if you remember what we told you so many years, go on, go on giving. And these are the good things that, you know, you remember. You pass it down to the children. I talk to my children. I tell them these times. You know, good times, this-- these are the things that sustained me, that when, you know, when times were bad, that I was thinking about these times. 

My grandfather, my father's father, he was just such a humane person, such an intelligent person. I would sit for hours and listen to his stories. If it was a choice between going to a movie and going to my grandparents, I chose going to my grandparents and talking to them, just looking at their faces They missed, the children, missed a lot, not having grandparents. OK? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: Good. I'm glad that's over. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was a privilege. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, it really was. 

SUBJECT: I'm glad I could help out. I mean, we should do it. We're not going to be here too long, and if we don't do it now, you know, maybe too late. I hope that future generations find out and it wouldn't happen again, we'd be able to prevent it, that even with the small part of our doing something. And I thank you, young people, for doing it. It's really, you're doing a wonderful job. It's great that you are interested in it. 