INTERVIEWER: Mr Schleifer I want to ask you your full name. Just tell me your full name, and where you were born, what city you lived in, in what country, and what year. 

SUBJECT: My name is Mendel Schleifer I was born in Vienna, grown in Poland. Growed up in-- raised in Poland. Born in Vienna, raised in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: What is your family like-- life like when-- in the late 1930s. What was your family like? 

SUBJECT: Well, my father had his own shop and a store, clothing from clothing 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: In Stanislawow And we worked together. I worked with my father, we had some people too. My father died, he was a young man. I took over his business. I was I think, then 22 or 23 years old. And I took over the whole business. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you married? Did you have a family of your own. 

SUBJECT: No, later on. I got married later. When I took over the business, I was not married. Later on I got married, had a family. And you want me to talk further? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, well now, in 1939, 1940-- 

[INAUDIBLE] 

Oh dear. Did you press-- you didn't press the button. 

CREW: Hold it and then turn it. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1939, 1940, where were you? 

SUBJECT: In 1939, the Russians occupied the place. Russia occupied the place in 1939. And in 1949 the invasion from Germany, they took over-- in 1941, German took, the Germans took over. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when the Germans took-- 

SUBJECT: The Germans took over, they right away made a-- separated a ghetto for the Jewish. And they called out a lot of families, I will say like on a market, where they used to sell horses. Used to call it [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And they called out the people. I didn't go. And my family, we hided. I went out of my house, I had two homes, two houses, with a shop and everything. 

I went out, and I didn't take one thing from what I earned. I gave it to the people which I was-- which my children was, and I was. I was a short time in the ghetto, about two months by myself. I wanted to see what's going on. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were your wife and children? 

SUBJECT: They was in the place where I gave away everything that I had. 

INTERVIEWER: What place was that? 

SUBJECT: Neighbor. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, they stayed with a neighbor. 

SUBJECT: The neighborhood, it was non-Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: And you stayed in-- 

SUBJECT: A non-Jewish neighborhood, and I was in the ghetto. I wanted to see about my family, about the whole family. But later on, about two, three months, I left the ghetto, and I was staying with those in the same place. And I had another name. 

INTERVIEWER: You took another name? 

SUBJECT: I took another name. And I came out some-- a lot of times I came out from that place, on the street. Come out on the street, I didn't have my own name. You have to come out to see what's going on in the city. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you frightened? 

SUBJECT: Well, I wasn't happy, but I used to go out, I was curious. But they didn't recognize me as a Jew. And I wanted to see what it was they called-- the committee, the Jewish committee, they called in, and they asked the Jewish committee to call all people-- on that place where they used to sell the horses, to come there all together. 

And I was watching when they walked from there to the cemetery. They took them to the cemetery. That I didn't see, but I just watched, and I didn't know where they go. I watched all of them, the whole family-- my mother, my sisters, my brother, my grand-- grandmother, uncles. Everybody, I watched, they went together there, and I felt that they had gone to die there. Since then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did they die there? 

SUBJECT: They did. Since then, I left the place, and I went in the woods. After that, I went in the woods. And I lived in the woods for two years. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you when you were living in the woods by yourself? 

SUBJECT: About 37, 38 years. 37, something like that, 38. It was in probably one end of [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER: Were you alone? 

SUBJECT: I was alone, then I brought in my wife too, with me. I brought my wife too, with me. And the children, no. No children with me. Just me and my wife. First I went by myself, then I had possibilities where I was in the woods, to come into place where the family was. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were your children? 

SUBJECT: They was at that family where I gave the everything, the whole thing. 

INTERVIEWER: They stayed with them. 

SUBJECT: They stayed with them, and they became unknown. None, they changed their names, but they couldn't come out too much in the free, to be free. And I was [INAUDIBLE] in the woods. Not in one place. I wasn't sitting in one place. I was doing around in the woods, often every time in another section. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you manage to eat? Where did you sleep? 

SUBJECT: That is the question. Eat, all I stole. Or, some people, where they did know my stealing, they prepared. And in the yard, every time, they prepared food. Not to have to steal. But when we stole, we didn't stole a little thing, we stole cows, we stole pigs. We stole what we could. I wasn't alone by myself. 

INTERVIEWER: How is it the Germans didn't find you in the woods? You must have had to build fires to cook the meat. 

SUBJECT: All right, we did-- we, we did it. We did it. Some possibilities we had, when we had the possibilities, we did it. But mostly, we had prepared food from the people around that place, from the villages. Those villages supported us. 

I was not steady by myself. I was sometimes with group, sometimes by myself. So the whole time we lived through like that, two years. In 1944, the Russians took over. I came out from the woods. And the Russians took me away. 

INTERVIEWER: Before you left the woods, were you ever sick when you were in the woods? How was your health? 

SUBJECT: I was never sick, and I was never cold. Never cold, and never sick, and I never had a cold. 

INTERVIEWER: How could that be? 

SUBJECT: It was. I don't know how could it be, I don't know myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Your wife too? 

SUBJECT: My wife was too. In a situation like that, you're not getting sick. If you are feeling sick, you're getting healthy, in a situation like that. And after that, we got sick. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you sleep when you were in the woods? How did you sleep? 

SUBJECT: In bunkers. 

INTERVIEWER: Bunkers? 

SUBJECT: Under the earth. 

INTERVIEWER: You made the bunkers. 

SUBJECT: We made it. We made bunkers, we covered it with the earth on the top. We didn't see the light. We didn't see the daylight. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you ever built a house, or a bunker, or anything before in your life? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. We couldn't stay in one place. We had to-- we could live in some places two months, three months, some places a month. Then we felt it, that the Germans are, by possibility, from the villagers could know, we moved away. We wasn't standing there. 

INTERVIEWER: How old was your wife at the time? 

SUBJECT: My wife was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tom, we're ready. Times when you are most frightened, times when you were-- you know, you felt good. Times that you want to-- what did you-- 

SUBJECT: Well, we never felt good. We never figured that we will come out alive. Never in that time. We never felt good. We never felt that we will come out alive from there. But on the other side, we was a little happy. The children wasn't with us. That was our happiness, in the mind. But we didn't figure we will see them again either. And we lived through like that for two years. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there are other people in the woods that you were with? 

SUBJECT: Was, was, sometimes that was. But then, sometimes no. 

INTERVIEWER: Besides trying to just-- 

SUBJECT: Then I saw, more dangerous with a group. I went away by myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Besides trying to just stay alive, what else were you doing? Were you-- were you trying to help other people? Was anything else happening? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we was trying, wanting to help one the other. We was trying to help some ways, doing things which it was necessary to help in the places that I was with other people. But when I was alone, I would sit in quiet. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when the Russians came in? 

SUBJECT: When the Russians-- when the Russians came, I went out from the woods, that was in 1944, and they took me away. They took me away, they sent me away to Siberia. And in Siberia I was for six months, cutting ice in 400 gram bread. And my qualification helped me coming out there. I meet a [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] for the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] called [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

And he said, "You are here?" I says, "You see I'm here." And he released me from there, and sent me away deep in Russia, where I bought my qualification out, 'til I left. 'Til I left Russia. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with from this experience? What happened to your family, the rest of your family, your children? 

SUBJECT: Well, with the children I came together much late, very lately we gather. We came together in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like to go to Germany after-- 

SUBJECT: We went-- after, we went out, we came out from Russian. It was called a Polish organization, which the Polaks had a right to go home. And I registered as a Polak, and they had to release home, and I went home. I didn't go home, but I went farther away. And I was, I think, in Oberschlesien, in the city of Katowice for a short time. 

Then I passed the borders, I went to Czech. From Czech, to Austria, from Austria to Germany, to Munich. And from there, they put us in camps. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of camps? 

SUBJECT: Used to call, "DP." DP camps. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like in those camps? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was not comfortable. But we lived through, we wasn't in danger. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear stories about people who had been in the concentration camps? The camps-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, I was there with people who they were in the concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they like? 

SUBJECT: Well, then, that time, they was like other people. We ate-- we didn't have, in the beginning, those camps, we didn't have for days where to eat. We cut grass, and cooked, and we ate that for a few days, not long. Then the DP, that it calls the CSC-- the DP camps, the DP organization, like the UN. They was the UN. They send us food, they start to send us food and we start to be good. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to the rest of your family? Not your children, but you must have had memories of other members of your family. What happened to those people, do you know? 

SUBJECT: They got lost. They are not alive. I had here in the United States two uncles, my mother's two brothers. And they brought me here. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother-- was your mother alive when you left? 

SUBJECT: Yes, when I left-- when I left, I saw my mother go to die. 

INTERVIEWER: Go to die? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: In Stanislawow when the Germans took over. Saw my mother, saw my brother, saw my wife's family, my whole family, I saw them go to die, and they went tall to die, and nobody is alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't they take you? 

SUBJECT: Who? 

INTERVIEWER: You. Why didn't they try to kill you? 

SUBJECT: They couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER: 'Cause you were hiding. 

SUBJECT: How could they? I was hiding. I didn't go with that, I didn't go to them to kill me. I was hiding from them. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't the rest of your family hide with you? 

SUBJECT: Well, I will tell you, that is a good question too. I ask some from them to do something, but they said no. They thought it's when it was the first world war, and they thought it's the same Germans, what it was then. And they didn't want to leave what they earned, what they had. They didn't want to leave that. 

I said, "You don't need nothing. Try to get out how you can." But I didn't have the opportunity too much to talk. There was no time. It was in the beginning, when the generals came over. Before even they started the ghetto, I talked to them-- "Leave everything, go where you can." But they didn't listen to me. 

I did, I left everything. I left, for the people where I was, time being, I left everything what I had. I went out just in a jacket, that's all. 

INTERVIEWER: When you think back on that time, why do you think that they couldn't believe that the Germans that were invading now were different than the Germans of World War I, as you put it? 

SUBJECT: Well, they was feeling it's a war-- and it was the war, like in the first World War-- that the Germans wouldn't do so much to them. Therefore, they felt that they didn't want to go, and thousands of peoples didn't want to go. They felt that the Germans, well, they are the same people that they was before. 

INTERVIEWER: And why did you realize that they were different? 

SUBJECT: I realized I had a lesson the first World War. I was 11 or 12 years old, and Russians-- I was once, the first time with the Russians. Then I came Austria back, and the Germans took over for a time being, it was for 15 months. Then when I saw the Germans, they leave again, and the Russians got to come in again. 

And my father was in the army, and he came over-- that was a little later. I came to my mother, and I said to my mother, "Listen, I don't want to be here again with the Russians. I want you to go away." And she didn't want. I said, "If you don't want, I go by myself." I was 12 years old. 

I go by myself. But she didn't want to leave me alone, and she went with me where we was. Then Austria prepared for those people trains to take them out, who wanted to go. And my father, later, when we was in the train, my father came with a van to take us out from there. But we wasn't already there, we was at the train, in the same city. And that experience I had from then, which I did good, and I had it in my mind, the same thing. 

INTERVIEWER: When you think back now about what happened to you then, what is it that you're left with? What is it that stays with you? 

SUBJECT: It left with me a person not to think about nothing, and not to have in the mind. When I came over to the United States, my uncle bought me-- he wanted to buy for me a business. He told me, go into business, I'll do it for you. I said, "Uncle, I don't want that. I want to live comfortable, and go work for somebody else. And I don't want nothing no more." I don't want nothing, I want to live-- through my few years that I have to live-- I want to live through quiet, no business, no riches, no nothing. And I am not sorry for that. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your wife with you when you came here? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, she was with me. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you saying that what it made you feel is that you didn't want to have complications in your life? 

SUBJECT: No more, no. I didn't want a business, I didn't want to get rich, I didn't want nothing no more. I wanted to live like I live now, quiet. I'm not jealous if somebody has apartments, if somebody has a lot of money. It doesn't bother me a bit. It bothers me if I am healthy, and I live comfortable, it's enough for me. More than enough. 

INTERVIEWER: You think you would have been different if that hadn't happened to you? That you would have had different ambitions, different-- 

SUBJECT: Well, if it wouldn't ha-- I was in the business. I had a big business. I would stay in the business, the same way where I stood. And after that war, after that life that I lived through, what I saw the life from people, I said, I don't want to-- I don't want nothing. I want to be in a place on my own. I don't want nobody to give me. 

When we was the three years in the camps, we lived on given. And I said to myself-- sometimes I was crying to my wife, and I said, "How long we will live somebody to give us?" Why couldn't I live to have my own responsibilities? To pay rent, to pay for everything, to buy my own bread. 

But it came true, after three years. Came to the United States, and I got my life, what I wanted. Not rich-- I live comfortable. And I don't worry. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else that you would like to tell us about those times, or memories you have of your family before the war? Things you cherish, things you make you happy? 

SUBJECT: Well, we cherished a lot in the family. A lot we cherished in the family. 

CREW: Gonna have to change the tape. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh no, that's what I want to end up with this. OK. 