CREW: It's rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

SUBJECT: While we were hiding, I remember an incident where the, the landlady at the company and my wife and I were in the next room. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is the landlady in Prague? 

SUBJECT: No, no, this was still in Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The first one. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The one who threw you out? 

SUBJECT: Right. At the company. And I was sitting and having coffee and cake, whatever. And we were in the next room trying to keep quiet and be as inconspicuous as possible. When suddenly Balla, my wife, had a hiccup. And while she was having the hiccup, I looked through the keyhole to see what the, what the reaction is going to be in the next room. 

And sure enough, they were pointing at the door. What's this there? And they tried to, to minimize it to, not pay any attention to it. But we had a moment that we thought, that's it, that they're going-- that she's going to go in and prove that there is something there. Luckily, they left without anything. I don't know if this has hastened her decision to throw us out or not, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that shortly before she-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was-- it was a nightmare at least to say. This is the least you can say about it. When the-- I remember my father buying the Volkischer Beobachter the German, the organ the German, of the Nazis, Nationalsozialistische Partei. And he used to see-- this was at the beginning of the war when there were just only skirmishes between France and Germany and the, and the, Czar and the slaughtering it. And when he saw a, a notice of some killed German soldiers, only a few, three or four, he was, he was elated. He thought maybe, maybe the allies will bring them down. Maybe there will be an end to our suffering. 

But just as time went by, and we saw that nobody cares, that nobody gives a damn about what's happening here, we grew more and more desperate. We didn't believe-- nobody believed that we'll survive. We had-- we had so many fears. First, the first and most, the most tragic thing would be if we will be discovered, if the Germans will discover us. 

The second fear was that we will run out of money. And then there was this, this terrible weight, knowing that my mother and my sister, aren't alive, that all my aunts and uncles and cousins are not alive. So we, we, we couldn't imagine how, how will we-- how will we live all alone without any family at all? This was a terrible trauma for us. 

So we went-- while we were sitting there, especially at, at the second place, and looking at the flowers, we have decided if we ever, ever come out of this, we'll live on a farm. We'll live on the land, quiet, maybe grow some flowers. 

I remember my father telling me the day they took my mother and sister-- my little sister, she was only 12 years old. Suddenly, she had-- when they took her away, despite the fact that she had working papers, both of them, my little sister said to my mother, so we'll work. So we'll work hard. And her face-- 

Then one day I came home from, from work, and my father wasn't there. My first reaction was to commit suicide. I was left all alone. My sister-- and then it turned out that my father came back a few hours later. He was already in the train. He was already in the freight train-- and he-- going to Treblinka, when he somehow got to the window, despite the fact that the windows were-- those little windows, those little openings, were covered with barbed wire. 

He asked a person in the, in the car to throw the, this cord from one side of the train. And he jumped out from the other, from the opposite side, knowing that the guard, that the German guard, sitting on top of the train, will shoot at the first thing that comes out of this train. And sure enough, he did. He shot at, at the cord, thinking that this a person jumping, but he jumped from the other side. 

And he came back with a group of Jewish workers, He came into the ghetto from this work outside the ghetto. And like I said, there was, there was this desperation, this feeling of resignation that, that this is not going to end well, especially when we, when we were standing-- one day we were standing in front of the microphones of the loudspeakers, which the Germans installed in Warsaw after they have attacked Russia. 

And they were-- for three days, there were no news from the front. This gave such an uplift to the people at all, because usually they would give reports. They shot down so many planes, so many allied planes, sank so many ships. And there for three days, there was no news from the Russian front whatsoever. So everybody was elated. Said this is it. 

But three days later-- and when the people were gathering, they had those, those news bulletins every three or four hours. So exactly at the time, people would get in front of those loudspeakers to listen to the news, hoping maybe, maybe. And then after three days, they brought the news that they're almost in Moscow. You could hear the reaction of the people without words. Because this was the only hope we pinned on this whole situation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were in hiding, did you have an access to a radio or any ways of having news? 

SUBJECT: When we were-- yeah. We had the-- we were hidden in this villa. The lady had an access to underground newspaper. But unfortunately, this was a, a newspaper from a group, from a very anti-Semitic group. And they have-- in every issue, they didn't omit to write that after the war in the new Poland, there'll be no room for Jews. In those times, when Jews were slaughtered by the thousands daily, they have find it necessary to mention that after the war there will be no room for Jews in Poland. 

We also, we also had bulletins which the Polish government in exile from London was smuggling. And we have seen notices where-- with names and addresses-- where people were executed for murdering Jews. And they have always said, stated, that their sentence was carried out. So we knew a little. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Executed by whom? 

SUBJECT: By the-- there were two-- they have-- the Polish underground consisted of three groups. There was the Russian-- the Russian-inspired, the Communist underground, which was the-- they called themselves Armia Krajowa. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Armia Ludowa. 

SUBJECT: Armia Ludowa. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The People's Army. 

SUBJECT: Right. The People's Army. And there was the Armia Krajowa, which was from England. By the Sikorski, which was head of the Polish government in exile. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [Inaudible]. 

SUBJECT: And there was an anti, anti-Semitic group, ONR, Oboz Narodowega Zjednoczenia, ONZ, which was anti-Russian, anti-communist, but also anti-Jewish. And those were-- if, if, if a Jew would somehow get into the woods and try to join one of those partisan groups, the most dangerous, because they were all dangerous, they wouldn't take-- first thing is they wouldn't take anybody without a weapon. You're no good to us without a weapon. So without even-- so not, not be willing to bother with them, they would get rid of them somehow. 

So the-- this group was the most vicious of all the partisan groups. The Russian partisan groups, which the Russian army has formed, they have taken in a lot of people, especially from eastern Poland, because they were operating in the vicinity of Vilna, of Minsk. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the Armia Krajowa executed those-- 

SUBJECT: The Armia Krajowa would execute-- the Armia Krajowa was very helpful. There was-- there were people like me hidden with the Poles. Luckily, we had the remains of the store which we could get rid of in order to raise money to pay. But there were people who didn't have any sources. So the Polish government would drop money into the woods to the Polish army, the, the Armia Krajowa, the underground. And they would distribute the money to those people. 

I know of people who risked their lives to deliver the money to people in hiding. Because this was a double task. You were, you were, you were risking your own life by being Jewish and walking the streets, and then walking into a place where there are hidden Jews, which you never knew what, what might happen. But there were people who were risking their lives and deliver money to people who didn't have any means. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was a day like in hiding for you? 

SUBJECT: It was, it was very gray. There was-- there was a glimpse of hope that maybe, maybe by some miracle, we'll survive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you get up? What did you do after you got up? 

SUBJECT: What would I do? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were with your wife? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, the first thing we would-- as soon as the Germans came in, we went to look for my father. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no, a regular day-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were in hiding. 

SUBJECT: In hiding? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How the day look? 

SUBJECT: The day, the day looked-- we were eating whatever available. We were waiting for the news for the newspaper. This was a big event, every day, the newspaper, which was, of course, edited by the Germans. And there were all kinds of these rumors. 

The landlady would go out to shop. And then she would come back with the news that they have-- you know, she wasn't very sensitive. She would tell us something-- next street, they have discovered Jews. And they have taken them away. Or she would come back and tell and say that at the market, the price of onions went up tremendously, and that people speculate that the Jews buy out all the onions. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you sometimes laugh? Any laughter, jokes? 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were laughing? 

SUBJECT: We were laughing, yes. We were laughing when we-- we were trying to ask when this landlady would give us the New Testament to read. And I would read it. And then I would ask her a question to show her my interest. And I would ask her a question, and she couldn't answer. And she would-- she went off the next day. She would come in and bring me the right answer. And once when we went back, when we were alone, we're talking about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you read? Did you have some books? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they had books. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They lend them-- ? 

SUBJECT: This-- she was a teacher, by the way. She was retired. But she was a teacher. And she was, she was-- yes, we had, we had fun. I mean, we had a little laughter, too. She, she was, she was very tight with money. It's a matter of fact, when we gave her the money, we knew that the money is going to be worthless. So we, we couldn't tell her, don't take any money because this is worthless. And we knew that she's not spending it. 

So at the end, we told her-- in order to protect her, I said to her, you know, maybe maybe-- you know, we don't have the money here. We don't have the cash. We have to sell something in order to get the cash. How about if I'll give it to you instead of-- so we, we used to give her the watches which I had. We used to give her-- in lieu of money. 

She used to-- she used to have-- she used to hide-- she had a cupboard full of flour and other nutrients-- I can't recall what it was-- which she would use. It was standing there for years. And it spoiled. She had-- and we were laughing. She, she would, she would cook a tremendous pot of soup which would last for two weeks. And they would eat every day, heat it up, and eat it. And it was funny to us. 

She would-- all kinds of little amusing things. We, we found it out of the ordinary. But she was-- she was a, a decent person. I don't think she could do anything bad to another human being. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you feel when you saw the first Russian soldier? 

SUBJECT: When we saw the first Russian soldiers-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you knew that you could come out of the hiding place-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. The date-- the day, the day they arrived, the Germans came in. They have taken off the communication, the wires. And they came into the house, and they brought a-- two packages of coffee, ersatz coffee, mind you And they asked the landlady-- yes, they, they shined their shoes. We weren't hidden anymore, then. I was walking around. And so was her cousin, which came from the city to hide there, because they were taking the Poles into Germany, too. 

So we were all mingling, and nobody asked any questions. And the Germans brought this coffee. And they said, we'll be back at 2 o'clock, and have coffee ready for us. They never showed. This was the end. And then in the late in the afternoon, she, she came in rushing into the room and said, there are so many people on the road. There are so many people on the road. 

So we all looked out. And we saw thousands of people. It turned out it was the Russian army. They were walking barefoot. And those were the first, the first soldiers from Asiatic, cow mix, you know, those lemon eyes. 

And the first soldier who came to me, I grabbed him, and I started kissing him. He was all dirty and sweaty. And I started to kiss him, because I never saw a German-- a Russian soldier before. And he said to me, do you have vodka? And I said, I'm sorry, I didn't, I didn't have anything to offer him. 

And then more and more were coming. And as they were coming, and we knew that the Germans have left, the landlady, this decent person, came over and said, now when you're free, nothing can happen to you. Please leave. 

It turned out that she was-- she was embarrassed that her neighbors might find out that she has hidden Jews. So he told us to leave. So the first thing we did is we went east, because the front was right there. The Germans, the Germans were in Warsaw. And the Russians were shooting across the river. And there were always casualties. 

And, and we were waiting to hear something from my father, which, unfortunately, we never did. We never found out what happened to him. So we-- as soon as they liberated Poland, we went to Warsaw. We searched and searched and couldn't find any clues. We went to Lodz. And the, the Poles have not forgotten. And they started the pogroms in small towns with the few remaining Jews have returned were murdered, because they were afraid-- this time, they were afraid that they might claim their properties. So it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see across the river? 

SUBJECT: We were on the roof of the building. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: With-- that's the landlady--? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe it. 

SUBJECT: We were laying-- they was a flat roof. So we're laying on the roof. And we see the smoke, the planes, bombing the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was 1944? 

SUBJECT: '44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In Warsaw. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The-- 

SUBJECT: Uprising. Before the uprising, during the Jewish uprising, all I know is that the-- it's a little incoherent, but the, the older houses, older apartment buildings in Warsaw were connected. All the walls dividing the buildings had openings in them. So in other words, you could walk for miles without walking on the street, just by walking on the top floors or walking on the roofs because all the, all the houses, all the apartments, had openings. So you can go freely from one apartment building into the other. 

The-- when I used to go to see Balla, my wife, which was a couple of blocks, I never entered the street. I was just walking on the roofs or the top floors of the buildings. You could-- when you walked over the, the-- you would see the attics, which they used they have in, in Europe, where people used to hang their laundry to dry. Every apartment building has an attic, which had ropes across the length of it. And people were hanging the clothes to dry. 

So I would walk from one-- from one attic to the other. And all the attics had one thing in common. They were full of feathers. People in Europe were using feather beds. So the people were selling the sheets and the covers to get a bread or barter for bread. So all the, all the attics were full of feathers and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: They emptied-- 

SUBJECT: Emptied the feather beds. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because-- so that they could sell the land. 

SUBJECT: Sell the-- right. I was called-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Carry it out smaller. Fold it and-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --carry it from there. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Like people like me who bring it-- who bring it out and exchange it for food. I was told-- you always-- you could always see people just standing there looking out. I never asked any questions, but I think that those were people of the underground. 

I know that in my father's shop was talk of an underground. They were talking about buying weapons. I know that one-- since my-- they all knew that my father was a jeweler. A fellow came one day and showed my father two large diamonds and asked him to appraise them, which he did. Then a few days later, he came in and asked him if he would buy them. 

My father said yes, he would. So they, they agreed on a date which he will bring the diamonds in and my father would have the money. This day, somebody knocked at the door. And when we opened the door, two fellows came in with guns and took everything away with-- everything they could find. We started talking about it to people, especially to this fellow who was running the shop, the assistant manager. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was still in the ghetto in Warsaw? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, this was in the ghetto. And he said, well, those are-- this money goes for weapons. They were, they were very rough. They roughed up my sister. They even tore off a necklace she had on her. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So then, when you heard that this money goes for weapons, what did you think? 

SUBJECT: I didn't believe him. Knowing-- feeling the situation, we were so-- we were so isolated. There was not a single sign of anybody being interested in helping us. Knowing the attitude of the Poles, I thought it's, it's, it's just unbelievable. And how can you fight the German army? 

INTERVIEWER 2: And then when you found out-- when you heard about-- did he hear about the uprising? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. We heard about the uprising, uprising. It's a matter of fact, when we were-- there was-- there were shots fired in the ghetto before. And there were shots fired at two Germans. And we had the cult-- cultural life in ghetto, too, in spite of all this here, my little sister, who was only 10, 11 years old at the time, belonged to a group, which was-- they used to-- they used to gather in our, in our kitchen-- young people her age-- and learn Hebrew and, and conspiring. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean this was an underground school? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is left of you today? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is left of you today? 

SUBJECT: What-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did it influence your life now? 

SUBJECT: Well, those, those are-- I don't think this, this, this, this, this will stay with me for the rest of my life. This is, this is nothing you can, you can just forget about. This is, this is too emotional. I can't forget my mother or my, or my sister. I keep, I keep visualizing them in this train. And sometimes I have a feeling-- I get a feeling that maybe I, maybe I could have done something to save them. 

But at times-- there was-- they have created-- they have manipulated the people in such a way that you didn't, you didn't even have time to think. You were so preoccupied with, with, with trying to live. I have seen people who were swollen, swollen from hunger, people who-- they were, they were, they were looking like walking skeletons. And still they wanted to live. 

There was, there was-- people went crazy. I saw a lot of people walking or running on the streets and, and yelling and, and, and singing. This, this convinced me that, that the will to live is so strong in a person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said that you and your wife felt that you will live on a farm. 

SUBJECT: Mm hm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A garden-- do you have a garden? 

SUBJECT: We lived on a farm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did? 

SUBJECT: I did. We bought a chicken from him when we came here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: So we couldn't imagine how cruel a person, a human being, can be to another human being. I remember one, one time-- we didn't work on Sunday. And we had a neighbor, a bachelor, who lived across the way from our apartment. And he was-- he used to come over a lot, because he was alone all by himself. He to come to our-- across the way. And we were talking. 

And he suddenly-- the door was open. And suddenly two SS men came in. And I was in a, in pajamas and barefoot. I ran after them. I said, we didn't do anything. They didn't do anything to us. And I just-- I just went berserk, because those were the most famous killers in the ghetto. I thought, no, he can't get away from them without harm. 

This is impossible. They won't let me go just-- they saw Jews talking in a room, having a conversation, a, a civilized conversation, this is-- this is beyond their imagination. And they would-- they would do something to us. But somehow, they, they walked away. And the one said to the other, they've gone crazy. 

There was an incident where-- and we had a lot of fun with this fellow, too, with this-- he was a bachelor and he, he lost his whole family. And he used to-- when he used to come back from work at night, he would cook for himself. He would, he would make a soup. So I asked him, how do you make a soup? 

So he says, I go to the cupboard and see what I have. Whatever I have, I put it in a pot with water. And I peel potatoes. And I listen to the pot, he says. When there is a grachke, you know what a grachke is? No. A grachke when it's-- you know what a tumult is? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Halas? 

SUBJECT: Uh, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Noise? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Noise. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh. You can translate it, because it means noise. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. When it's, when it's, a, a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It starts mixing, but it-- 

SUBJECT: When he hears this, this sound, he knows it's time to put in the potatoes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I guess a way of living with humor. 

SUBJECT: It was a tragicomedy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think at, at this moment, we have to stop. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do I take this off? 

