INTERVIEWER: Do you want some tea with lemon? 

LILY LERNER: No thanks, darling. I have a glass of water. That's fine. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

LILY LERNER: Oh, OK. 

CREW: OK. Any time you want to start. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's begin. Why don't you tell us your name, and where you were born, and the year? 

LILY LERNER: My name is Lily Lerner. Lily Gluck Lerner. My maiden name is Gluck. I was born in a little village in Hungary-- Tolcsva. And I was born June 20, 1928. And I live in Asheville, North Carolina, at the present time. 

INTERVIEWER: How many, uh, siblings 1 were in the family? 

LILY LERNER: We were four children. Two boys and two girls. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother and father? 

LILY LERNER: And my mother and father. And I'm the second daughter. I have my sister, who is two years older than I am. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was her name? What is-- 

LILY LERNER: Margaret. Margaret Gluck. My brother was Ignatz. And I had a younger brother, [? Henler. ?] 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember about your early years in the small village in Hungary? What was life like there? 

LILY LERNER: Today, in America, and the thinking back what was life there, life was so much different. The value of life was entirely different. The sense of values were different. 

Our family was a very close-knit family. There were only 100 Jewish families living in the village among the 4,000 non-Jewish people. And, uh, life was always-- and anti-Semitism was on the surface. And we always knew that we were Jews. However, we lived with that, because we knew we were Jews. 

Life was beautiful, ever since I remember. I was three years old when I went to kindergarten. And, uh, I always loved to be sociable. And I was picked to play Mary in a Christmas play. And I had an uncle, he was a rabbi. And I knew there would be some conflict. And I certainly couldn't say yes, whether I'm going to take part of the play or not. So I had told him that I have to ask my mother. 

And my mother agreed that I should play, because there was not necessary to be different. And I did play. And there weren't many Jewish children in the kindergarten. 

It was nice, and I remember that things sometimes was very, very funny as today, because I remember the bread and butter that we had, of course, we didn't have much butter-- once a week we had brother. And we used to like to dunk the bread into the sand for some reason. 

And then to bite in it, it was a kick. I-- this was something that I remember. And life was beautiful, as I said. My mother and my father, they-- they're the close tie. The relationship between a-- a husband and a wife, I can only appreciate it even more today, since I am married. Because as a child, you know, you really don't know what a-- what a marriage is like. 

But the way they understood one another, the way they worked with one another, and the emphasis that was on the family closeness. And, uh, each and every child was so carefully taken care of, and so carefully thought, and so carefully given everything. Every little thing, of course, because there wasn't too many things-- material things-- that the children could have. 

And I remember when the khamisha-asar be'Shvat. When you have to have certain, and you make a-- a benef-- benediction on the certain fruit and things, that it was something out of the ordinary. And we had our-- our little bag of nuts-- peanuts, which is so common in this country. And we had a piece of chocolate. And then we had a piece of other fruit, or orange, or anything that-- what is not available. A date. 

So my father sat down, and he took his little hand pocket knife, and he cut it in four pieces so everybody should have a little piece. And one should not have more than the other. And we were waiting, so waiting, of khamisha-asar be'Shvat, because there was some delicacy that we could not partake throughout the year. And so on, and so forth. 

And the Passover, the Seder, it was so meaningful. And every Seder, when it rolls around, I always see my father. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe a Seder? One particular one? 

LILY LERNER: Well, I could describe the one that, uh-- my mother had a sister who was, um, widowed. And she came to visit us at that time. And we sat down to the Seder. And of course, the Seder table wasn't as elaborate as some of the Seders today. 

It was a table. And it was a white tablecloth on it. And we had little plates, and we had big plates. And, of course, we didn't have as much dishes. 

So we used the dishes for the fish, and turned it upside down. We ate the fish on the top. And then we turned it down, and that's where the soup was served, on the inside. 

And my aunt came. And she sat down, and she says, isn't this wonderful that I'm here? Even though that I am alone, she just had one daughter. She said, I remember when we had the Seder back home. And I haven't been to Seders lately, just this one, because I didn't have the mental capacity to even to come. 

And she was saying the Haggadah, and she was reading. And I remember my brother, my younger brother. And he was saying the Ma Nishtana. And then my older brother had a little drink of wine. And he was born the second Seder night, my older brother. He was born in 1921. 

And, um, my mother was busy to go and see whether the soup is ready, or the chremslachs are made. And my father was saying the prayers. And of course we would not dare to say anything, because reverence was something in-- that even-- we would never say anything to disturb the peace, or disturbed the rituals, or to disturb my father. Because he was so dear, and he was the father of the house. 

And even then, we knew that there's always one father. But it was just something that we cannot compare in today's life. And even-- it becomes more precious to me, because I see the way life is today. 

And then he was saying the-- the benedictions after the Seder. And the Birkat Ha'Mazon and the Haggadah, and all those words. Every time that we have the Seder, it just rings in my ears. And even the holidays are so hard for me to celebrate, because I always remember the close family tie that we sat together, and around the table. And for hours and hours, there was no way of rushing. 

We had nowhere to rush. We had nowhere to go. The family was it. 

It was the entertainment. It was the movies. It was the love. That was what it was, the family. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your father do for a living? 

LILY LERNER: Uh, we had a small vineyard. And we had also a small shoe shop. And, um, my grandfather used to sell, uh, caskets. But, uh, we had some. But my father was kind of winding up that business. 

It was a very eerie thing. I always hated to go through that part of the store. And I was glad when he decided to-- not to continue. So this is the business. 

I used to go in. I remember I was 12 years old, and I went into the store. And I told my mom-- Mother, I says, I almost made a deal. The pair of shoes was supposed to be 10 pengo. And I asked for it 18, and I was negotiating with a customer. We were up to 12 already. 

And my mother said, but Lily, this is not so. It's only 10 pengo. I says, but mother I made two extra pengo! She says, no, you shouldn't do that. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. That's a good story. Tell me about your school. You went to what kind of school in your small town? 

LILY LERNER: There were three schools. The Jewish school, we had, uh, the Jewish school. And it was subsidized by the government. And all the Jewish children went to that elementary school. We had six classes in one room. 

INTERVIEWER: Was that mandatory, that all went to that school? 

LILY LERNER: I really don't know whether it was mandatory. It was just natural that the Jewish children should go to the Jewish elementary school. Because there were schools for everyone. 

And we had six classes in one room. There was only one room, and there was only one teacher. And there was only one Hebrew teacher, and we had Hebrew classes twice a week. 

He was a very old man. His name was Lukacs He was a very disciplinarian. And of course it was most important, because even though in the sixth grade, there were no more than about 55 students. But, however, it-- it took concentration to be able to handle six classes. 

And, uh, I remember back to my first grade. I even remember the dress that I wore. I remember I had, um, a black apron. And I had, out of that same material, made something for my arms up to my elbows to prevent, you know, when you lean and you write in the notebook so ink shouldn't get on the dresses. Because clothes wasn't so available so easily. 

He was a very interesting teacher, thinking back today. All I know is that I strived for good grades all the time, and I accomplished it. And it was a-- a good sense of accomplishment. 

INTERVIEWER: After the sixth grade, what was the opportunity then for schooling? 

LILY LERNER: Well, I went, and I made an examination to the middle school, to the [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] And from the sixth, I went to the third [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] Maybe it's a high school. You could make, uh, an exam. Or you can go from the fourth elementary school into the first high school. And, of course, that wasn't in Tolcsva. That was in Sarospatak. 

And, um, I started by myself, because we couldn't afford a tutor. And I went for the exam myself. However, some of the children in the village had tutors. And they went every day and took classes and made them work. And my girlfriends had given me the work, and I did it myself. 

INTERVIEWER: So is-- is that the school you went to afterwards? 

LILY LERNER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. And what was that like? 

LILY LERNER: Well, that was only-- uh, as I said, I didn't go to school daily. I did it on my own, and you had to go the end of the school term, the year, and take the examination. So it was a twice trip, you know. Go to Sarospatak just twice, one for the written exam, and one for the oral. And that was that. And it was a Catholic school. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember about the friends in your hometown? Playmates? 

LILY LERNER: My, uh, close playmates, the children from my school, we had no problem. I had a very good time. And their cousins had come from the biggest cities in the summertime. We had a wonderful vacation. 

But throughout the year, their non-Jewish friends had some problems with them, because when we went to school, they were always waiting outside, and heckle us, and throwing rocks, and always saying Jewish-- Jewish kids, and dirty Jews. 

And I remember saying-- they had-- they had a little verse that it says, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] That means that, uh, the Jew is going to Vienna, and she has a piece of challah in her hand. And I ask for a piece, and she wouldn't give it to me, so I kicked her in the back. And that was that. So things like that. 

And in the wintertime, snowballs. They always threw snowballs after us. And they put pieces of rocks in the snow, inside. So it should hit, when it hits, a little bit harder. And-- but otherwise, it's, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you respond to this kind of, uh, behavior? 

LILY LERNER: The-- our response-- myself as a little girl, I had no stamina that I should be able to stand up against the boys, and especially the older boys. There was nothing to do but run. So the faster I could get out of their way, that was my aim. 

But life on a whole, it-- you couldn't see real anti-Semitism on the surface. [INAUDIBLE] children, and of course I didn't know, because I-- I didn't know what my father is encountering. He didn't speak about it. Perhaps he didn't speak about it to wanted to shield us, because we were small children. Or-- or he just didn't want to talk about it. 

But I'm sure there was, until-- until later on, when everything came to a head. You know, then-- then it was that it was brooding and boiling, and-- and that's why it could succeed to such extent. 

INTERVIEWER: Hmm, I see. 

LILY LERNER: But it was, um-- you know, on the Saturday, we weren't allowed to put the-- put on the fire on the woodstove. So we used to stand outside and ask some friends to come in and put a piece of wood on the stove. And then in return, we gave them a piece of challah or, you know, just a thank you. 

And after all, we-- we know everyone. Everyone knew one another, because it's a small-- was a small town. And our family was there for generation. And everyone knew one-- everybody. So there was no problem for people. Some people come in, some people refused to come, even then. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there a synagogue in your town? 

LILY LERNER: We had a beautiful synagogue. We had a beautiful synagogue. And the women were sitting upstairs, and the men were sitting downstairs. And we had one rabbi. 

And we had a shammash. And the shammash used to go around and collect some money for the poor. And the rabbi had a yeshiva. We had yeshiva boys from-- from joining towns to come, because he was-- he had a very good school. 

And we used to have those bochurim, you know, days for, uh, Shabbos. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me about that? 

LILY LERNER: Ah, I remember that as my sister and I-- you know, we were looking forward the day when the bochur will come because we were girls. And there weren't too many Jewish boys in town. And especially they were older. So it was something to look forward to. To get dressed up, comb our hair specially. 

And, uh, we-- my mother tried to have a better dinner as usual. Which, of course, consisted probably potato soup, and beans, and-- and noodles, and cheese, and such. Meat wasn't available during the week. We had a chicken for Saturday for the whole family. That was the meat. 

And for the high holidays or for Purim, then we had beef, or [INAUDIBLE] or a veal. We You know, it-- just the meals weren't so great like you can have here any day. As I said, the-- the quality of life was so different. And the appreciation for-- for the things that weren't available, perhaps, or for the things that-- that was-- that was made it maybe so special. 

And maybe that was-- that the remembrance is so special. Because, um, so many years have passed by, you see, and you just go back to those years all the time. And with-- with the-- with the thoughts that are so wonderful, and so meaningful. We try to inherit today, but it's just impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm, mm. Tell me about, uh, what happened before the war began. Just as things were beginning to change. What do you remember? 

LILY LERNER: Oh, it's not hard to remember. And, uh, I remember everything. My father came home-- we had a town crier in the village. Of course, there were no news media, no television, no radio. Some people had radios. 

There was a town crier. He came out with his drum. And he beat on the drum, and everyone went outside the door and listened to the news. And, um, he said the laws have been passed that the Jewish properties are going to be expropriated from the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: What year is this? 

LILY LERNER: That was in, uh, 1938 and '39. And my father just couldn't bear the thought. He-- he didn't believe it. He says, it can be. He says, I'm a Hungarian citizen. 

My father was a Hungarian citizen. My great grandfather was a Hungarian citizen. It's impossible that-- why me, or why anyone, especially us? And, uh-- but of course, the laws came out, and they take the vineyards away. And the little fields. We didn't have that much. 

However, it was taken away. It was-- you weren't allowed to have it. And he said that we have to move, because I-- I'm not able to-- to bear the thought that someone else should go and harvest my work that I've worked all my life. And, uh, no one stand up. No one stood up. No one said, hey, this is not right. Why take it away? 

And those were the people that my father has fought in the First World War. They were the friends. They were the friends that they reminisced about the war, that they were talking about stories. That they came into our house for a cup of fine, or a-- or a glass of whiskey, because we were whiskey and wine makers. And they knew that he has it. 

And, uh, in Europe, as you know, their language is-- is not as the English language. That when you say "you," that is how you communicate with you and the president. But there, a friend-- it was, um, first person. And everyone called my father on his first name. He never allowed anyone to call him or give him a title, because that's the way he was. 

And, uh, he said, all these people, no one-- and no one stood up and said that maybe this is wrong, and this shouldn't be done. But, however, that's how it was. 

INTERVIEWER: And so this town crier announced in '38 the change? 

LILY LERNER: Yeah, the town crier announced the change, and and we had to comply with the laws. 

And they took our-- our properties, and they distributed among quite a few other people. And they didn't know how to handle it. They didn't know what to do with it. When the harvest came, they were it all laying drunk. But whatever they harvested, they-- they didn't think of the tomorrow. 

All of a sudden, they strike it rich. It wasn't richness. However, that's what they thought. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: And did you remain in that town when the land was taken away? 

LILY LERNER: No, we went to live in Miskolc, in the city, because my father didn't want to live there. He said he can't take it, he has nothing to do there anymore, and he doesn't want to see the faces of these people. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about the preparation to move and the decision to leave. 

LILY LERNER: Well, the decision was that it was emotional. And, of course, my mother agreed with my father. And he thought it-- it's best for the family if we-- if we move. 

So we called a mover, and we packed our little beholdings, and the furniture, and put it on a buggy pulled with horses, and we moved into Miskolc. And, uh, we only had a small apartment-- a three-bedroom apartment. Which was very small, because in Tolcsva, we lived in my grandmother's house. And the rooms weren't too many, but they were large. 

And we had a large yard, and we had fruits and fruit trees. And we had chickens, and we had cows. It was a life that, uh, it couldn't compare with that life already. So that was a lot harder, starting then. But, uh, of course, it would have been OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your grandmother remain in her-- 

LILY LERNER: No, my grandmother died when I was a little-- a very young child. I only remember going to her to see her on Saturdays. But she died a long time ago. And my grandfather, I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Hmm. So you were living in what was her house, though? 

LILY LERNER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: I see. Do you remember saying goodbye to any playmates? Leaving? 

LILY LERNER: Of course I said goodbye to my playmates. And, uh, I told them that I'd be coming back, and I'd visit at times. I didn't know whether I would be able to come back, but I felt that I wanted to come back. And, uh, we left. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

LILY LERNER: That was in, um, '40. 1940. And living in Miskolc wasn't so easy itself. We had no income. So my father, um, bought some cows. And we had milk. And we all learned how to milk a cow. And we sold the milk. 

And my father did some business of buying some wine and selling. And that's how we made our ends meet we didn't have a-- a savings account, or we didn't have life insurance. This just wasn't something that it was done. 

INTERVIEWER: The war began in 1939 when Poland was invaded. How did this affect what was going on in Hungary, in this town that you were living in? 

LILY LERNER: It's very interesting. We knew that the war started. But, of course, we didn't know what's happening. We didn't know what was going on. 

We didn't know what takes place in Poland. We didn't know what was taking place in Czechoslovakia. We didn't know anything. We didn't know-- we only knew when this-- we knew that Hitler came to be the chancellor of Germany. 

The rise of Hitler, and the propagandas, and the-- the harsh speeches. And the-- it was frightening, but we didn't know. It may be unbelievable to you, but it was done in-- in such a way, when I think back that, uh, how-- how this was possible is just beyond my-- anything that I could imagine. 

INTERVIEWER: There was no conversation at home in-- in your new town when you moved? Nothing about your parents? Were they maybe aware of things and didn't share it with the children, do you think? 

LILY LERNER: My mother always read the newspapers, because the newspaper was the only-- only media of learning what's happening in the government. And, um, she always said that you weigh children as the war was going. She said, America will come and conquer Germany. They were conquer Hitler. America will come, and when America comes, it'll come like a-- a road grader. And it's going to smash everything in minutes. 

But the trouble was that America never came. And America doesn't move so fast as they have-- we thought that they will. And I remember-- I remember the pictures in the magazines, and Roosevelt became the President of the United States. And my mother said, I like this man because he smiles. I like a president who smiles. Perhaps he's compassionate. 

And, of course, she was wrong. But, uh, America never came. 

INTERVIEWER: Not for a while. 

LILY LERNER: Not for a while. Not for a long while. And not the way she thought they would. And, of course, uh, my younger brother was bar mitzvahed in Miskolc. And we went to that little shul. And on the way home, someone threw a rock in his head and made a big gash, and disappeared. 

And so it was a-- you know, special on a day of the bar mitzvah. And there was no big celebration, like, you know, bar mitvahs are blown out of proportion in this country and, uh, so commercialized. It was limited to the family. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have family living in that town? 

LILY LERNER: In Miskolc, we had an uncle-- my mother's brother-- lived in Miskolc, and his family. And we didn't have too much connection with them before. It's very interesting that in Europe, the families who were living in different parts of the country, even though it was a close distance, the-- the thing of visiting one another was something, uh, unheard of, because of transportation, or because of occupations. It just wasn't there. And even though the family was close, and we knew where the families are located. 

But, uh, when we-- when we went to jahrzeit and that's when the brothers got together. And the sisters. And that's-- that's when they met. Or if there was a happy occasion. A wedding in the family, we all went to the wedding. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember a wedding in particular? 

LILY LERNER: Yes, I do remember a particular wedding. Um, my cousin. This, uh-- and who was at the Seder. Her only daughter got married. 

And my mother has helped her, to bring her up and. She supported her all the way, all the time. And my mother has given a share to make the wedding. And I remember she baked strudel, and she made meals, you know, so the wedding should have a big feast. Should be more food. 

We got together in Tokaj, because my other aunt was in Tokaj. And my uncles-- my fathers' brothers were there. So it was easier for for us to go. And that was more centrally located. 

So it was a-- a very big wedding. And, uh, she was very happy. And she was beautiful. And the family got together, and-- and-- and we sang songs. And they sang Hungarian songs, and they sang Jewish songs. 

And it-- it was such an event that, uh, it-- it left, really, an indent on me. And I said to myself, my god, how beautiful would that be when I get married? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. 

LILY LERNER: It was beautiful when I got married, but the family wasn't there. And she, of course, was-- she had two children taken to Auschwitz. And she was burned, that cousin of mine. But she had the baby on her arm. And then we went home, and this life continued. 

And then my father, um, he went to Budapest. He went occasionally because the business required that he bought, um, um, you know, um, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] And he went to Budapest and sold it. And he had his old connection of-- of the shoe business in Budapest, so it gave him a lift to take a trip from time to time. 

And every time he came back, we-- he brought us chocolate. And the delicacy was a piece of chocolate and a piece of bread. Who would think of eating chocolate with a piece of bread today? And he had friends, really, that go back for a long time, even to childhood. And they were always-- they always kept in touch. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think of yourself in a patriotic way, living in Hungary? How did you think to yourself? As Hungarian? As Jewish? What-- as a child, what do you remember? 

LILY LERNER: I was, uh, patriotic to the sense that, uh, we had the-- the flags. And we sang patriotic songs, and we celebrated the-- the national holidays. There were about four or five a year. And I recited poems, which was very patriotic. And I didn't-- I had no second thoughts of delivering a good poem, because my mother came and-- and watched me when I was recited And, of course, I didn't want to disappoint her, or disappoint the community, who witness the-- the-- the-- you know, that the children are performing. 

And we brought flowers, and put it on the teacher's desk, and it was a-- it was a real holiday. We were very patriotic. As I said, my father fought in the First World War in defense of his country. We were Jews, and we were Hungarians. We never thought that, uh, this path, Judaism, or being Hungarian, that-- or being Jews will separate the two. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you begin to see that it-- it was a separation? Uh, knowing that the fields were taken away, that was one incident. Further down the line, how did you see the separation? 

LILY LERNER: Oh, well further down, the line, that-- these laws came one after another. Even more severe-- one was more severe than the other. The Jewish people were not allowed to have any domestic help. Of course, us, we didn't have. You know, that it-- it hurt so much when we moved to Miskolc, we didn't have help anymore. 

And, um, Jews were not allowed to be in public offices. And the Jewish stores were not allowed to sell leather-bottom shoes, because there were more profit in those items. And, uh, they were not allowed-- the Jewish boys and not allowed to be in the Hungarian army because they weren't counted as loyal citizens anymore. 

And they was not allowed to cut kosher meat. I remember I had a bicycle, and I had to go out of town because there was a shokhet, who-- who cut in meat. And for the Shabbos [INAUDIBLE], the chicken in. So, you know, no-- not legally. And anything that is just-- just-- just-- just-- you couldn't function as-- as normal people anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: What were your brothers doing during these days? 

LILY LERNER: My brother-- my father and my brother were taken into the labor camp. And then, for some reason-- 

INTERVIEWER: What camp? 

LILY LERNER: It's-- it's-- it's just a label. Instead of the army-- you see, my brother was of age. And he couldn't go into the army, because they didn't want Jewish boys in there anymore. They weren't fit for the army. 

So, uh, he was in the labor ar-- labor camp. And for some reason, they-- they let him go out of there. I don't know why. But I remember one day when they were doing Tolcsva, and they came to gather up the Jewish men. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that day? 

LILY LERNER: Yes. And, uh, my father said that-- let's-- took my brother. He says, let's go out to the fields and hide. Why should we go? 

And as they were going out, then, uh, one of his friends, he said, where are you running? I'm going to tell them that you're going away. 

INTERVIEWER: A Christian friend? 

LILY LERNER: A Christian friend. And, uh, and that time, they didn't take my father and my brother. I came the reason was just to-- I guess just to gather the Jewish men. And after they left the town, my father-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who left town? 

LILY LERNER: There were some-- some policemen came from another city. 

INTERVIEWER: To gather up the men? 

LILY LERNER: Yeah, to gather some Jewish men. That was the before, uh-- you know, my-- my memory is quite shady on that. I don't know what the reason was. Well, anyway, after that, he went into the labor camp when we were in Miskolc. But that time, they-- they were successful not to go with them. 

And, uh, then we moved, and they were in the labor camp. My, uh, my mother was always worried that my brother is not strong enough physically. He wouldn't be able to-- to uphold, you know, to the routines, because he-- he thought that he wasn't so strong. But, of course, a mother is always worried. 

He was OK. But for some reason, they discharged him. And then he was in a ghetto with us. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they come and take your father and brother to the labor camp? And who came? 

LILY LERNER: There-- there was a law that from what age up to what age has to go in and has to report. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the age? 

LILY LERNER: My brother was 21. And he had to go. And my father had to go. And then my father was discharged because he was older already. And, uh, my brother was discharged for some reason. And then he came into the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they tell you about the labor camp? 

LILY LERNER: Well, he told us about the labor camp, that they had to carry some rocks, and they had to dig. And it was really nothing to-- that anything that it was so beneficial for the country. It was just mainly to-- to make them work hard, and to make them realize that they are Jews, and they are in labor camp, and they are not fit for the Hungarian Army. 

They had to wear a yellow band on their left arm. That was, uh, signaling that they were Jewish boys. And they had, um, a hat that pertains something to the army. But that's all. And they wore their own clothes. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were they there? 

LILY LERNER: My brother was there a few weeks. Not too long. And, of course, when, um, you said how life was in Miskolc, this-- this life wasn't so relaxing anymore from the moment that they moved in. The unrest was there, and-- and-- and the air was just-- just not restful. You know, there was always something. We didn't know what it was, but there was always something. 

And I remember one time that the Polish-- they said there's a train coming through Hungary with some Polish Jews, and you should take food out for them. And we did. But we asked them whether they know anything, or why are they here, or where are they going. They didn't know anything. They were just-- they were-- they were taking-- they were going somewhere. 

We gave them food, and we didn't know anything. We didn't know what happened, and I don't know what happened. We had-- there was the BBC, the English radio. It never said a word. 

There were the-- the Zionist movement in-- in Budapest, and their leaders. And no one had-- had let out any news, or no one knew anything. It was just unbelievable that-- and at that stage of the game, it was so late. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you thinking about? 

LILY LERNER: Well, I'm-- I'm thinking about the-- the years before this the ghettoization begun, actually. I'm-- I'm referring to that. We didn't know what happened in Poland years ago. 1941. We didn't know anything about the Warsaw ghetto. We didn't know what's happening that they're taking people into the woods, and they're shooting them. And we didn't know not one thing. 

We knew that the Jewish boys are in the labor camps, and that was it. And the properties were taken away, and-- and we know that we don't have what we ever had, the little bit that we had. But we-- we made-- made ends meet, and we lived. 

So the air was-- the air was frightening. And it was fearful. But no one-- no one did anything. No one knew what to do. 

I remember one time, my father said that perhaps that I'd be [AUDIO OUT] family and-- and emigrate to Israel. And I know he was working at it, but he never succeeded. What was it? I don't know. 

Was it financial that he couldn't meet the finances? Or was it political? I-- I don't know. But I know I heard that they were talking about that they would like to move out to Israel to take the family. But it just wasn't possible. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know anyone that did emigrate, was able to leave? 

LILY LERNER: No, I didn't know personally. I-- I understand that some people emigrated, and some people fled to Switzerland and from Budapest. But as I said, in the smaller towns especially, it was-- it was just so far away. And it's amazing that the whole Hungary is so small in size that, uh, North Carolina is much larger, and how people didn't know. 

What What did you know in '42, then '43? How did you find out what was the plan in Germany for the Jews? 

LILY LERNER: Well, when Hitler's army came into Miskolc-- 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

LILY LERNER: 1943. March 19. They marched on the streets. Just a few tanks and a few soldiers. And, uh, I had a little dog. He ran out, and they killed him. And when we saw the tanks coming, we were just frozen. We didn't know what to say. We didn't know what to do. 

And then my father said, I think that you ought to go back to Tolcsva. Perhaps the people that know us, maybe they will help. And it would be better for us if we go out of here, and go back there. 

And we did go back. We did go back there, but it didn't help. We got on the train the following night. And, uh, my father remained in this Miskolc, because he said that he-- maybe wants to liquidate, you know, and get rid of the cows, and just do something that, um, that a man has to take care of. And he will follow, come after us. 

And, uh, we went back to Tolcsva. And my father came after us, and he stayed there. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you thinking, going back to your small village? 

LILY LERNER: I was thinking that what-- as my father said, that maybe they will help us after all. Maybe-- maybe they would protect us, because they know us. And, uh, maybe they love us. Maybe they have something in their heart that they-- I didn't know what was awaiting, or what the result will be as of the-- the German occupation. 

We knew everything that was taking place in Hungary, and that the government was fascist, and then everything was against Jews that was done against Jews. But we didn't know what-- what's going to happen, and actually the-- the German occupation will bring. 

So-- and to tell you the truth, I-- I didn't have this fear of-- of-- that they are going to take our life away. I never thought of that. I thought, all these things that is being done, it-- it's enough, you know? Like they say, [INAUDIBLE]. And I thought that's going to be the extent, because I was barely, you know, 16, 15. 

And I just-- and as a 16-year-old, I was a lot more innocent then a 16-year-old today. You know, we didn't know as many things as-- as the kids know today. We were sheltered, and-- and we had no knowledge. And there was no communication with the outside world. It was just unbelievable. 

And we went back to Tolcsva. And, uh, we stayed there, and there was Passover. And the day after Passover, the town crier came on the street again. And, uh, in two hours, every Jew in this village should get ready, because the policeman is coming to you, and he's going to take you away. And that was that. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do in those two hours? 

LILY LERNER: It was the day after Passover, and the Passover dishes, you know, were still on the table. And it was early in the morning. Our clothes were laying over the chairs. It wasn't put away. 

And, uh, my mother said, maybe we're going to work. You know, that this-- this-- this hope of a human being, this, uh, hope that-- that maybe something is not going to happen, you know? It's-- it's actually like you're putting your head into a-- a haystack, you know, and know that it's not-- that the lightning is not going to hit. 

But, of course, there was no conception, because, as I said, it was something that no one thought of, that-- that our life was threatened just because we were Jews. We were honorable people. We were honorable citizens. We were contributing to the community. We were contributing to the welfare of the country. You know? 

It's-- in-- in-- in general, the-- everybody, and-- we never thought of that. That this is going to come to this. And, of course, we didn't know what's happening in Europe. And this was inexcusable for somebody's part, because somebody should have let us know. 

So in two hours that we just gathered just, uh, very minimal things. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you take? 

LILY LERNER: I've taken a little prayer book with me. And I've taken, um, some pictures that I had. And a school book. And that was all. 

And they came, and we were standing outside in the yard. Then the-- they took our cows. They led it away right in front of my eyes. These are sort of friends, you know, that-- that they made believe that they were our friends. 

They went into our houses, and they grabbed our clothing that was on the table. They grabbed the dishes, and they ran. They were looting while we were standing there. It was an unbelievable sight. 

And I told my mother, I says, why is this happening? What did you do? She, of course, she didn't utter any words. There's nothing that she could say. There was no words of encouragement, or no words of-- of sadness, because she didn't know, you know. 

So when they-- they were coming to take us, had we known that what's happening-- I mean, there were strong boys among the Jewish people. Of course, we had nothing to fight with but our shoelaces. My father was in the-- in the war, and he had a-- a pistol that he brought home. And he buried the pistol. 

And I-- I remember, I was quite young then, and I said, why do you bury this? He says, I bury it because, God forbid, I don't want that an accident should happen. Some child could get a hold of it. He says, the Jewish people are not used to having weapons in the house. It's not allowed. And I'm going to bury it because we're never going to need that. 

And they came, and they-- they told us to go with them to the schoolyard. Even-- you know, we had hatchets, we had shovels. My father was a strong man. Had he known that-- that this is the-- the last of his journey, I mean, some people could have just-- just fight those two policemen, after all, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they Hungarian policemen? 

LILY LERNER: Of course. They were from-- from that same village, the Hungarian policemen. What they looked like to me then-- they never looked too good to me, but that uniform, the yellow uniform, and the feather in his-- in his hat, you know. Cold. And then the look on his face. 

And I remember I felt, but I didn't at the time, I was going to the post office one Sunday afternoon. And you had to go and pick up your mail. And it was a nice pastime to go to the post office, you know, to pick up the mail. 

And I saw men bending down and picking something up. He was the, um-- of the guys that, uh, had the-- you know, who put the horseshoe on the-- on the horses. And, uh, he-- he-- and the man from the off-- I remember the man from the bank, he was taking his deposit, you know, to the post office. 

And um, he-- he dropped the bag. And I saw that he-- he lost the bag. I didn't know what was in that bag. I assumed there was money, because he worked for the bank. And then the-- the housekeeper from the police-- all they had is housekeepers. I don't think any of them-- maybe one of them was married. 

And that this housekeeper cooked the food for all the policemen. Her name was [? Erjze. ?] I never forget her face or her look. And she bent down, and she bent down, and she picked up this bag of money and took it in-- you know, in the station where the police were. And the man from the bank was running back from the post office. And he asked me, Lily, did you-- did you see anybody pick up a bag? Because I lost my bag. And he was frantic. 

I said, yes, I certainly did. I said, [? Erjze ?] picked it up. And he was so thankful, you know. He said, you just saved my life. He was so thankful that I happened to see the bag, and I happened to see who picked it up. But, of course, he-- he forgot that, too. 

So when the police came, I just had the feeling that I ought to tell him. I says, he remembered the day when I remembered-- when I reminded [? Friedrich ?] to pick up his money bag, and-- and [? Erjze ?] picked it up, and she would have never told him that she did, you know. Most of those police were from the criminals, you know. They-- they came out-- they were very brutal people, that type of police. 

And nobody-- but I didn't say anything. I didn't know what is going to happen. I didn't know what-- but I had that in my mind. And they took us to the schoolyard. And I saw the friends were standing outside and applauding. And laughing. And at the schoolyard, they came with the buggies. And they made us get in the buggies and the wagons. 

And there was one man sitting, and there were about 15 people in each buggy. And then the procession started to take us to Satoraljaujhely. Satoraljaujhely was the capitol of Zemplen. And this acted as a magnet for the 52 villages around, you know, to bring the Jewish people into the ghetto. 

And there, they told us that they're taking us to Satoraljaujhely. I didn't know what, or ghetto-- and no one was-- dared to say a word, you know. We-- we stood there like, you know, just frightened sheeps. 

And then, you know, we were ready by then reduced to, you know, to almost to zero, because everything was taken away, and everything was-- the emphasis was everything against Jews. So we just were speechless. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had no idea what you were going to? 

LILY LERNER: We had no idea. We had no idea what's going to happen, or where are we going, or what is-- what is going to befallen us. 

And as-- thinking back, you know, sitting here now, I mean, that one man that was leading the buggy, certainly could have done away with him, you know, and run away in the hills. Perhaps some-- some more people could have been saved or survived. Not to mention the fact that if-- if the people who know us certainly would help to-- to send us away and not to help us to survive. Because that's how they acted. 

But something could have been done even if everyone knew that it-- there are-- they're going to be killed, or this is the end. Or-- or-- or they're going to be gassed and exterminated, and-- and being mass murdered. 

So that one man and the few buggies, they drove us into Satoraljaujhely, to that one house. There were about 20 families in that one house. And one family was given a straw sack. And our whole family was sleeping on that sack. And there was one kitchen in that house. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people were you altogether? 

LILY LERNER: Oh, about 20 families. And, uh, the means of-- of-- of keeping clean was not so good. That was one, you know, sort of bathroom. It wasn't a modern bathroom. And there was a well, and there was water. So you can-- you had to stand in line to get some water to get washed. 

INTERVIEWER: When you arrived there, what did you see? 

LILY LERNER: When we arrived there, we saw a bunch of people. You know, there were people from all over in these 52 villages boarding already. And, uh, and the saw the-- the fence around the neighborhood. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Barbed wire fence? 

LILY LERNER: Barbed wire fence around the neighborhood. And, uh, these kind of police walking around-- the csendor They call them csendor. And, uh, guarding the people. And-- and, uh, I said, what is this? 

You know, they said, it's a ghetto. I says, ghetto for what? They says, the ghetto for you. And-- and that was that. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother say, or your father? Do you recall how they responded? 

LILY LERNER: My mother always said that God will help, and something will happen. But we don't know. That's what she said. She always said, we don't know, because no one knew. 

She was such a righteous person. And, uh, it really wasn't right, that a person like her and the others-- but to me, she was the most. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your first day like in that ghetto? 

LILY LERNER: The first days was, uh, getting situated. And it didn't take too much, because we only had one straw sack to get situated on. And um, we were told that, uh, who and what time could, uh-- you know, if you have anything to cook, to take your turns to cook some meals. 

And, um, we were in the ghetto from-- from that day on until day after Shavu'ot. And, uh, we started to function a ghetto life. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what was that like? 

LILY LERNER: The ghetto life was like that, um-- there were doctors in the ghetto. You know, everyone was in a ghetto. And I volunteered to be a help for the doctor, to go out on and watch the sanitation in the ghetto, and check the hairs of the children. And everyone-- you know, the small children that had long hair, that we should cut their hair so they shouldn't-- you know, lice get into their hair. Because keeping clean was-- was quite hard. 

And I remember I-- the doctor has given me white kerchief, so I should be, you know, identified as a helper. So I could go all-- in every part of the ghetto. So we went in the mornings, and we checked for lice, and be checked for cleanliness. And we begged the people to try to keep clean, because it's most important. 

And the-- the rest of my family remained in the ghetto. And then it was about early afternoon when I returned. And I remember my brother always-- there was a yard, and he said, you, you don't have a Jewish face. I should go and run away. I should go out of the ghetto. I shouldn't stay there. 

And I said, you know, like many others, that whatever is going to happen to my family will happen to me. We were thinking if something is going to happen, but we didn't know what. And my sister's tonsil was removed in a ghetto on a chair without any anesthesia two days prior to going to Auschwitz. 

And, uh, I went home one time to Tolcsva-- home. I'm calling it home. And, uh, try to get some flower. And I remember I had some-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you do that trip? 

LILY LERNER: I-- I had, um, and identification paper from-- from our, uh, domestic help. And I didn't look Jewish. That's what they said. 

So I got on the train, and I went to Tolcsva. And I had some money, and I purchased some flowers. No one asked me, what is the purpose. No one asked me, how come I-- I have to come back here to buy flowers. No one asked me where my family was. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they treat you? 

LILY LERNER: Just-- just different, you know, like I was a stranger. Total stranger. So I got the flowers. I was glad. I don't know why I went there. I could have gone out just in the village, but I guess I felt that that's where I have to go. 

And I brought the flowers, and I remember my mother baked a cake for Shavu'ot. And she said, uh, she knew I-- I loved stuffed cabbage. And there's-- there's no way there's no cabbage in the ghetto. She went out in a garden and-- and got some leaves. And she said, I'm going to make some cabbage for you in these leaves. 

And I remember we had a tomato soup for Shavu'ot. And-- and there was leaves, stuffed-- it wasn't meat. It was rice and something she used. But it was delicious, and that was our last meal. Last holiday meal. 

And I've went out from the ghetto occasionally. And, of course, I had my yellow star. And I had a pocketbook, and I put it over my yellow star, and I just walked by. I didn't take the star off. I felt if they put it on me, let it be there. 

And the csendor used to say, where do you think you're going? I said, I'm going because I have to go get something. He says, what do you think? I know you're Jewish. I know you have a star. Take-- move your pocketbook away. You can't go anywhere. 

I say, I have no star, and I'm going. I didn't say whether I was Jewish or I wasn't, and I just walked by. So it just goes to show you, you know if someone wanted, really, you know, if we-- if we would have known our fate, and we could have gone out of the ghetto. Several people. And we could have been-- saved ourselves, had we known. I went out of the ghetto, and I came back in the ghetto several occasions. 

But I had no intention to stay out of the ghetto, because my mother and father and my brother and sister were there. And I-- no one-- no one else meant anything to me. Not the country, not to scenery, not the village, not the town. Had no meanings. 

INTERVIEWER: Where there are people who did leave the ghetto? 

CREW: We're going to do a tape change now. 

INTERVIEWER: Sure. 

CREW: OK. 