SUBJECT: You could see Dan Allison. Just the other day, I was telling to my other nephew-- he's here from Australia-- some of the stories. 

INTERVIEWER: Dirk, tell us when you're rolling. 

CREW: We're rolling now. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Mrs. Fried, can you tell me your first name and where you were born approximately? The date-- where and when you were born. 

SUBJECT: I was born in Czechoslovakia. It is near by Hungarian border. It's not far away. And I born on December 3. And I won't tell you the year. 

INTERVIEWER: What was life like where you were born? In the city and your family. 

SUBJECT: It wasn't a city, it was a little town. And how I remember it was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Don't touch the microphone, please. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I'm getting very emotional. 

INTERVIEWER: That's all right. You get as emotional as you please. 

SUBJECT: I think it was a very happy life. And I really didn't want to cry. 

INTERVIEWER: Talk to me about your father. Do you remember your father? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I do remember him. But I don't remember him like a child, when I was a child. I just remember him when I was adult already. And when we went away to-- to the ghetto. And then we went to concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's start back a little more. You had a nice life and a nice family. How old-- what-- 

SUBJECT: We were 11 children. 

INTERVIEWER: 11? 

SUBJECT: We were a very big family. My mother comes-- or my mother came from a very wealthy family. My father was here in United States then, like a single man. He was in Atlanta, Georgia. And he came back because his parents were sick. And then he remained and he met my mother. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did he do for a living? 

SUBJECT: And then came the war, when he married my mother. They had a store. We had a grocery store. And, like, everything-- they carry everything, from clothes, from grocery, from everything. And I remember he had maids and we had private tutors, teachers. This, I remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there many other Jewish people living near you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Lot of it. I don't know how many families, but I'm sure maybe 50 families. Maybe not 50, maybe 35 or somewhere like that. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- uh-- were you the youngest, the oldest, the middle? 

SUBJECT: No, I was probably the middle. 

[CHUCKLES] 

INTERVIEWER: The middle child. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did you first notice? Uh-- what-- what comes to you in terms of your recognition that the world was changing, that your-- your situation was not the same? 

SUBJECT: So growing up, when I was growing up already that the older sisters were at the time [? they went ?] we had family in the city. My mother comes from a big family too. And that-- her sisters were married in some of the cities. And the older daughters-- older-- my sisters and my older brother, they went to school to-- better schools, to high school. But we never came the time. 

[CHUCKLES] 

And I remember the hard life of the-- of the-- I don't know what year. But it was very hard. First of all, we were many children and the situation was getting bad. The most-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know the situation was getting bad? 

SUBJECT: I mean-- oh, I know-- I remember back when all of the-- the situation was so bad. I don't know how old I was. Probably they didn't have a lot to pay the taxes or something, and the tax man came. And-- and, you know, they were scaring-- scaring the parents. They're going to take away everything or something like that. But the most I really remember-- I don't even remember I was ever a child. I don't know. 

The most I remember, 1938 when Germany came in. And we-- we belonged to Czechoslovakia, and Germany divided Czechoslovakia. They gave a part to Hungary. And we-- by us was the border then, and we were then-- uh-- Hungarian. And-- and I remember that when they came in and they took every-- everything. Everything. What-- 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean, they took everything? 

SUBJECT: Everything. They came in, those-- those young-- uh-- they called them the [NON-ENGLISH]. They-- they-- they-- uh-- but they-- suddenly I can't find the word. Young boys, but they were-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Soldiers, but they-- uh-- were-- uh-- going by themselves to the army. And they-- they-- they did everything. They could have killed, and they could have-- uh-- spanked, they could have-- uh-- steal, and they could have do anything. And they took every-- everything away from the store. 

INTERVIEWER: They came to the store? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they took everything apart, and they took everything. And I remember when the-- about four or five Germans came in and then they-- uh-- uh-- took away my father. For the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you there at the time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they took away my father, and they took him to Satoraljaujhely. This was Hungary. The Satoraljaujhely. It's a city. 

INTERVIEWER: Um-hm. 

SUBJECT: And the-- but it's not right away. They didn't take him right away. It was a few months later when they took him in, and they-- a few Jews they took away and they-- uh-- you know, the most prominent Jews they took away. And they were trying to get them to talk and to-- to-- uh-- for money, probably, they were pressing them or for something. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were home with your mother? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we were all of us home. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing at that time? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- but between-- I don't even know which year we got to be Hungarian. In '38, I think, we got to be Hungarian. And it was a concentration camp by us. Uh-- in the-- uh-- it's a castle. Sometime ago it was a baron lived there. It's about two miles from us in a beautiful, beautiful mountain. It was a-- 

INTERVIEWER: They made it into a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: And they made a concentration camp. And a lot, I don't know how many thousands of Jews they came-- they were concentrate-- they were bringing their-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: --over-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. We saw the camp because we were very much involved. Because many of them, they came down-- uh-- to the-- to us. I mean, to-- to the town, to-- uh-- to the post office, and with the-- uh-- police. They had special police there. And they allowed them-- some of the police, they still had feeling and they still were good. And they came in, and we gave them the last bread or the last-- the last anything we cooked up, parts of whatever we had. And they ate everything with us. Even my youngest sister and brother, but they are not alive. Even they knew what I did even on the street. They said in and they knew what I did. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you left-- how did you leave your home? 

SUBJECT: We didn't left the home yet. Didn't. [INAUDIBLE] under the Hungarian-- uh-- government, and we didn't left. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? What was-- 

SUBJECT: But they took away everything from us, and we all of us knew we have to make a living. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they take it away? 

SUBJECT: They-- they took apart. They took-- just they came in, they took. You didn't have no power. You didn't have no rights. You didn't have no nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they walk into your house? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me-- 

SUBJECT: Matter of fact, it was there a Spiegel. Their son is in Israel. A family, and they-- uh-- they went, the German-- the German went there. And-- uh-- they said, you have to move out because we moved in. They moved in. And they said, where shall I go? Then they send them to us. 

INTERVIEWER: And they moved in with you? 

SUBJECT: They moved in with us. That's all. Listen, they came there. I remember like today, they came down with their wagon and the cows were in the back and the cows pulled them. The neighbor brought them down with their little clothes and-- 

INTERVIEWER: And they moved into your house? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And then we lived together. 

INTERVIEWER: And how did you make a living? How did you-- 

SUBJECT: We made the living-- uh-- we-- uh-- I was knitting. You know, a lot of peasant people, and we have connection with the peasants. And-- uh-- I was knitting them, and my sister was sewing. And this way we made the living. 

INTERVIEWER: You sold what you made? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And your father wasn't there anymore? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- my father still was with us, but they took him away. The last-- in '44, before Passover, by the Monday, took him everything we have. 

INTERVIEWER: So-- 

SUBJECT: Or somewhere. I-- I-- I think he went with them, or his father-- uh-- that Fleminger or something. Because he was somewhere not far away from us. 

INTERVIEWER: But for four years you lived with this-- 

SUBJECT: With the Hungarian. Oh, oh, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER: For four years you lived with the Spiegel family in your house? 

SUBJECT: They wasn't exactly four years with us. I don't know, really. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do during all that time? Do you remember what you did every day? 

SUBJECT: Every day it was different. Oh, we had a very hard life. We had-- I was one of the bigger and we were-- oh, we were doing smuggling. We had to live. We had to live with something. Then from Czechoslovakia you couldn't get some coffee and black pepper. And we were smuggling and bringing to Hungary. And we wasn't afraid. What could have happened to us? We had to live from something. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother would send you someplace to go and get something-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --that you could eat? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. I mean, we-- we girls did that. Most of them I did it. I was very willing. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go at night? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't you afraid? 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. Probably today I would be afraid. That time I was young. I wasn't afraid. You-- you had-- and anyway you got, like, a piece of food, you didn't even care. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- uh-- go to school at all? 

SUBJECT: We went. Sure, we went to-- uh-- to-- uh-- to 12th grade, I mean, to high school. 12th-- you know. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to high school through all this time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Oh, no, no, it was-- uh-- how was it-- I just finished when the Hungarian came in. I had Slavish school. I didn't have no Hungarian school. I had Slavish schools. 

INTERVIEWER: So you didn't have to learn Hungarian? 

SUBJECT: But we spoke at home Hungarian with the parents. We spoke at them. That's why we-- we still speak Hungarian. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened in 1944? 

SUBJECT: And then they took us to-- uh-- then they took us-- it was a very scary life. It was-- doesn't-- didn't worth nothing, our life. You didn't have no future. It didn't have no-- uh-- no meaning. It didn't have no nothing. Any minute they could have just take us and-- and then concentrate-- to put in a concentration camp or-- or-- or to get to anywhere. We-- we really just existed. It's-- uh-- it's been worth nothing. 

And then in '44, when they were taking-- but we-- we maybe heard that they take-- we heard that the Jews-- uh-- in-- uh-- Poland, a lot of them running away from Poland. Somehow you didn't want to believe that it could happen. We were so naive. And-- uh-- and then in '44, it was-- the situation was-- you could feel that it was very bad. And that-- uh-- concentration camp over there on the-- in that castle that it was getting empty. They were the first they took away from there, the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know that it was getting empty? Did you see them leave? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. They had to pass by us. Oh, yes. By truck. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you see them? What did they look like when they passed by? 

SUBJECT: Oh, they were by truck. They were taking them by-- uh-- you know, by truck. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see the people in the truck? 

SUBJECT: Yes, sure. Sure. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they look like? 

SUBJECT: They were-- they didn't know where they were going. Like, we didn't know where they were going. They were their-- they were wearing their-- uh-- clothes. They didn't wear special clothes there. They were wearing civilian clothes. And-- uh-- we had a lot of friends there all that day. 

And-- uh-- and in '44 before Pass-- uh-- before Passover, or our father for Passover wasn't home for '44. 

INTERVIEWER: So you had Passover without your father. 

SUBJECT: Yes. We didn't have-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that Passover? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I remember that Passover. We-- we didn't even have anymore Passover. We still made the Passover. My mother still was very religious. But we didn't even bother. It was already no life. And the-- and the Passover finished. The next morning, they took us away to the concentration-- to ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: What ghetto? 

SUBJECT: To Satoraljaujhely. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to you there? 

SUBJECT: And over there they were concentrating all the Jews from all over the-- the-- the section over there. They were concentrating the Jews there. And there we were, I think, about a month or maybe even more. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did you do while you were there? What-- 

SUBJECT: Nothing. You couldn't do nothing. You were closed in and you were existing. That's all. You didn't do nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like-- uh-- when you got up in the morning? 

SUBJECT: I-- I-- I personally went to the hospital. And I was trying to help in the hospital for the sick, for the thing. And we saw that the-- the people are leaving. And we-- we were, I think, by the-- the second transport or the third transport, I don't even know. And-- uh-- I was in the hospital. Then I was in the hospital. I personally went into the hospital to help. 

INTERVIEWER: To work. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: To help. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And who was in the hospital? What kind of people? What kind of-- 

SUBJECT: Every kind what you could imagine. Everything. Cripples. Old. Sick. Everything on the world was there. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother working in the hospital? 

SUBJECT: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you-- did you stay in the same place with your parents? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: With your mother-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --and your sister and brother? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were there for a month, and then what happened? 

SUBJECT: I don't know we were there a month or something more. And then they put us to those-- uh-- wagons. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of wagons? 

SUBJECT: You know, like you-- uh-- put the animals or you-- uh-- what you-- deliver sending. You know, the closed wagons. And they took us-- uh-- to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you got to Auschwitz? You went by wagon to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, you know, on the train. On the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, you went on the train. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In those closed-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, in the closed boxcars. 

SUBJECT: Boxes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in the boxcars? 

SUBJECT: I don't even remember how long even. Two days or three days or somewhere like that? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you felt? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- no. 

INTERVIEWER: Not what you thought, but what did you feel? Were you uncomfortable? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we were on each other there. We were on-- You couldn't breathe. You couldn't stay-- stand-- stand. Or you don't sit. You were just jammed in like-- uh-- wood or something. And some people died there, and some people fainted there. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was there anybody near you that fainted or died? Did you see any of them? 

SUBJECT: Not exactly by me, but further down a little bit. Not my family because we were staying in one bunch. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you-- when you had to relieve yourself or something? 

SUBJECT: It was there a pail, I think. It was there a pail. It was-- the older-- it was-- uh-- unbelievable. And we got there to Auschwitz. I think it was very early in the morning. Very early in the morning we got there. And they opened the wagons. And I remember I had the blue coat. And we put on how may dresses we could because we thought they were going to leave us everything. 

And I put the-- uh-- photography from the family-- pictures-- I put into my pockets and the coat on. And right away all those SS came and they were helping the Jews with their-- what they were helping with the different SS. But they were working, the Polish Jews and things. And right away the old went on one place right away with our-- with my sister-- little sister and brothers. With my mother we couldn't even say goodbye. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't you very hot wearing all those clothes in that wagon? 

SUBJECT: Maybe I just put it on before we get off or somehow. Because I-- I-- I know it was very-- I was dressed up. And five sisters, we was five sisters together. And right away they put us in the line, the five sisters. And then came an SS and he was asking me if I-- in German if I am pregnant, because I was fat all of my life. I'm fat now, and I was in the concentration camp I was fat. 

And-- uh-- and could you imagine, I put on all those clothes and everything. And I didn't understand. And he was a Hungarian one, a Hungarian SS. And I was looking at him. And he knew he didn't-- I didn't understand. Then he told me in Hungarian, [HUNGARIAN] like for an animal, you know. When-- uh-- to an animal, they say it's [HUNGARIAN]. 

And I was shocked. And I said, no, you know. And naturally I said the truth, you know. At that time for a girl to get pregnant, could you imagine that? 

And then they pushed us five sisters together. And it was very early in the morning. And we were walking when-- then they ordered the-- the transport bus picked and everything. Then we were walking, and we were walking. There was a very bad-- very big-- uh-- fire. And we didn't even feel nothing anymore. You didn't have no feeling. You didn't even care. 

And I was telling to my sister in Hungarian, I said, they're taking us to that fire, you know. And next to me was the SS, but was walking next-- by-- by us, you know, on all sides they were. And he was a Hungarian. And then he says to me in Hungarian, he says to me, don't be scared. You're not going to that fire. You're going on a good place. You're going to work. I just got, you know-- uh-- looking at him. He answered us and-- because it was unbelievable SS should talk to you or something. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: No. I never-- I-- who knows if I ever saw him before? But who did-- I didn't even look at him. Who cared? Who cared? And-- uh-- then he said, don't be afraid. You're not going to that fire. Then I didn't say nothing. And eventually they took us to that C Lager, to Auschwitz. The-- the camps, it was divided. Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER: That's OK. What's-- what are you thinking about? 

SUBJECT: No. And they took us to the C Lager, and-- uh-- to the C camp. And every camp was-- uh-- A, B, C. And they took us to the C. And maybe it's me I-- I ride the wagon. Busy, you know, they were right away asking for help. Who could help us? Help. And I was between them, you know, I was everywhere helping. And-- uh-- then all the girls were closed in. And I couldn't go out because I was like a helper. From that-- from the barrack, from that-- uh-- when they took us there. 

And the other side, like here, on the other side, there were the-- the Lager, the barracks too, and men were there, men. And I went in to look for my brother solely and too for my father. But I didn't find them. And then maybe next day or two days later they took them away, all the men. Just girls were-- just girls. And we were in that Lager. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people in the Lager, and can you describe the Lager? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- uh-- we were in the C camp. And in the C camp it was-- I don't know how many barracks. I-- I don't even know. You know, it's big barracks. Probably you saw them on that day. And I don't know how many-- 

INTERVIEWER: How many people slept in the same place where you slept? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we were-- we were sleeping on bunk bed. About 14, 15, 12. Not-- not less than 12, never. 

INTERVIEWER: In one bed? 

SUBJECT: It's-- I mean, it was a big bed. It was-- it was like a 9 by 12. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of a place was it? Was it a house or-- 

SUBJECT: It was a-- it-- it was like a-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Like a-- 

SUBJECT: Like for the animal you build. 

INTERVIEWER: Like a barn? 

SUBJECT: Like a barn, you know. And on two sides were the beds. And they were-- uh-- up and down, those beds. Even three, three, even three beds. Some beds just two, three. And on each floor was a floor and nothing on-- on it. It was no bedding or something, had nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Just-- just a hard-- uh-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, but before-- 

INTERVIEWER: Just boards? 

SUBJECT: --oh, but before we get to that C camp, they took us I don't know where, and they cut us. They cut our hair. 

INTERVIEWER: They cut your hair off? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. You see, it's-- it's-- slowly comes back, everything. They cut our hair. And they took everything everybody saved. 

INTERVIEWER: They took all your clothes. 

SUBJECT: All the clothes, everything. And we were standing there naked. And all those little German boys. They were laughing at us. And they were be-- beating us, you know, with-- such a beat-- you know, how you call that, what-- 

INTERVIEWER: Beating. 

SUBJECT: Beating. And we girls were young. It was shame. It was a terrible feeling. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they give you your clothes back? 

SUBJECT: No. Never. Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they give you to wear? 

SUBJECT: Then they took us everything away, everything. I think even the eyeglasses they took. Everything. Everything. Nothing. Even the hair they took. Everything. 

And then they pick some rags. Just rag. Some people got so long. Short people get the long dress. Just a dress. No panties, no something. Just a dress. Or-- or-- or tall people couldn't get a dress like this. And I think-- and wooden shoes. Big wooden shoes. Big, very big wooden shoes. And-- uh-- and this was it. This what they gave us. 

And then we were walking down to the C Lager. And we saw that fire. And then we find out the children were burned. They couldn't burn the children. The children, throwing just in the-- but I did not see to throw in the children. But the big fire was there, and this what they say-- were saying. 

INTERVIEWER: So what did you do? You were in the C Lager, Lager number C. And you got-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --busy. 

SUBJECT: And then we got there, and I got busy. And then I got to be a night watcher, a night watcher. Because if you had the-- some kind of position, you could have a little more food and opportunity to get some food. Then I was working all the time. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do, working? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- I was a night watcher, a night watcher. When everybody was asleep, I had to watch that barrack. Nobody should make outside, because the girls from the food and what they get and what they didn't get. They didn't went to the toilet. They went to make there. Then if I didn't send them away, then I had to clean after them. But it was terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: Did many people alleviate themselves outside the Lager? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were responsible-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --to clean it up-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --so you didn't want them to do it. Where did you send them? 

SUBJECT: To the toilet. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was that? 

SUBJECT: They were a barrack. It was a special barrack for the toilets, you know. With toilet-- with holes, with holes, you know. It wasn't toilet. Just with holes. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were many of the women sick and they would go-- 

SUBJECT: Many. 

INTERVIEWER: --to the latrine all-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Yes. Many. Many. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they allowed to get up and go when they wanted to? 

SUBJECT: Probably. I really don't even know. I don't even remember. Certain things I don't even remember anymore. But the nights were just terrible. All that screaming from everywhere. 

INTERVIEWER: Screaming? Why? 

SUBJECT: It was like ooh! Like this, like a big, like thousands of people at once screaming, you know. And you could see from far away the-- from Treblinka the-- the fire, the chimney. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew it was Treblinka? 

SUBJECT: Then we knew what, yes. The nights were terrible. The nights was just terrible. And I was doing that because the five sisters. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the five sisters stay together? 

SUBJECT: One they took us-- took away from us. One, one sister. She got sick, and they took her away. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did they take her? 

SUBJECT: This is-- uh-- we-- sis-- my other sister and I, they took her to another Lager. With her-- she had, like, a blanket. With that blanket, and they said she has scarlet fever. Uh-- they-- they-- they find-- they find a few. But it was already that. Many people had scar-- scarlet fever. 

And-- and we took her over. She didn't want that we should kiss her. She-- she didn't want that we should kiss her. She never came back. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- uh-- what did you do during the day? Because if you were up all night, what did you do during the day? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we-- early in the morning, I don't know what time we had to stay in [HUNGARIAN]. Had to stay in line for hours till they came to count you. And then it was some kind of breakfast and black coffee or what. I don't even remember what they gave us. Some kind of water. I don't know what was that. 

And the morning went away with thas-- with this. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to sleep in the morning? Is that when you were allowed to sleep, in the morning? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- probably. Probably I was allowed something at some-- at some time in afternoon. Between I had to stay in the-- in the line. It was no such a thing. I had to stay in the line. 

INTERVIEWER: Because they were counting. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Because they were counting. You could have stayed there hours. And after. And plus, nothing else to do there. After you could sleep or-- or sit and to think. Then you saw every kind, you find every kind of people. You talk. And you could-- you could see that dividing ring. 

And you could-- you saw when a girl recognized the other. It was divided. One-- one Lager, one-- uh-- block. What should I-- one Lager was divided with electric-- uh-- from the other one. And you rec-- one girl recognized another, and they run to the wire and she died there. Right away she got burned. She got killed. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this girl run-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --and-- and touch the wire? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you think that you and your sisters, the other three sisters, were able to survive? Why were you able to survive? 

SUBJECT: Because I made sure they eat. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you make sure? 

SUBJECT: Ah, you-- you-- you could find every kinds of tricks. [CHUCKLES] I remember. I remember-- uh-- I-- I really don't know from where I had this. But then I was telling things what I did in the Lager. And every Lager had a Lageralteste, you know, the head of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: And then under her. And they knew me right away. From the day when I came in, they knew me. And they allowed me, or the-- uh-- uh-- even-- uh-- to pre-- uh-- get some food. I mean, how shall I tell you? It's-- uh-- I-- you-- I went stealing, you know. You steal. 

INTERVIEWER: Was the kitchen nearby? 

SUBJECT: We went for the food to the kitchen. And we went to the garbage. It's picked up, or the potato peel-- uh-- shell-- no, the peel. 

INTERVIEWER: Peels. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, peels. And-- uh-- and-- and here there came a truck with cabbage or with the-- um-- some kind of-- how you call those-- um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Turnips? Carrots? 

SUBJECT: Turnips. 

INTERVIEWER: Turnips? 

SUBJECT: Turnips. Then you had the chance to steal. Once I got very much beaten. 

INTERVIEWER: They caught you. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they caught me once. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they catch you? 

SUBJECT: [CHUCKLES] I took-- I took a-- a-- piece of-- you know, I-- I-- I was-- pro-- probably I deserved it. Everybody was trying to steal. And-- uh-- I took a wood, a piece of wood in my hand, and I was make believing I'm watching the truck. And they didn't-- I looked when they turned. When-- when-- uh-- I had the chance, I threw down their stick and I took a turnip. And I got beaten from a Russian girl. 

INTERVIEWER: A Russian girl beat you? 

SUBJECT: From a Russian girl, or a Polish girl, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Beat you? 

SUBJECT: And they hit me right here. And it came up like a salami, you know, like a salami. Then for two days I didn't go. [CHUCKLES] But after this I went again. I-- I-- again. 

And this way we were there three months. But we knew it wouldn't come out good. We knew from it. And we was picked all the time because I have blonde hair and-- uh-- blue eyes and blonde hair. And-- and my sister Magda has blonde hair. And my sister Olga and my sister Ipir, she's here from Israel. She lives in Israel. And-- uh-- they are-- uh-- brown. 

And-- uh-- we were picked all the time. I was picked all the time. 

INTERVIEWER: Picked for what? 

SUBJECT: They were picking people for-- for-- uh-- jobs. To go out to German to work. Or they were picking girls to go-- I never saw but I never-- uh-- was picked for that to go to the soldiers, they said. Or I don't know. Or-- or for work. 

INTERVIEWER: They let your hair grow back. 

SUBJECT: It was growing very slow, very slow. It was growing so slow, when I came home I didn't have no hair yet. Somehow, I don't know why, I didn't have no hair yet. And-- uh-- just a little bit on the top I had. 

But-- uh-- uh-- we were picked-- they were-- we were picked all the time. But the other two sisters left behind. And somehow we managed to get back to them. And they never caught us. They never caught us. 

And-- uh-- one day came a civilian to-- uh-- to-- uh-- pick girls. And we heard that the civilian is-- uh-- picking girls. And they're picking blonde girls. And hands that were very-- they could work soft. Not soft hand but-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And-- uh-- then we put on-- uh-- some-- my dress, we-- we changed with the other two sisters or somehow like that. They should look better, because they-- they were brown-- uh-- hair and brown and fat and may-- maybe we figured they were going to look better in that dress, then we put them on the dress. And we went to the-- uh-- to the-- uh-- uh-- first block-- how you call it-- uh-- to the fence when they were coming in, and there they were picking. 

And we went over there and we to-- uh-- they should pick us together. But then you sit. You are together, they purposely didn't pick you together. And again, we were standing there in line for hours. And they picked just two of us. And they didn't pick my two other sisters. Then somehow we managed to run back, and we went back to our block, to our-- what we belonged to. You couldn't go to different block. You belonged to one-- 

INTERVIEWER: How would you-- how could you run back? Weren't they watching you? Didn't they have guns? I mean, why-- how could you get away to run back? 

SUBJECT: No, you see-- uh-- it-- they didn't take us nowhere yet. They just put us on the side probably, you know. And over there they-- they didn't watch so carefully, you know. They didn't-- uh-- take us out somewhere to a room or somewhere. 

And then we went back to our-- uh-- block. And my sister said-- uh-- she's going to speak up. Oh, and then we heard he was picking 300 girls, and he still didn't pick. But he comes to our block to pick more. 

INTERVIEWER: Who is he? 

SUBJECT: That civilian guy. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he German or-- 

SUBJECT: German. 

INTERVIEWER: German. 

SUBJECT: German. And he came-- uh-- he came to pick to our block. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what he looked like? 

SUBJECT: He was a nice-looking gentleman. 

INTERVIEWER: Tall, short, dark, light? 

SUBJECT: He was-- uh-- medium tall, you know. Not too-- no, not fat. He was a nice-looking gentleman. [INAUDIBLE] and he was such a nice gentleman. Who knows? But-- uh-- he-- uh-- came and picked-- he was surrounded with SS, with the Germans. And we had to stay in line. And he picked us. And he picked again. 

And when they came to us, then my sister spoke up. And my sister says, we are four sister because then we were just four. And we would like to go very much together. And wherever they're taking us if-- to work, we'd like to work. 

And-- and then it was unbelievable. It's-- everything just luck. And then they said, come, Kinder, come, you know. Like, it was unbelievable. Those words he was using. Come, Kinder, come. And they took us. And then they-- they-- they-- and they picked us-- uh-- 300 girls. And we left that C Lager. And we went across the street. We had to walk a little bit to the B Lager. 

And over there we were-- we went in in the B Lager. And-- uh-- we-- uh-- we-- uh-- went in, and there were the-- uh-- the head of the Lager, that-- uh-- Lageralteste. And under her was another Polish girl. And we went in, and this was the first work for her who could sew. And I-- and he was-- she was asking Jewish. And I didn't know how to answer her Jewish. But I heard she was, and my sisters know how to sew. And those girls were there already three years. Then they had all the connection. 

They had clothes and everything. They had everything already. You know, everybody could smuggle a little bit in. Then-- uh-- they-- uh-- then I took my sister by hand and I run with them. I said, and I said, I, I, I could sew. But I couldn't. I don't know even today how to sew. But they knew. 

Then-- because if you did something, right away you have more. Understand? 

INTERVIEWER: Um-hm. 

SUBJECT: Right away you had more for ever-- from everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you stay there until-- 

SUBJECT: And we stayed there for another month. And-- uh-- we-- all we had then very good. And I was one of their maid inside cooking for the Lageralteste. She had the kitchen. And I was one of their maids. Oh, I did everything. I was already a maid. I ordered the cook turn, and wash turn, and the floor and everything. And then she begged us we shouldn't leave. The man came for us a month later. And she begged us. And she said, girls, I don't know where you're going, but I promise you if you will stay here, whatever will be with me will be with you. 

But we somehow left it to the-- to the-- luck, to the future. And we-- we went away, and they took us to Weiswasser. It's by Berlin, Weiswasser. 

INTERVIEWER: It's a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: No. It was a Philip-- uh-- a-- a Philip, I think. 

INTERVIEWER: A what? 

SUBJECT: Phil-- Philips? Philip? Philips? 

INTERVIEWER: It was a plant? It was a-- it was a factory? 

SUBJECT: It was a factory. 

INTERVIEWER: Philips. 

SUBJECT: They were building bulbs, Philips bulbs, no? 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I see. Electric. 

SUBJECT: Bulbs. Electric bulbs, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Electric bulbs they were making. 

SUBJECT: Every kind of electric bulbs. Matter of fact, they were blowing the-- even the glass there. 

INTERVIEWER: You were blowing the glass? 

SUBJECT: No. There-- some men. Some men were blowing, and some girls were standing next-- uh-- from our 300 girls was standing next to them, and they took away from the men the bulbs. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you live when you were doing this work? 

SUBJECT: Then I want to tell you exactly. When we got there, we were-- uh-- going back three days by, again, by-- uh-- train. But before they picked us, the-- uh-- went to Treblinka and they change our clothes. And that-- that-- uh-- Lageralteste, she was telling us, if they're going to change your clothes, then you're going a good place. But if they're not going to change your clothes, then you're going to the chimney. 

But we took the chance. And they-- we went there and they change our clothes and gave us shoes and dresses. 

INTERVIEWER: You'd been in the same clothes for a month or more? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Three months. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep clean? 

SUBJECT: Oh, water was there. That's all. We just-- 

INTERVIEWER: With the same dress? 

SUBJECT: With the same dress, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't-- it wasn't very dirty? It wasn't smelly? It wasn't awful? 

SUBJECT: Who remembers? I don't even remember. We washed yourself. Probably we washed even the dress. I don't know. With the water was, we couldn't wash ourselves. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you only had the one dress. 

SUBJECT: One dress, yes. Nothing else. Nothing on there or nothing on the top. Nothing on that. And it was September, I think, when we left Auschwitz. And we got the clothes. And they took us for three days. And they took us to Weiswasser. And in Weiswasser never before they had anybody from the concentration camp. And the people were amazed, the German people. They came there early in the morning, and it was very chilly. We were very cold. 

And they took us to the factory-- uh-- uh-- to the factory cafeteria. And everybody had-- uh-- uh-- cereal in a wide, big dish. And they told us we should sit down. And we was afraid to sit down to the table. And we were all of us crying. And we ate the dish. And they took us to take a bath. And after this, they took us-- and after the bath, ev-- everybody got the toothbrush and we got the dish like the soldiers had, and toothpaste, and a cup to drink. And they-- we had to walk to our barracks that we lived. 

We walked I don't know how many miles. Oh, about three miles or somewhere like that. And from the big-- in the front some German girls lived and they worked in some of the factories. And in the back we lived-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why does it make you feel bad to talk about the cup and the toothbrush? 

SUBJECT: It's not the cup. It's just the feeling of we felt. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you feel bad about that? That was a good thing that happened to you. 

SUBJECT: But we could-- we cried that time. I cry even now how we felt. We were again people. We thought we could be never again people. And they gave us. And then we went into the barracks, and everybody had their own bed, a regular bed. Up and down. And blankets. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you there? 

SUBJECT: Maybe about six months. And then over there I-- again, the first night everybody was so tired. And the first night they were screaming who could cook. I was the first. I said, I know how to cook. The next day, already, 14 girls we went early in the morning to cook. And they gave us the old kitchen on the-- on the premises in the factory. The old kitchen gave us-- they gave us there, this was our kitchen to cook. 

And you know, they give us pots like this. And-- and everything big. And we didn't have no strength. And our muscles and our hand and everything. And I was crying. I don't know how to cook anymore. They didn't even listen to me. But after I got muscles, I got used to it. And I was on the-- I was one of the cook 14 girls. And we received-- 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you, about? How old were you then? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was already in the 20s. 

INTERVIEWER: 20s? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In-- in-- about 21, 22. 

INTERVIEWER: How much did you weigh? Were you very thin? 

SUBJECT: No. I was all the time fat. I was fat. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you stay fat when you didn't get enough to eat? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- be-- because my nature is probably I'm fat. And-- uh-- I had all the time somehow. We didn't eat good. But all the time I-- I-- what we get. And I got too a little bit. If you-- if you make up your mind and you want to come out one time-- uh-- may-- maybe I was thinking this way just to finish some day. And he won't win, Hitler. And-- and the world will be. Then you make up your mind and you want to-- uh-- do something about you. If you let yourself go, you-- we would have all die. Everybody would die. All those people who came back, they wanted to live. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk about this with your sisters? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say to her? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Oh. My sister what-- what-- 

INTERVIEWER: About wanting to live? About-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Why-- why, we would worry all the time. With my-- but she's in Israel. She's here with us solely because we will have a wedding. And she came here [INAUDIBLE]. She's with me. She was all the time sickly, you know, at home too. And we make sure she's all right. I mean, we make sure she should stay all right. 

INTERVIEWER: So she survived because you helped her? 

SUBJECT: Yes. All the-- all the three survived because I helped them. And then I was on the kitchen. And-- uh-- just-- uh-- SS girls watch us. SS ladies. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. SS women. 

SUBJECT: And-- uh-- and even that-- and the girls was resting three days. And after three days, they took them to the factory. And it was a beautiful factory. I want to tell you, really. It was a beautiful factory, but I don't know if you could see here. I didn't see too many factories here in the United States. But the factory was there with music and with warm heat. And the-- the girls were working there. Very good conditions, I'm telling you. 

And the toilets. It was really unbelievable what kind of toilets they were there. And we 14 girls could walk-- uh-- openly on the-- on the premises over there. And we had two German girl-- ladies what they were watching us. And one was from a fund, like a baroness, you know. And she was really a lady. Even I would met-- meet her today or see her today, I would not let her to do nothing. She hated all of them. 

She hated if-- you know, when-- uh-- one of-- one of the girls-- uh-- came in from the factory-- I mean the SS girl-- and she went and she took our soup. She ate from our soup that we cooked over there. And we told her this, and this came in. And she had the soup. She screamed at us. But how could we stop her not to have? Who were we to tell her she shouldn't have? 

INTERVIEWER: You have-- you're not hostile to-- you like some of the German people, is that what you're saying? 

SUBJECT: That lady, that-- uh-- I remember her name. That one name I remember. Lily Fonmarambe. I-- I-- am not sure if I'm-- if I-- this is the right name. But I would never do nothing to her because she really was very nice to all of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in-- 

SUBJECT: To all of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in that factory when liberation came? 

SUBJECT: No. Then the Russians were nearing by. The Russian-- uh-- were coming. It was-- uh-- Weiswasser near Berlin. And-- uh-- our working conditions there were wonderful that I couldn't say nothing. We were in the con-- we were-- uh-- uh-- concentration camp and just ladies were watching us. And it was not terrible. The food was minimum, you know, but nobody went hungry. It-- uh-- I-- we can't say really-- I can't say nothing about that because I don't think so, the German workers had more. I don't think so. 

But the Russians were coming, and they had to leave. Then we were walking, I don't know about for three days. And we went by train, I think. And they took us to-- uh-- to Hamburg, Horneburg. It was by Hamburg. 

But over there we went to live-- uh-- to those barracks. And we all had to find lot of names on the walls. And some other girls were there. And over there we were just six weeks. And then they took us to Bergen-Belsen. 

And we were in Bergen-Belsen, I remember, I think we were in Bergen-Belsen in-- 

INTERVIEWER: You seemed happy to go to Bergen-Belsen. Why? 

SUBJECT: No, we were not happy. 

INTERVIEWER: You smiled when you said when you went to Bergen-Belsen. 

SUBJECT: No. No, no, I'm not smiling. Uh-uh. I'm not smiling. No. Then they took us to Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was there when you got there? 

SUBJECT: It was something terrible. It-- it was something unbelievable. I said with a special-- uh-- rest or something, you thought I was laughing about it because I thought you know how Bergen-Belsen looked. Maybe you had some idea. Bergen-Belsen, it was unbelievable. People on people, dead on dead. Uh-- the lice was on the trees. The sickness was everywhere. Typhus. It was something unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER: The four of you were still together? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We were still together. The 300 girls we went all together. It was something unbelievable. It-- 

INTERVIEWER: And how did you live in Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: We were very lucky. We were just five days under the German. Five days. And-- uh-- we got liberated after. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel-- 

SUBJECT: But under that five days we were-- we got all of us sick-- 

INTERVIEWER: Typhus? 

SUBJECT: --by typhus, all of us. It was mountains of dead, mountains. Dead on dead. 

INTERVIEWER: Just left there? 

SUBJECT: Just left there. Mountains. We were walking on them. We were sleeping with them. They were everywhere. Everywhere. 

INTERVIEWER: You were sleeping with dead people? 

SUBJECT: We-- everywhere. Everywhere. It's not so much to sleeping with them. Like, everywhere they were. We were the 300 girls in one and the-- and we-- we-- it was such a very pressure situation. Everybody knew something happening, and we hear such a-- such a noise like all those things are coming or by the mountains, you know, you could-- it's a pressure. It's something. 

Oh, but when we went-- when we went to Horneburg, to-- to Bergen-Belsen, then we went by train again. And they-- the English with the Americans were bombing. And we were in the train. And we didn't even care. We were happy. We were happy they bombing. We were happy because they bombing Germany. And they did-- nothing happened to us. 

And-- uh-- they pushed us out on the-- on the side somehow from the main-- uh-- tr-- uh-- station or somehow we were standing there for a while. And then they stopped, and they took us to Bergen-Belsen. And then, like I'm telling you, it-- it were-- we were there just five days. And-- uh-- and the Germans were everyone there. And the dead was every-- it-- it's hard to describe. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did it smell? 

SUBJECT: Awful, awful. It was no food. It was no water. It was no nothing. Just lice and lice everywhere, on the trees. On everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Lice on the trees, is that what you're saying? 

SUBJECT: Everywhere. Everywhere. Everywhere it was sickness and death and-- and-- and-- and everywhere on the world. And-- uh-- then-- uh-- we got-- uh-- liberated. It-- we got liberated. They came in, the English. The English soldiers came in with microphones and things, and they said we got liberated. 

And the Germans were starting to shoot. They didn't get them together yet. And the Germans started. And my girlfriend, my best girlfriend, she was-- she knew she got liberated. And on the step-- on the step, and she says to me, you will come to us and you will see how good it's going to be. 

And she got a shot in her heart. And she-- and she didn't say yoy. She didn't say-- she didn't say nothing and she was dead. She didn't say yoy. She didn't say nothing. But she knew she got liberated. And I was standing next to her. And she got dead. 

And then we went in. They were shooting everywhere. And then we went in one bunch, all the sisters, and over there under those beds. And we hide because they were coming in there-- there-- they-- they were shooting the-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: The Germans were shooting the prisoners? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. They were shooting everywhere. They were shooting. And the-- uh-- in the house, in the room, by the bed. And we were there. And our friends, but we were together, the 300 girls. One-- uh-- how you call the-- suddenly I can't even think I'm saying. What they putting into the shoot, how you shoot, with what you're shooting. 

INTERVIEWER: The bullets? 

SUBJECT: The bullets. Nah, I couldn't think of name of bullet-- 