ABE B: That was the-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Sara, can you move a little bit closer to your husband and [INAUDIBLE]-- yeah, great. 

SARI B: OK? 

CREW: Rolling. OK, she can start. 

DORI LAUB: What [INAUDIBLE] survived? 

ABE B: Warsaw. 

DORI LAUB: For you? 

ABE B: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SARI B: Yes. 

ABE B: It was quite large cosmopolitan are. The area of Warsaw where I lived was primarily Jewish. I did not know any such thing as a ghetto. 

We felt comfortable, we felt safe to live amongst ourselves, our own people. And it was a nice, happy life, contented life. Some people had hardships making a living. 

DORI LAUB: For you. 

ABE B: For me? For me personally, I never know-- I never know of what it means to go hungry or not to have enough clothes. In [INAUDIBLE], we made a nice living. And I got to where we were fortunate enough to be able to be helpful to less fortunate members of our family. Remember before certain holidays, my mother would make up packages of food, and I would-- they would send me with them for poor and for Passover. 

So, I was very, very close, close relationship between our immediate family and distant family. 

DORI LAUB: You were the youngest? 

ABE B: I was the youngest. 

DORI LAUB: How many? 

ABE B: There were-- we were three brothers and three sisters. Two were married. The other sister had-- had already two children. I was a uncle-- became an uncle at the age of-- of one year, I became an uncle. 

And this, this nephew of mine, he got killed right in the outset of the war in 1939. Where in the same time, my mother got killed, and my sister, my mother-- my sister's mother-in-law, together with about 60-odd some people in that one house. You know, if we picture Warsaw, you know, the tenement houses like in New York, where in one house, there was something like 200 families. So when they started to bomb Warsaw, we were the first ones to get it. 

DORI LAUB: Those were whose bombs? 

ABE B: German bombs, yeah. We were the first one to get it. And I got the feeling-- right then and there I got to feeling of what war is. 

DORI LAUB: They bombed totally your house? 

ABE B: Direct hit. 

DORI LAUB: You were in the house? 

ABE B: Direct hit. I wasn't in the house. I was partially buried under the rubble. 

When-- funny feeling when you hear that whistling noise coming right down your head, you know, you systematically, automatically, you kind of hunch yourself. And the moment of the impact, you see a big flame, and then you start choking. And you-- you never had that feeling, so we thought it was gas bombs that they were throwing. 

But it was a destruction bomb. And it was a five-story building. And the bomb fell all the way from the top, made a crater down to the ground. I happened to be in the less outskirt-- and how should I say, outside the vicinity that the bomb destroyed everything. So the wall just felt partially on me, and I was dug out after a short period of time. 

All the people under the rubble, that you heard noises, please help, you know, crying out. But there was nothing that we could do because the Germans right away they started to throw incendiary bombs. And everything went up in flames. So we couldn't do anything. So we-- 

DORI LAUB: Who was it? 

ABE B: My family. You know, my father was with me. My two brothers were still with me. My sister-- the older sister was with me. So we-- we seek shelter in a different street in the basement. 

And that night, that was the worst picture I could ever see, just like-- I don't know if you remember seeing San Francisco where the city is in flames, that's what Warsaw was like, flames all over. So we just went down in the basement, and we cried, and cried. We thought, this is the end of it, that sooner or later, the flames are going to circle us, and that we're going to burn. 

DORI LAUB: Did he mention your mother? 

ABE B: No, no, no, at that time, we know that my mother was in the building under the rubble. We-- we tried to-- of course, it was only my mother. The rest of the family that weren't alive, you know that they are in there, but we couldn't do nothing-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: This is all in the ghetto? 

ABE B: --to help them. There was no ghetto yet. That was before anything happened. That was just in the beginning of the war in 1939. The ghetto came into in '41. 

So but somehow the following morning, the fire subsided. And we went back to the house. And we tried to take the rubble apart. It was so hot, they were still burning. 

But little by little, we finally got the smaller pieces of brick and wood apart. And we started to find the burned bodies, burned head, the bones. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where were you, Sari? 

SARI B: At that time, I was in Hungary. He came from Poland, and I came from Hungary. So we had nothing in common. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What had happened to you by 1939? 

SARI B: In 1939, the Hungarian Jews had not felt any problem yet. In Hungary, it started really bad maybe end of '42, '43. And then it's really got bad in '44 because we started to have problem from Passover time. 

And when we were going to sit down for Sader, and then after when we finished Sader, we were putting away our dishes that my grandfather said, well, we are all together this year, but who knows what we're going to be next year. And when I was putting away the Passover dishes, my mother said, well, we're going to put it away, but we wouldn't know who's going to take them off. And this is really when bad things had start. 

Because things before had happened like my father was in a working camp. They took him away because he wasn't good to be a soldier, but he was good to go-- to do what had happened for-- 

ABE B: Forced labor. 

SARI B: --forced labor. And he was quite far away from us. I think it was about 10 or 12 kilometer. I don't know exactly just how much the distance was. But I was going to him every single day because I was taking food for him. But over there, there weren't serving Kosher food. And we wanted him to eat, so therefore I was taking-- I ride on bicycle to him every single day except Saturday. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You mean your father was in a work camp but wouldn't eat the food, and you had to take it on a bicycle? 

SARI B: I went every single day. And sometimes Fridays I went like twice to make sure that he would have food for Saturday. I wasn't able to put everything on a bicycle because the distance was very-- And 

DORI LAUB: Could you stopped-- could you, say, help them out to stop the rolling-- 

ABE B: Yeah, I could continue now. 

DORI LAUB: Did you [INAUDIBLE]? You were looking through rubble [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE B: Yeah, one of the head bones that I picked up, I recognized it, that it was my mother's. How do you recognize a burned head bone? Evidently when the bomb hit, she must have been bleeding very heavily. And her coat that she wore was soaked with blood, so it didn't burn. And that's how I recognized. 

SARI B: I was thinking it was your father who recognized. 

ABE B: And then, of course, another evidence that it was my mother was she wore a black-- can you imagine, I can't get through it? 

DORI LAUB: Jewelry? 

ABE B: Right. And we got all those bones in a box? 

DORI LAUB: The ring, or? 

ABE B: Yeah, she wore her, her wristwatch. And she had several rings on it and some silver money. That was evidence that this was my mother. The rest nobody was recognized, so we just loaded up a box full of bones, and we took it to the cemetery for burial. And that was the first en-- encoun-- encounter of the war that I had at the age of 14. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What happened when the Germans walk in? What happened when they came in and-- 

ABE B: When the-- when the German's first marched into Warsaw, if they had any plans for us, they didn't show it. At that time, they behaved like conquering soldiers. They didn't exclude us or separate us from the general population. That came a little afterwards when things started to get rough, and like we would have to stay all night along in a lines to receive a loaf of bread. 

And some of the Polish population, they wanted to have a better chance to get a loaf of bread. They would go to the gendarmes and say, this is a Jew. So they-- he would come and take us out of the line after waiting all night long so they would have more of a chance of getting the loaf of bread. 

And little by little, we found out the plan that they had in mind for us. Life became unbearable in the area before even it became the ghetto. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How? In what way? 

ABE B: Uh, beatings. We lived under constant terror. Uh, you didn't know-- you did know from one second to the other when they're going to come and-- and just kill you. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why didn't you leave? 

ABE B: Where to? Uh, we didn't have any plans. We didn't know where to run. Where could we run, and how could we go any place? 

It-- it was no-- there was no-- as a matter of fact, even the ones that did manage-- no, first of all, the whole family couldn't run. With the older people, with the young people, we couldn't run. The ones-- there were some people, young people, that separated. 

We were like, like I mentioned before, we were a very, very close family. And we made up-- right from the beginning, we made up our mind that what's going to happen with one is going to happen with every-- with all. So we tried to stay together as much as we could, which was until they started to liquidate the ghetto. 

I remember one incident where one night they would come in, and they would take out, just in our section, they were taking-- they got some, some 100 people, all of influence, prominent people, take them down to the gate and shoot them on the spot, for no reason, just to terrorize us. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you see it? 

ABE B: Of course. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What did you-- 

ABE B: They didn't try to hide the fact. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What did you do when you saw it? 

ABE B: Well, that became a daily occurrence. We lived with it, and we slept with it, and so it really didn't make much of an impression. It was only-- we accepted the fact that it's only a matter of time. Now it happened to somebody else, maybe tomorrow it's going to happen to us. 

Another daily occurrence was dead people, people were died of starvation, dozens and dozens. Every morning you woke up, you went down the street, there were loads of dead people laying on the street covered with newspapers, most of them swollen. I don't know what makes a person swell up when you die of starvation. 

And of-- you know, it's a funny thing as-- it's a ironic thing, there's always a little humor with all the bad thing that happen. We had a town fool. I suppose just like any other town had a town fool. His name was Amima 

And there was no transportation. They would only go with carts that people pulled. And they would go every morning and collect all these-- these dead bodies. And he would run after them, and he would holler, lay on the side, make room for-- for the next, to the dead people. 

So another daily occurrence in the ghetto, starvation, hunger was so strong for people, literally risked their life to get some food. Like a lady would somehow, if she managed to-- to sell some jewelry, and get some money, and buy a loaf of bread on the black market. Some people were so hungry, their-- their hunger was so strong, they didn't care what happened to them. They-- they just jumped that person with that loaf of bread and try and get at least a handful out of it. 

And there were so many people in the ghetto that he couldn't get away with it. So-- but he didn't care if he gets away or not, as long as he could stuff something in his mouth. Eventually some of the passerbys would jump him and, and beat him to dead anyway for what he did. But if-- he didn't care as long as he got his bite of bread in his mouth. 

DORI LAUB: What were you doing? You were still with your father? 

ABE B: Yeah. Well, things more or less normalized, whatever you could call normalization. We made the best of it. We-- we went about making a living the best one could-- profession, business, black market. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How big was the ghetto? 

ABE B: All the ghetto-- that was the largest one. I think at that time was something like a half a million. 

LAUREL VLOCK: But there were gar-- there were vegetable gardens in the ghetto? 

ABE B: No, forget about vegetable garden. We were so packed in the ghettos, we had one room, on room. And there was-- 1, 2, 3-- about eight people, eight of us, in one room. There was no room for anything in the ghetto. 

DORI LAUB: So what was your profession? 

ABE B: My-- my-- what I was doing-- uh, somehow there was no transportation in the ghetto. I was fortunate. We had a little jewelry. And my brother was a jeweler. 

So we-- I don't know how he managed-- who he was selling it to. Most of it was being smuggled out to the aryan side And with the money, we managed to get rickshaw for me. And that was a way of making a living in the ghetto. That was one of the only transportation that the Jews had in the ghetto, transporting people. 

DORI LAUB: How, what, who, who traveled? How much did you get for a-- 

ABE B: Well, the ghetto was quite large. From one end to the ghetto to the other was something like 10 miles. And if you wanted to go from one end to the other end, especially from the smaller ghetto-- I lived in the small part of the Warsaw ghetto. 

And the Warsaw ghetto was two-- two parts divided by a wooden bridge. There were films, and-- and some other films about the Warsaw getting that bridge, I traveled underneath that bridge many times with the rickshaw. Traffic could not through. Walking you had to go through the bridge. And that was the way I was making a living, transporting people. 

DORI LAUB: Who would-- 

ABE B: Only-- only Jews that wanted to go from one end to the other. They were-- people were constantly moving from wherever they could find facilities, to relatives. And that's what I would do. And I made-- I made enough to feed myself. 

DORI LAUB: How much did you charge for-- 

ABE B: Uh, I charged something like two zloty, three zloty, depending on the distance. 

DORI LAUB: How much was the bread? 

ABE B: A bread was 10 zloty. So actually, I-- on a trip, I made a quarter loaf of bread, which was good because most of the people couldn't do anything. 

DORI LAUB: How many trips a day? 

ABE B: Oh, I could've make something like an average of 20 trips a day, yeah, until-- until they started to liquidate the ghetto. Of course, I'm jumping ahead of myself. Before even the ghetto was established, right in the beginning, as soon as the Germans marched into Warsaw, they-- they took contingents that the Jewish Gemeinde, what's it, the Jewish-- 

SARI B: Community, community. 

ABE B: The Jewish community had to supply forced labor. Now, there were-- there were places where one went to work just for the day. And then there were places where they would-- would take you out of Warsaw for an extended period of time. Of course, I was too young at the time. They wouldn't take me to forced-- to forced labor, which at that time wasn't even a camp. They call it a camp. 

They-- they took-- they-- they called for my brother to go on to the camps. And at that time, we still didn't realize what was going on. You know, so you're going to work. So work wouldn't kill me. 

So I says to my brother, all right, I tell you what, you buy me a present, and I'll go instead of you. Little did I know that this is going to be-- as far as camps are concerned-- that this is going to be the worst experience of-- of my life during the war time with all the concentration camps, including some of the most famous one, Auschwitz, Majdanek, and Buchenwald. That was far, far worse. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What happened? 

ABE B: In a very, very short period of time, out of the close to 2,000 people, there was only 150 alive. Most of them died from sickness. They weren't even organized. They don't even know what they were doing, the Germans. They just needed temporary labor. They were digging anti-Panzer ditches on the Russian front. 

So they took us out, and they just stuck us into a unfinished house. There were no floors. There were no hygienic facilities, no toilets. 

The six weeks I was there, we didn't even take off our clothes once, it didn't wash once. In a very short period of time, we became crawling with vermin. I have scars on my body that lice ate into me. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where. 

ABE B: Don't look, on my legs. 

SARI B: He has [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE B: There was no water-- no drinking water. So you can imagine if there was no drinking water, naturally there was no water for washing. Most people, as I said, died from sickness, dysentery. 

Quite a few were shot for-- the only reason that some of the guards, after guarding us, were-- were young Germans. And as a sport, just to try their aim, they were just taking potshots at us. I myself, I-- being that I was still in the beginning of the whole affair, I still had my strength. As I said, I had-- I was pretty well fed before, all that, so I would take hardship, wouldn't affect me too much. 

So I-- and in order to survive, you had to work. You have to show that you can work. Because they're your worst enemy is once you-- you gave then any indication that you weakening, that you can't work, that was the end of you. So naturally, one gave 100% of what one had. I don't know if there's anything above 100%. Whatever you had, you gave. 

So I was there with a-- with a axe, trying to chop on the stone and everything. And all of a sudden, a young German calls me over, and he says, bend over. So I starts to plead, why? I'm working. Don't you see? I'm doing better work than anybody else. What do you want from me? 

He says, no nothing in particular. I just want to try out my branch. I just broke off a new branch. I just want to see how strong it is. 

So I just said-- you know, just like I'm talking to you-- he says bend over. So I bend over and hit me once, and he broke the branch. Jeez, for crying out loud, it's no good. I gotta get another one. 

The same day, I heard a shot. And the guy that was standing right next to me fall dead. What I was talking about the guards taking potshots. So it became a daily routine. And within a very short-- how much-- no matter how strong one is, how much can you take of it? 

LAUREL VLOCK: You mean that you went-- got up in the morning in the same clothes, went to bed, got up in the morning, sames clothes, went to bed. 

ABE B: And not only that, being that we-- being that this wasn't a camp, and they weren't organized for us, they would-- we would lay on the floor pressed together like sardines in a can, literally. In other words, I had my head on somebody else's body, somebody-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: What was the weather? What was the temperature? What was the season? 

ABE B: Cold. It was towards-- it was in the fall. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So you wanted to be close. 

ABE B: It was in the fall. Not that we wanted it. Even if we had something to cover ourselves, it didn't matter. There was no room, very simple. There was no room. So I had my legs on somebody else's body, somebody had his legs on my body. 

Now, there was no such thing as-- if you had to get up to look for elimination, you wouldn't take a chance because you could never make it back to your spot. So if-- if you have you have to eliminate, you did it right then and there. I mean, it was a dirt floor, so it was soaking in, which was good. I mean, it was good thing that there weren't no floors. They were unfinished floors. Yes. 

DORI LAUB: How did you get out? 

ABE B: Ah, within a very short period of time, everybody got sick. The few that were still alive, they were so sick that they couldn't do nothing with us. So they let us go. They just let us go. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why didn't they kill you? 

ABE B: At that time? Ah, looks like a that time, they still didn't have their full program of annihilation because the ghet-- the-- the ghetto was just about starting to be enclosed. And I-- I don't think actually that even they knew exactly what to do with us then. 

DORI LAUB: So Abe, to be a rickshaw driver was a normal, good life after that. 

ABE B: Yes. I other words, I was one of the fortunate ones in the ghetto. At least I had something to make a living because the majority of people couldn't do nothing. As long-- as long as if they had some valuable stuff they could dispose of and buy food, they did it. 

DORI LAUB: But then the ghetto began to be liquidated. 

ABE B: Ah, that's when they started-- after a while, finally, then-- then they came with the master plan of annihilation where-- where they knew exactly what they wanted to do and how they want to do it on a mass scale. 

LAUREL VLOCK: When they let you go out of this working camp-- 

ABE B: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: --they just took you back to the ghetto? 

ABE B: They didn't take us any place. By that-- by that time, most of that area, you know, that particular area, the ditches that they wanted to-- to finish, was finished. See, they had several camps set up. Every few miles apart, they had something similar. So they had-- they had their work done, they didn't need us anymore, and they let us go. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And how did you get somewhere? 

ABE B: Somehow-- somehow the group, the nearest town, the Jews were still living there. Most of them, they're still living there. And they helped us out. And they arranged somehow for us-- they fed us. And they arranged transportation at that time by-- by a train. And we made our way back to Warsaw. 

SARI B: Did your father take-- 

DORI LAUB: [INAUDIBLE] those-- those ditches were getting structured before the war started. 

ABE B: Before the-- no, no, no, before they started with Russia. 

DORI LAUB: Russia. 

ABE B: They were still buddy buddies with the Russians at that time. But already, they were making ditch-- ditches. The-- the Russians were-- were-- were-- preparing themselves on their side, and the Germans were preparing themselves on-- on the Polish side. 

So at the age of 15 then-- I was 15, I looked like 70. It was, like I said, it started out in the fall, so when they let us go, already it was winter time. Ah, we didn't have no shoes, so we only had rags wrapped around our feet. And I had an old coat over me. 

I was hit over here where my hand swell up, and I couldn't move it. I had it on a sling. And then I had something around-- rolled around my ears to keep warm. So I was-- I was-- I looked like I was 70 years old and dirty, filthy, crawling with lice. 

So finally when we got back to Warsaw, people started to run around and letting know anybody that had people in these camps to come and see if anybody that came back belongs to them. So my father came and he recognized me. And he took me-- he wouldn't take me home under the-- in the circumstances I was. 

They had an enclosing station, where they-- they-- the gassed or enclosed, you know, bathed. They put some kind of ointment. And I came down with typhus then. You know what typhus is? And survived that, too. 

DORI LAUB: So after that experience didn't prove that bad-- that-- 

ABE B: Well, after an experience like that, no matter what was thrown your way, you were conditioned to handle it. 

DORI LAUB: Now, let's look at-- life was with a rickshaw and you made a living. And then it began. 

ABE B: Yes. And then they started to liquidate the Warsaw ghetto. Then they were organized, they had already camps. They have camps where they wanted to save some special individuals where they wanted to exploit their-- their health and then their youth for whatever they wanted it. 

Uh, most of the camps who are just outright destruction camp. You know, like Majdanek was the most famous one. That's where most of my remaining family wound up. 

DORI LAUB: What did you see? What did you go through? 

ABE B: Uh, the day-- one day, lunchtime, I left my-- my rickshaw in front of the store. We had a little retail store in the ghetto already where my brother was busying his trade as a jeweler. And I went out for lunch. And I took a little snooze, which was a customary thing. 

Now, the ghetto was always so loud, always so crowded. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Loud, is that what you said? 

ABE B: Loud, yeah. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Noise. 

ABE B: Noisy because the streets were always crawling with people. It was so dense, so tight, just like on a-- on a flea market over here. You couldn't-- you couldn't hear-- if you were talk to somebody else, you had to talk loud to hear each other. 

DORI LAUB: And those were the times that people were already taken away? 

ABE B: No, no that was daily life in the ghetto. 

DORI LAUB: Yes, but have these transfers to Auschwitz begun? 

ABE B: Wait. No, I'm getting to that point. So that day, when I got up after that little snooze, I was up there with my older brother. I-- when I woke up, I heard a dead silence. It was so unnatural. I didn't hear a soul. 

Figured out that the other apartment, the other room. We opened the door, and all the doors in the hallway were open. And there was no soul, where-- where an hour before were dozens and dozens of people mingling. Look into their apartments, you could even see you half-- half-finished meals. And everything is there, and no people. 

We walk down the streets, and the same thing. I don't know if you ever saw that picture, Lost Horizon was it, where-- where it was a-- the world came to an end, and there were only a few survivors? So me my brother, we went down. We walk on the street, and all the stores are open. The things that some people were peddling in the street is just laying there, and no people. That was the first experience. We didn't even know what was happening. 

Now, we know that that was the time that they were liquidating the Warsaw together. And that was made for several hours. We didn't see a living soul in that part of the small ghetto. Little by little we saw-- 

DORI LAUB: Who was missing? 

ABE B: Everybody was missing. We went down to the store, the store was crowed with people. It was always a dozen more people in the store. There was wasn't a living soul. 

We had a little shelter in the basement [INAUDIBLE]. Woke up, you know, the food that we were hiding over there, whatever else, was there, and no people. 

DORI LAUB: Yeah, but your own-- 

ABE B: My own family. My father was gone. My brother was gone. My sister, my brother-in-law, they were-- everybody was gone. 

DORI LAUB: You went to take a snooze and woke up-- 

ABE B: And woke up, and they were all gone. 

DORI LAUB: Your own family was-- 

ABE B: The whole family, every-- all of a sudden, at the age of 15, I am alone in a hostile world with people that are only looking to exterminate you. And here at 15, and I have to look out for myself, nobody to comfort me, nobody to counsel me. 

DORI LAUB: And that was the first transport you know of? 

ABE B: That-- no, that is the-- that was the first time that I have experience with, that I was involved with. I heard of other sections where they-- but I didn't have the experience. I just heard of where they came, they surround it. 

It was SS in conjunction with the Ukrainians. They surrounded the whole section, several blocks, and they would say, everybody out. And they just took everybody right into the trains that are going to Majda-- Treblinka, which was extermination camp where they burned everybody alive over there. 

DORI LAUB: When you saw that all were gone, what did you think? Where were they gone? 

ABE B: Well, I didn't know. I didn't know. I was dumbfounded. Little by little, people started to crawl out. And then we found out that the-- 

SARI B: They came [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE B: That's what happened. They came, and they surrounded that area. And they took everybody, what they called the Umschlagplatz, where-- where they loaded everybody in cattle cars. And at that time, I didn't even know where they were taking them. They just took him for Umsiedlung which was a-- how do you say Umsiedlung? 

DORI LAUB: Train-- relocation. 

ABE B: Relocation. So if that's the case, as I mentioned before, being that we were such a close family, we says, well if they took them, we got to go where they took them just so that we could be together. So right-- a couple hours afterwards, we just packed in a little rucksack-- how do you say rucksack? 

DORI LAUB: Knapsack. 

ABE B: Knapsack. A little food, a little clothing, whatever we could, we put it in a knapsack, threw it on our shoulder, and we went ourselves to the Umschlagplatz. I left my rickshaw. I-- same thing, this store and the house left open, anybody wants it just for the taking. 

And we thought we'll-- we'll catch up with them. And wherever they took them, we'll be with them. As we get out to the area, there were thousands and thousands of people-- thousands and thousands of people. If you look around-- you look around, they weren't there anymore. 

And then we saw what was happening, that there were a whole bunch of SS, and everybody had to line up abreast, five abreast, and walk through these SS. And they were walking right into these cattle cars. And they filled them up to the limit. There was-- they didn't say, you know, like only 50, or 60, or 70 to a car. As many as the good stuff in standing up went in. And they locked them. 

And-- but the same thing, we still didn't know what is going on, where they taking them. So we just lined up the same way where everybody else was going. And we went through the selection process. 

And as we walking through, you know, like big heroes, at the age of 15, you know I had already schon gemuselt, so I was hardened. And I'm walking through like a big shot soldier. SS sees me with a knapsack and my brother, he says, you, on the side. See now, people know left or right. At that time, I didn't know what left to right is, just says, to the side. 

So I was heartbroken. I says, how-- why is he taking us to the side? Now we can't go where-- where the rest of the family is. 

And you know, you know, I hear some stories where some people were talking, pleading with the SS. There was no talking, no pleading, no asking questions. They told you to do something, you did it. You wouldn't even have the audacity to ask them a question or question their-- their actions. 

SARI B: They'll hit you. 

ABE B: They just as so shoot you ans answer you. So we went-- we-- we went to the side. And as we stay there, some other individuals, most of them able-bodied people, found out pretty soon the group became larger, larger. There were 60 or maybe 70. 

And then all of a sudden-- and-- and we were worried. You know, why are they taking us to the side? You know, everybody, we were very anxious to go into the wagons with everybody else. 

Finally, one other guys that was selected to go to the side came to us and he says, listen, fellas. We should consider ourselves very lucky. I says, why? I don't know how he knew. He must have-- he must have had some kind of connection with somebody. 

He said, because you see, us they taking out because we're going to go into a camp. They're going to-- we're going-- they making-- they're going to make us work, but they're not going to kill us, not right away anyway. But all these people that are going into the wagons, tomorrow they're going to be smoke. 

I say, how do you know? He said, well, he has a certain position and-- in the ghetto. And he was already on one of those transports. And the same way he came out from that transport, so he knew about it. And sure enough, that's what happened. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How did he get out? 

ABE B: If you had-- there were some individuals that had connections through some maybe police commandant, or some other politician, or something. And sure enough, that's what happened for-- I don't know exactly, two or three weeks it took them to clean out the whole area of the small ghetto. I don't know how many hundreds of thousands of people there were. 

And-- and at that time, they accumulated close to 1,500, 1,600 people that they took out everyday, 100, 80, 90. And they took us out on the Aryan side, which wasn't outside the ghetto. It was a school building. And they kept us there under guard until the solution of the small ghetto was finalized. And then they packed us off in wagons. And we wound up in Majdanek. 

DORI LAUB: Now, say in-- you stopped, and your father was in the camp, and you used to bicycle for Kosher food. What happened after that? 

SARI B: What happened after. Well, after it's also-- somehow the other-- my father managed to come back and go with us to a ghetto, which was already a few months later. And we went into one ghetto, and my grandfather had gotten sick at that ghetto. And I had to take him to a hospital. 

A hospital wasn't in that city, so they took him to another city. And therefore, we were trying to get to the-- from this ghetto to go to the other ghetto so we should be able to see my grandfather. Well, I don't know how-- somehow Miro-- denied they took us to the other ghetto. 

And we stayed there for a while. And there again, and we couldn't go see my grandfather anyhow because in daytime, they allowed you to go for a few hours, but not too far. And he was very sick, so they would let us go to the hospital. 

And all of a sudden, we heard that the people from the hospital was moved also to the ghetto because they don't want to keep them anymore there. So we figured, oh, we'll be able to see him somehow there. But we were never be able to see him. The only time I saw my grandfather is when we were put in to this trains, what he called it was the-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Wagons? 

SARI B: Wagons. 

DORI LAUB: Cattle cars. What year? 

SARI B: This was 1944. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The word for trains was wagon, meaning they called-- 

SARI B: It was a cattle wagon. You know, it was-- I mean, we were-- 

ABE B: All cattle wagons. 

SARI B: It-- it was-- everybody was always squeezed into it. Like in that particular wagon that we were in, there were people dying. There were dead people among us. 

There were-- babies were born. There was children who were crying. And people were praying. They still was praying for something that it should happen to us. 

And then he went to a borderline where they were going to take us to Germany. At that point already, the border was closed. They couldn't take us through there because we were really the last transport. We went from Hungary to Germany. 

DORI LAUB: The last? 

SARI B: The very last transport we were. And-- 

DORI LAUB: To a camp. 

SARI B: To the camp, right. And when-- 

DORI LAUB: Had you missed-- had you missed the transport, you would not have been deported? 

SARI B: If we could have only stayed home, like, for two more weeks, we probably would never made it-- made it to Germany. And then they brought us back again to another border where the wagons did go through. And as we were getting out from that wagon-- I had my mother, my sister, my brother, and my aunt with us. And my grandfather was supposed to be in a different wagon where all the sick people had been. 

So we were getting off on the wagon, and we also had to line up like everybody else. My mother went with my sister. My father had my brother. And somehow, my mother had some new fur coat, and I went to get her fur coat. So in between-- when I was going back to the wagon for the silly coat, I just lost everybody. Everybody was moving fast, and I couldn't find anymore anybody of my family. But I did see when they were emptying up the-- 

DORI LAUB: They were-- your family went through the-- 

SARI B: They were-- 

DORI LAUB: --transport. 

SARI B: --trying-- they were going through the SS man, you know, and that line, who goes to the left and who goes to right. 

DORI LAUB: The selection? 

SARI B: The selection. But I never went with them because I turned back for the coat. But I did see-- 

DORI LAUB: Did you ever see your family? 

SARI B: Pardon me? 

DORI LAUB: Did you see your family again? 

SARI B: Afterwards, no. 

DORI LAUB: So, you went back for the coat-- 

SARI B: There was so many people, I just never-- 

DORI LAUB: --that was-- 

SARI B: I lost everybody. 

DORI LAUB: Forever? 

SARI B: This was it. I never saw anybody. All I saw that they were opening the door because I was trying to run back to the door where my grandfather was. But all I saw they were taking the people out from that particular wagon. And they were throwing them on a truck. 

And that was, he alive? Wasn't he alive? I really don't know. But I did see as he was thrown up at that particular wagon. And then I started to cry. And I haven't seen anybody. And I was going to-- 

DORI LAUB: He was the last person in your family that you saw? 

SARI B: Right. And then, of course, we were going through the-- I still had to go through Mengele or whoever. 

ABE B: Selection. 

SARI B: Selection. 

DORI LAUB: This grandfather had how many grandchildren? 

SARI B: This grandfather already had four grandchildren. 

LAUREL VLOCK: They threw him somewhere on-- 

SARI B: On-- on a truck. You know, they had this open truck where-- where you throw the sand out, and it opens right up where-- 

ABE B: Dump truck. 

SARI B: Dump truck. They throw him on. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who threw him? 

SARI B: The SS men. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And they picked him up and threw him. 

SARI B: Well, that was the way it was there. 

LAUREL VLOCK: And you saw it? 

SARI B: And I saw it. And I started to cry. And With the cold, and with the crying, I had just completely lost everybody in that particular time. 

And I was going through the selection. And, of course, they put me on the other side. And there were people who had known me from home, and they said, don't cry. Your mother went on the other side. We'll take good care of you. 

But I saw my grandfather, and I didn't wanted to tell anybody that-- what I had seen, and I kept on crying, crying, crying. And this was in Auschwitz and Birkenau. I was there about a month in Auschwitz and Birkenau. 

Then we were sent away to our camp where we were making bombs and granads-- 

DORI LAUB: Grenades. 

SARI B: --in a-- in a factory. 

DORI LAUB: Did you think of your family know what was happening? 

SARI B: Well, we saw a lot in Birke-- in Birkenau. You know, we saw the smoke. We saw the gas chambers. 

But my parents were still young. So even though I saw everything, you just can't believe this-- this is happening to-- to you. So I really do think it was really happening to me, too. And-- 

DORI LAUB: Sorry. It seems like for you, the only person that really died was your grandfather. The others you thought maybe-- 

SARI B: Well, I did thought there was maybe my father was around. I really feared. And this is really why when I had gotten liberated from the ladies camp, which was a thousand person, went and heard that there was a man camp-- 

ABE B: Which was in Buchenwald. 

SARI B: --which was in Buchenwald. And I was hoping that I would find my father there. So I went to Buchenwald. It wasn't that easy to get there, but finally I did get there and tried to look. I didn't know-- 

ABE B: That was after liberation already. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You were there? 

ABE B: Yeah, she found me over there. 

SARI B: That's when I met him. 

ABE B: She found me over there. 

SARI B: I met him at the same time when I was looking for my father. So they put me down in a room, and I don't know, it was his room, so I was his block. And I was asked to be taken to between Hungarian people because I couldn't speak German, or Polish, and so on. 

ABE B: Or Yiddish. 

SARI B: Or Yiddish. And they tried to take me, but I couldn't walk on the street yet because I was liberated in-- in March, end of March. It was-- was Passover around that time. And when I came to Buchenwald, it was end of April. And they got liberated April 11. 

And the bodies, you had to walk through one. And if you wanted to go anywheres, there was bodies laying all over the ground. One was shot, the other one was just plain-- 

ABE B: Beaten to dead. 

SARI B: --beaten to dead. And-- but and matter of fact, there was the little tiny strawberries was growing on people. 

LAUREL VLOCK: On the people? 

SARI B: On the people. I don't know if you remember, there was a whole field. There was little-- 

ABE B: Well, the wild strawberries, they were left dead on the ground, the wild strawberries grew over them. 

SARI B: It was just-- and people were eating it. And I just-- 

ABE B: They were picking up the strawberries off their bodies and eating them. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Strawberries were growing on human beings? 

ABE B: Yeah, wild strawberries. 

SARI B: Wild strawberries, the tiny little thing that comes up very early in the year. It was end of-- beginning-- something like-- 

ABE B: Yeah, well, you see, when they-- when towards the end when they were liquidating from Buchenwald, something like 40,000 people went on what they called the "death march." And most of those people died while being transported. And there were no-- no means of burying them or disposing of the bodies, so they were just laying there and rotting there. 

SARI B: It took a long time because it was like woods in-between there well between Weimar and Buchenwald. And they couldn't catch up with all of them, so it really was something. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You met each other there. 

ABE B: After liberation, yeah. 

SARI B: After liberation. After I had-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: How did you meet? 

SARI B: Well, there's a lot to it before-- 

ABE B: We're going through-- We're going through a lot-- a lot. 

SARI B: I will be jumping from one thing to the other because when I had gotten liberated, it was also not so easy. We were making bombs in a factory, Allendorf. And there was a thousand ladies. And just about towards the end, a bomb fall out of my foot. Matter of fact, I have like a crooked toe from it. And that puts me in the hospital because my foot swell up and I couldn't walk. 

Not that we had shoes, we had this Holland shoes, the wood shoes. We call it Holland shoes. You know that? And they put me in the hospital. 

And then next morning, we find out that the Americans are getting closer. And they try to liquidate the whole camp. So everybody had just got to work. 

We got up to the [INAUDIBLE] in the morning. And they started to send everybody for the walk. They didn't know how far we have to walk or what have you. I couldn't walk. I was in the hospital. They throw me on a truck where the SS men-- it wasn't SS men. They were mostly Weimars. 

ABE B: Wehrmacht. 

SARI B: Wehrmacht people. And they put the luggages on the truck, and they put me onto the truck, too. But whenever we stop for something, the girls kept on saying, Sari, get off the truck because you're going to go to the gas chamber. This not going to do any good for you. So how can I get up? I can't walk. 

But in the evening, when we were staying outside of the fields, they decided they're not going to let me get back on the truck. There was haystack, very high, and they made horse in it. So about four of us went into the haystack, and we covered ourselves up. And we stayed there overnight. 

The next morning, we look out, and we heard noises, and we didn't know what was going on. But all of a sudden, we saw colored people, which we never witnessed before. We didn't know of any color people. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You mean black people? 

SARI B: Yeah, black people. 

ABE B: Negroes, never saw a negro in our lives. 

SARI B: OK. So we didn't know if we should be frightened, or should we-- we should be happy, or-- we thought it's even worse than the Germans were because we didn't know what it is. And later on, we went back again, and we started to talk between ourself. And one of girls looked up a little bit later, and she heard, yes or no, yes or no. She figured these soft people, really, they are from America. And she was kind of listening. She heard of-- she learned a little bit of English to make the words that it's different than German. 

And every time she heard them, she went a little bit closer and closer out from the haystack. And all of a sudden, we saw people was marching. So that was the American soldier. They had different clothes on them and so on. But evidently, they didn't know too much about us because they-- we were the first one who got liberated, so they kind of stopped, and looked, and started to talk to us. But we couldn't answer anything. So they would have to bring a man who speaks a low bit Hungarian, which was very, very broken language. 

DORI LAUB: [INAUDIBLE]. So your first seeing for the first time in your life-- in your life, a black man, was for you the sign of-- 

SARI B: Of liberation. 

DORI LAUB: --freedom from the concentration camp. 

SARI B: And they were very nice to us. And they had really treated us extremely nice. They had opened a shoe factory for us because we had no shoes. Swollen foot and every like that, we should go in and find shoes. Now, you could imagine, 400 womens dying to look for-- to find shoes for ourselves. We mixed up the whole store. But I wind up in one piece, somebody else wind up with another-- 

DORI LAUB: Sari, you said you were looking for your father, not for your mother and aunts? 

SARI B: Well, I-- I really-- after this stories, what we had heard, my sister was so young that I didn't think that she could be alive. But my father-- my brother was still 13, so I found he was a little bit more of a chance to find him. And that's when I was looking. 

So I walked away from that camp when there was a thousand women to the camp where I met my husband, which was Buchenwald and there was-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: What is your relationship like? 

SARI B: --20,000 men. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What is your relationship like, the two of you having met in a camp? 

ABE B: Well, uh-- 

SARI B: That was a story by itself. Because I met him, I couldn't talk to him. He couldn't talk to me. 

ABE B: You mean in the present or-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: At present. 

ABE B: --in the beginning? Oh, at present, I would say that our marital relationship is better than average. I don't know if it's because of our past that unites us or because of our personalities, but that's what it is. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you talk about the experiences to one another? Do you remember them, together, I mean. 

ABE B: Otherwise-- we-- we don't live with it, let's put it that way. You could never forget it. We try not to live with it. 

After the absence of all these years, I would think that it would be easier for us to bring it up. Evidently it isn't so because I come to points where I suffer, and it bothers me all over again. Like the other day, I was-- I was just watching television where they were killing these baby seals. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Seals? 

ABE B: Yeah, in Alaska? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yeah. 

ABE B: You know, the men with clubs would just hit these seals over the heads. We had a period of time in Majdanek, down where the-- which was one of the organized concentration camps-- where evidently they had too many people over there. They had no need for that many people. So they tried to then the population of that camp. 

So that's what they-- they had some Russian prisoners, which they were strong, they were healthy, so they-- they did exactly the same thing. In the morning, every morning, they would open up the gates of the block, and they would say, everybody out. And then one would stay on one side, and the other one would stay on the other side, and-- and-- and-- they would take swings at you. If you weren't fast enough that you could outrun them, you wound up on the pile. They would hit you over the head just like they were hitting the seals. 

You know, now you see people by the hundreds protesting and marching, they should stop the slaughter of the seals. I wonder how many people have raised their-- their voices then to stop the slaughter of-- of-- of people, of innocent people-- men, women, and children. Why? Why? For what? 

Over here, if I-- if a killer commits a crime, and he kills a dozen people, he goes to jail. He gets lawyers. It takes years until he goes through the judicial system. And they tried to save him. 

You can't-- they can't kill a killer. Over there, we were killed by the thousands, by the millions. We were killed, violated. And who ever raised their voice? I wonder where all these humane people were then. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You have no family, either of you. 

ABE B: No, I was the only one that survived out of the whole family, just like her. 

DORI LAUB: What is it to have a wife or husband who knows exactly what it was like? 

SARI B: Well, sometime maybe that's why we have more in common, or we could appreciate more each other, or we just comfort each other. I mean, look, I went to Buchenwald. I was all by myself. I was 17. You know, he was a year and a half older, and from there we went-- 

ABE B: That was already towards liberation. You know, when we started out, we were much younger. 

SARI B: And from there, we went away to another camp because the Russians were coming to Buchenwald, to take Buchenwald over, so. we went-- we went away to-- 

DORI LAUB: Do you think of things in the same way? 

ABE B: Well, we can't think exactly the same way. As-- as horrible as her experiences were, they are minute in comparison to my experiences, to my suffering. So we can't feel exactly the same way. But we have a lot in common. 

DORI LAUB: Sari, do you-- what did you think of that? Do you agree with him? 

SARI B: Do I agree with him? Most of the time. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you agree that your suffering was less than his? 

SARI B: Well, I-- first of all, I was fortunate, as I was really the last one to go in to Germany, which really wasn't so good because at that point, they didn't know what to do. If you're young, what all they just took you by the bunch and just send you to the gas chamber. 

And then on the other hand, I was lucky enough to be liberated first, which was in March. So I really was in camp only eight months. Now, how can you compare eight months against five, six years? You know, so it makes the difference because I lost my parents in eight months before where he had lost it in so many years before. 

Plus thank God I have not seen my mother's hand like he did with-- with the ring, or, you know, whatever. So even though I know what it-- I didn't believe it because when I met him, and I went to another camp where he was, I still didn't believe that I have nobody. I still fight my way to go home to my own hometown to see if anybody's home because I didn't give up hope. I mean, this is where I going. 

Very few women in my age would do what I had done to walk away from the camp. I had no papers. I have no proof. I have no way to show that I was so-- 

ABE B: Concentration camp commandant. 

DORI LAUB: You don't have a number? 

SARI B: I don't have a number like his. I ran away from it. And I was like, I don't miss it. 

ABE B: She doesn't miss it. 

SARI B: I was just fortunate. But that time, and I was going from one camp to the other, they really didn't believe me because so many people was trying to run away or hide that it was very-- matter of fact, they put me in jail a couple of times before I had gotten to go home [INAUDIBLE]. But I got liberated in March, so June, April 11. It was enough time. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Which-- how would people think you were running away into the camps? I mean-- 

SARI B: But I wasn't running that time to camps. I was trying to be private-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: I know, but people thought you were running away. 

SARI B: Right, that's what they did. But somehow I managed to get where I really wanted to get. And yet, I find people over there from my hometown, the mens. And I know where their wives were, and I ran to the other camp to tell them that your family-- 