[BEEP] INTERVIEWER: You moved to the other city. And I want to come back to you. 

SUBJECT: I moved to the city. That means that you want me to talk more about the city. Well, I know. I've got to keep on moving. The other city, again, six miles away approximately, named Sosnowiec. The city was unlike Bedzin. Spread out more, and more sophisticated in a way. Unlike the other city, somehow the more affluent one and the lesser one, they were bought together at different levels, either activities, social or whatever. They were close. The city was small. And they cared for one another, simply. They just cared for one another. 

The city, Sosnowiec, was a city with very many inhabitants. They weren't city born, so to speak. A lot had moved in there in years. So everybody is sort of a mixture. They settled there-- one a short time, one a longer time. And the atmosphere was quite different. 

INTERVIEWER: And you went to school there? 

SUBJECT: I went to school-- tried to go to school there, just briefly. One year or so. 

INTERVIEWER: And after that? 

SUBJECT: And after that went to work. 

INTERVIEWER: As what? 

SUBJECT: To begin with, I mentioned before, I went to back to the old city, which was commuting or living there with some sort of a foundry, leather factory. 

INTERVIEWER: At the age of 12 or 13? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: A laborer in a factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who did you live with when you were 10, 11? 

SUBJECT: That's a good question. I had grandparents in that city, where I came from, you know. I had grandparents in the original city, Bedzin, and boarded with them. But later on, as I started earning a little bit more money, I had a cart on the train, going back and forth, a commute. It was only about 30 minutes ride one way. So it'd be no problem to go on the train and jump off and get back in the morning and evening. I did that for about a year or two, something like that. 

INTERVIEWER: At what age? 

SUBJECT: I'm talking about 12. 11, 12 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: You were a regular factory worker? 

SUBJECT: A regular factory worker. Specific work. And there was nothing unusual about it. Matter of fact, I felt privileged I had a job. 

INTERVIEWER: 10 hours a day? 

SUBJECT: Something like that. Something like that. It was all-- nobody counted hours. In fact, as I remember, not only that, but there was some kind of law, partly social, against kids. It must have been something. At times inspections came at the factory, and there was me and another kid and we had to hide. So we just won't be discovered. Or better yet, we were directed into the kitchen where the boss lived, and help out over there while the inspection came. Because there must have been some kind of youth law, or whatever. And I'm sure it was not for the protection of the youth. If it was ever for any purposes, well, you take away the job from a grown up. 

That city, again, the struggle was still the same as far as making a living. The struggle was still the same. Personally, or for many other people. 

INTERVIEWER: For your family? 

SUBJECT: Family, right. Everybody started growing up a bit, and of course I have older children in the house. Everybody started to work whenever they could. That is a period when you are already aware of everything at the age of 12. Nothing is any more too hard, or you're too young to understand. There's no such thing. You make the move and you get involved. 

Trying to remember the city as it was, the atmosphere is not the same. Maybe I was a stranger to the city, or sort of. But as time went by, as time went on, you get involved again in the city in types of organizations. You start to know whatever in the city goes on. The only impression that I had later on that said not much caring what's going on. And the years proceeding it, working for a couple of years in another city. And finally came back to the city to work. Another type of job. A short while, and then eventually, in 1934, I was already working next door where I lived in a cabinet maker shop. 

INTERVIEWER: For how many years? 

SUBJECT: That was really just about two or three years stretch of time. In a cabinet makers shop, and working full time. And if you want to know how much I made, I'll tell you exactly-- it was the amount of about $5.00 a week. Five zlotys, to be correct. And five zlotys was honorable, you know? You call it apprenticeship. Apprenticeship. And getting an apprenticeship, was all together different. 

The family personally, as I said, started growing up. And everybody brought in a little bit more. Some people got married already in the house-- my older brother. Some of the family already went on there own, as far as just wandering around. The family got to be a littler smaller. Because the grownups just didn't have enough room in the house. Not enough as far as room, basic footage. Or just not enough to go around. So just took off. 

But I came back. And I said, I worked in the city and helped support the family. Friday, my mother was already down at the shops. 5:00, which was supposed to get paid. She came already in the morning, 8:00, 9:00, and said, what am I going to do with the money at 5:00? The stores are going to be closed. And I won't be able to buy Shabbos. My boss made some arrangements, and paid me in advance whatever it is. So much so that after three years, I was already a full fledged mechanic, and run already a shop-- a cabinet maker shop. 

At times-- 1938, 1939. I've got to jump, because I don't know what to continue with that will be relevant to you. Some unrest started to be between the people. Hitler and the war, you know? The feeling was already there. We saw already in the city, refugees coming in from Germany. Because we were right near the border, about 10, 11 miles out of the German border. And we saw what's going on, and the atmosphere was very tense. 

And people that held jobs, they were from out of the city, from other cities. You know, a lot of people travelling for work. I don't know how to compare it with today, but if you couldn't find work in one city, if you weren't a family man-- even some of the family men-- you went for work, you went far and wide. So people, at that atmosphere, start taking off for home, to protect family and be near whatever happens. And places opened up for work, because people went out of the city so much so that a position opened for me to run the shop. The head man in the business had to leave. That was just it. And at that age, I was running already four or five people. That was considered a shop already. 

INTERVIEWER: At the age of 15? 

SUBJECT: 15. Right. Exactly. And the fact is, a year or two later at the beginning of the war, I was running already another shop. One of the owners has a brother, and he's still here, in New Haven I worked for his brother in his business. It was a shop, we called it a business. It doesn't mean-- I was working as hard as morning till night, but I was very knowledgeable in my business. Not earning much money, but at least a secure job. 

INTERVIEWER: What did those refugees tell you as people came across the border? 

SUBJECT: Well, you saw people not unlike the people we saw in the city. Sort of-- you saw them well dressed. Well dressed, luggage, families. And you know, the Jews didn't look like foreign people, German Jews, you know? And you can see they're not the type that you see in Poland, at least. But in the streets, you saw them in the street with luggage. I don't know who dropped them off. A bus or train or what. And groups of 30, 40 here, and some at the other end. 

And you hear stories-- they had to pack up and go. That's what you could hear. And the city-- not city government, the Jewish community-- tried to settle them in houses. Some houses, somewhere. That was the atmosphere. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you expecting then that Germany would attack? 

SUBJECT: At that time, you wonder what is it like? The older people keep talking, you know. The older people, war-- they remember World War I. You can hear talking. The Russians, the Austrians, they came. They did this, they did this. And the young people, which never saw it, it was just a curiosity. What's it like? It's almost an adventure. It's going to be a war. 

And of course, 1939 came in. In 1939, everything was tense. You hear already the government, officially, through the radios and loudspeakers, tells you to prepare, in a way, for war. Or defend-- you get involved in digging ditches on the outskirts of town, and the volunteers dig ditches. Sandbags in front of the windows in the lower floors. 

As youth, you get caught up in the atmosphere-- we'll fight, we'll fight. Not knowing what fight, but we'll defend. 

INTERVIEWER: Fight for Poland? 

SUBJECT: For Poland, naturally. Naturally. It's almost-- everyone gets so enthusiastic about it. You would not know the powers of it, because you never saw it. Because the oldest were frightened. The older people were frightened, to the point that some of them start moving, started packing up whatever they could and go farther inland, away from the border. Figuring that something's going to happen. And as the days go on, you hear the radio mobilization. And you hear war songs and threatening and encouragement for the people. Whipping up an atmosphere of courage. 

And another funny thing I can remember is the first time that I can remember that something good came out, or something mentioning the Jew with some sort of respect, wanting or needing, at the time. While at any other times, you only hear abuse mentioned in connection with the Jews or Jewish people. Now, in time of war, they're getting to be sort of asked to contribute, to contribute as far as money, naturally. That was one big thing you need for the war effort. And contribute as far as help fight the enemy. In complementary terms. And that was kind of shocking to hear that through the radio loud speakers. 

But as a youth, the atmosphere of war, we're sort of awaiting-- what are we going to see? What are we going to do? And let's go. Let's get ready. And I wasn't war ready, as far as being drafted as orders, but pick, shovel-- where do you want to dig? What do you want to do? Stuff and so on. 

The fatal day came. The fatal day came. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that day? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, I remember. I remember. The day, the city was about 11 miles from the border. And we're talking about September 1st, the invasion. Which I don't remember if it's the first or the second, the day that we were cuddled up-- families, you know, in the particular building that I lived. It was a corner building, and sort of not accessible to the inside. It had two steel doors. It was at the edge of town. 

And in the mornings you heard shootings and shouting, and stuff and so on. And finally-- and everybody was told to stay inside and hide. We went-- most of the people went to the basement, and we also were living in a basement apartment with the windows centered up. And about noon time, we heard the roaring of-- and also, we lived-- I lived-- right on a major street, which connects one city to the other. A thoroughfare, you know, you go through. And about the middle of the day, you hear armaments going and going and going and going, and shouting. And now and then you hear salvos from the shooting. No major gun battle took place in that city. They just marched through. 

Yet, in the evening, towards the evening, you started hearing, as I said, near the street, shouts and cries. People crying and hollering. And soldiers-- all of them in a tone of hollering and screaming. And people running and shouting and crying. You just kept hearing it, hearing it. And you know something is going on, but you wouldn't dare go out. 

And the day went on, and this was on and on. And we were sitting, shivering, you know? What's going to happen? What's going to happen? And nobody will dare go out, as I said. And in that building you had two doors, two iron doors, gates like. And we're wondering, nobody is coming in. Just nobody came into that building. We didn't know what's going on, except what we could hear from the outside. 

Well, the time came in the evening, just very late. As I said, I don't remember was it the second or the first day of the war. And finally, all hell broke loose. In the evening, it was really dark in September. It must have been 8:00 or 9:00 at that time. A few shots fired, and we understand. And all of a sudden, we heard megaphones in the yard, with shouts and screams, everybody out of the house in the yard. In a tone that you-- almost unimaginable. So harsh, so commanding. And with the threat that anybody remains in the house gets shot. 

And so everybody clung to each other out in the yard. And there was a house, sort of a tenement like, 40, 50 families, mostly women and kids and so forth and so on. And then in the late in the evening, no lights because the lights were almost out for quite a long time, you know, because of air raid possibilities. 

And we heard a lot-- everybody would run out, of course. Didn't wait to get shot. Went out into the yard. And coming out, you've got in front of you many, many soldiers-- big guys-- all with a flashlight in their hand and the guns, the carbines. And over that, shouting and screaming vulgarities and insults at Jews, you know? They were just-- it wasn't just shouting. You understand? What they told you frightened you right to the bone. And if you didn't-- if they tell you to go there, they meant you to go there. To run. 

And there's not question of running. If you run by him, you get licked, kicked, or hit. And everybody gets accumulated in the middle of the yard. The middle the yard, as many people as you can imagine in a tenement. Old women, children, everything out of the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Those soldiers were? 

SUBJECT: Those soldiers right there, amongst us. 

INTERVIEWER: What soldiers? 

SUBJECT: The German soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER: There were Germans already there? 

SUBJECT: Yes. The Germans, that's what I said. We heard them all along during the day. During the day. We knew they were Germans. But we didn't know what was going on, because we didn't dare look out. And finally. late at night, it was a mystery to us that nothing affected us. Later on we understood what happened. 

So once they accumulated us out in the yard, then finally the command was, all the Jewish men leave the yard. Just march out. And you can imagine what was happening to women and children. The agony describing the cries-- it's just all that you could hear, was cries and yammering, thinking, what's happening to the men? Men and young men and older men, whatever. It doesn't make any difference. 

And they start pushing and shoving and screaming and hitting. There wasn't no question-- if they tell you stand up and march and walk, I would consider it all right, they want us, go. But it didn't take place like this. Just whip and run. Whip you and run. Always run, run, run, run. 

And as I said, they took us away and run us out in the street to the next corner. From the next corner, every 20 yards or so, you heard sort of a chain, like soldiers on this side, soldiers on this side. Direct you, push you. Run, run, run. You know? That's all we heard. It's what we heard all day. And about proximately another a quarter of a mile and every so yards, there's nowhere to go to the right or to the left. Understand? They were out there with the light and with the carbines, and directed you-- run, run, run, until about a quarter of a mile at the intersection. I still didn't know what's going on. 

At that, point the command was, empty you pockets. Everything you've got. You could see already that you were the last of the-- of whatever part of the city. That you've got a heap over there, this side and this side. Wallets, belongings, everything out of the pocket already there. You gladly-- you wouldn't question anything. You put out whatever you could. Until you get a kick in the bottom and run further. And there was another stretch, another quarter of a mile, going on with running just about. And they finally huddled us in at that time to City Hall. It was a new city hall built at the edge of town. 

They brought us in down there-- and later I found out it was part of the centers of that part of the city that they deposited all the men. There were other centers there, some other place, which I later heard. And they put us in the basement of that new city hall. There were approximately three or four rooms in the bottom. And as many people, 2,000 or so, young and old and everything else. It was about time to move around. Squeezed us together. And there was already, by the time we all accumulated and settled down, it must have been 12:00 at night, after all this. 

And we stood at night standing all along. And what do you do? You pray, or whatever you do. You wonder what's going to happen to you next? 

In the morning, there was still a question of sleeping. And by the life of me, I can't imagine the sanitary facilities. Nothing of the sort. In the morning, a light came on. We saw basement windows, you know, above ground. And each one of them was a machine gun pointed in there. Each one of them. 

And nothing, just locked up. And there we were for about 24 hours, until the next middle of the day. Something happened that I won't tell you of on the camera-- what happened over there during the day in that room. I'll tell you otherwise, I just don't feel like to tell you. It's that sort of thing. People went berserk. I mean, this I will tell you. Just went out of their mind screaming. Worried about themselves, worried about their family or what's going to happen next. 

Older people just about couldn't stand anymore. They just collapsed in the midst. I was there. I was a youngster. To me, physically, it didn't mean anything. All I was thinking of at that time, I remember I had an older brother with me. And I was standing, and windows were on one side of-- the windows pointing the guns at us on one side. And I told him, just make sure you stay between the two doors. Just think, in case they shoot. You'd have some protection. That's the only thing I could think of then. So we huddled together there. 

Nothing happened for the first 24 hours. And eventually, they start releasing the younger ones-- eight, nine, 10, 11, 12 to begin with. They called out ages and let them go, as far as I know. And by the end of the day, the first 24 hours, that evening they went for the 15, 16, which I was released, and went home. 

A day later, 48 hours, most of the rest were released, except some they took to a work detail. All types of work, used them. And among-- but before they released them, the men of ages probably 20 or 30, young men, they assigned them to come back in a day or so to work details in the city, here or there. I've been told later that they didn't take any names or places, anything. You'd better be there, otherwise you'll be shot. 

And 48 hours later, as I said, the rest of the people came home. And some of them, a number, 50 or 60 or something, they held back for another time for work. And a few days later, we hear of the people they held back, a number of them, a dozen or so, young men, were right out shot. This was-- it was the cream of the crop of the young people that we knew. 

Now, to tell you that that's something I made up-- one of the ones that was shot, his brother is in new haven here. Young man at the time, around 20, 22, of age. One of the people that sort of-- the city was proud of. You know, young industrious men. One of them, his brother is still here. That's the one I knew personally. Others I didn't. But that's just the beginning of what was going to come. 

And of course, later on, you're talking about year 1940 now-- because it was September. And until New Years, life was-- for a few months life was just unpredictable in any sort of way. Things started to happen, food was completely out. And the bakeries started baking by rationing, you know. Whenever they rationed anything they would take your ration tickets. And you had to get up in the morning and stay in line. The line as long as you can imagine. And if you're lucky, by the end of the line you still brought home a loaf of bread. 

And at the lines, you have the German guards. And at will, they knock you down. At will, they shot you. It happened. This happened-- in this city, not everything happens at one point. As I told you before, the centers that they were putting people, we know of the one that took us last. Remember I told you last, because probably as they were closer to the end, it happened so that at the other ends of the city there were other centers, which I went to later, took people different places to some coordinating center. 

And so I know in my street, the bakery was right in the same street. Every other day you hear, this one was knocked down. This one was shot for some particular reason, believing that somebody wants to go in the front of the line, the back of the line. Any kind of dispute. Anything-- two people talk, if the guard feels what to do, he does it. There's no question about it. And then you hear what happened at the other end of the city and the other end of the city. 

But an atmosphere that you just weren't sure when you go out if you're going to come back. And then another thing started right away the first year. That we were starting to get restricted. Of course, curfew was invoked right away after evening hours. And then you had specific streets-- 

INTERVIEWER: After what hour? 

SUBJECT: Evening hours. I can't be specific, because I don't remember. Early in the morning, of course, working hours was 7:00 or 8:00, or whatever, until about evening. And city streets were restricted, because the German occupation army took over the main streets and the main buildings. And any where near around there they cordoned off. And they cordoned off and said, there better be no Jews allowed over there to pass by walking. 

And it started already to begin with fingerprinting, and sort of passports with pictures. This started right away. And everything started-- the bureaucracy started to work. And everything they had to relay to us, to begin with, was through posters. You just woke up in the morning and you saw posters all over the city, and all over the government. Had to do this. You had to be at that center. You had to register at this, at that. 

INTERVIEWER: In what language? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: In what language? 

SUBJECT: It was German and Polish. German and Polish. The German language was not news to us. We knew it. Most of us knew the German language. And of course, most of the people were in the first World War, and there was no problem with the German language. But we knew we had the Polish language. And what happened as far as atmosphere in the city-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember how such a poster began, for the line? 

SUBJECT: Achtung. And this means, watch out, you know? Bekanntmachung, which means sort of in a nicer way. But most often means make sure you watch, or something like that. And then it started an atmosphere that when you do this industry and work, the normal life stopped to a standstill the first months. Nobody knew where to go, what to do, whatever it is. 

But finally, things came to halfway normal. Not normal, but possible to live. You went back to the store to begin with. You went back to work. Whatever functioned on a slow basis. 

But what happened then is that if you had to be out in the street, go to work, or go shopping, whatever it is, it started an atmosphere where from nowhere, you'll see what you call at that time verlader. All of a sudden you're in the process of walking one place to another, trucks, army trucks, surround you from every side. Germans soldiers off the trucks, and all of a sudden everybody halt. Everybody has to stay in the spot. Go no place. 

What they want-- they just grab whoever they want, at that point, to work. They needed people, not any way to begin with, not asking or anything else. Just they came, in four trucks, and surrounded a block, like. And whoever is on the street, you have to stand still. Because if you move, you get shot. And they took you wherever they saw fit for work. Or where they thought was fit. They took you to work for their purpose, by either loading, unloading, digging, moving, shifting, cleaning houses, anything. And if you're lucky, within a day or so, you're back. 

That was-- I mean, you still can live with it. And I said, there wasn't any kind of pay or so forth and so on. But that atmosphere that you had when you started getting tightened up-- that you go out, you don't know when you're going to come back or if you're going to come back. And God forbid if you resist anything like that, you know? And if you went to work, you don't think you were just another worker. You worked under the gun. You'd better do it fast, better do it good. And better keep doing it-- don't sit down and breathe. That kind of atmosphere. 

But you live through that kind of stuff, as long as you don't get fatally harmed. But as time went on, the Germans start working through a committee, the Jewish community. And in our city in particular, they asked for the Jewish elders, or something like that, from the Jewish committee. Which, to them, they relate orders. 

INTERVIEWER: The Judenrat? 

SUBJECT: The Judenrat, right. Judenrat. They relate to the Jewish people whatever they wanted. And the orders came very frequent, and every day you hear something else the Germans want. One day it's money, the next day it's jewelry. The next day they want so many workers. And so forth and so on. And of course the Judenrat did their best to comply. And they want whatever they could get, and give it to them. And believing, all the time believing, that you buy your life, you buy your time, whatever it is. 

That doesn't mean that the normal brutality from day to day, either something happened in this household, a German came in, or in this household, or on this street, or on that street. You just saw a couple of soldiers marching, you never know which door they're going to turn and where they're going to raise hell. Raising hell, I almost am ashamed to mention, it could be anything. Abusing women, taking the money, and just beating up and go. That was sort of standard. 

Again, by the norm of whatever we come to know later, that was almost mild. Whenever you got away with your life, it's almost considered mild. But that was the atmosphere. You would think that the Judenrat, the Jewish community, they will get the orders. And if it's obeyed, they'll leave us alone. Nothing doing. 

The city tightened a little bit, as far as territory. Everyday you had another order-- this street is off limits, and this street is off limits. Commuting between towns was to be off limits. 

And then working groups started to emerge through the German government, with special permissions for people that are involved in any type of projects for them to be able to travel here and travel there, those sorts of things. And then it was considered almost you got the sort of privilege, you've got this blue card or the red card, you are an employee for the German army or government. And you're considered almost untouchable almost, sometimes. You know, here, I've got my passport, and I'm also an employee. 

But that didn't last for long. At times, the Germans were marching through or whatever it is. To them, it meant nothing, a card. They hit you, beat you, to a pulp. Because you think you're somebody, you know? At one time, you think you got the card and you're somebody. The next one, you think you're somebody, but I still can do with you want I want. 

Life continued. Food was the biggest problem. Food, and maybe medical help. It started to get to be so that medicine-- medicine, just for illnesses, was almost nonexistent. It was almost nonexistent, unless you knew somebody somewhere who could get something hidden someplace. If you were sick, you had the worst problem of your life. Even simple medicines, simple medicines. 

If you needed surgery-- and the reason I mention it is because there's something personal there. That you just agonize, and you see people die. And there's nowhere to go to, no one to speak to. Nobody is going to give it to you. 

INTERVIEWER: Who needed surgery? 

SUBJECT: Don't-- it's too personal. I will refrain, it's too personal. I think I told you before, I'll give you an overlook, whatever it is. I don't want to go into personal things. Just mention it. Just as far as atmosphere was concerned. The crux of it all is the city itself, whatever they've done, me as a youth, I was almost above it all, feeling I can do it. I can hack it, whatever it is. I was a physical worker since very minor. And I've been caught on the buses and the trucks many a time. Many a time. 

And it didn't mean nothing to me to go load or shovel cement or rocks or whatever it is. Slum, you know? I could do it better than anybody else. And I showed them. Of course, their famous word was-- the famous insults, you lazy so and so, Jew. You know? Pig or whatever, I couldn't even go into it, their insults. And I told myself, I'll prove it to you who is lazy and who can do it, you know? Innerly thinking. All the youth, that way. So if that's what they wanted from me, I'll show them, see, I can do it. 

But it wasn't simple. 

INTERVIEWER: It was important to you to show them that you could work? 

SUBJECT: Right. Right. You know, just disarm them. And even do the task faster than they wanted to. I could prove it to them. I don't know how many others could. But this was just my naive inner thinking that I could satisfy them, or disprove their theory, or their thinking-- lazy so and so. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you realize that you were doing the work for them? 

SUBJECT: Of course I did realize. You just do this, and further on you do everything to save your life. It wasn't a question, you're doing it because you want to show off. You're doing it, you want to satisfy him in order to get away. And you do it. You just don't hesitate. Later on in life, I did many other things. 

That was a period of disorganization, 1941. But soon things started to get to be run like a clock. As far as working orders came out of the city government, Jewish community, or Judenrat, with specific assignments for youth, ages, to report to certain points, to certain points, every morning. And so the city was working. Everybody available for work, available or assigned. And of course, the management of the city government then, the Jewish government, or community, which had the right over the Jews. The Polish government had nothing whatsoever to say about it. 

Instead, we were told to the Judenrat, to the German commandeer, which ordered them what to do as far as this is concerned. It got to be so we got assigned orders one day-- we need a hundred people there, a hundred people there, so forth and so on. And by that time we were already registered. Everybody was registered. And of course, the Germans had a copy of the documents, so far and so on. And we were assigned for whatever task it was. 

It was already more organized to the point that you knew you were going to work. You didn't have to be caught in the city. And you always knew that you do a job that's supposedly it's important, and supposedly it helps you and helps the Jewish people. It's all, we'll be productive, sort of. There was no-- people that didn't work in their life, religious people, that would be somewhat sort of a thinking religious person with a shovel, you know, with the beard. They started to get into it and worked with enthusiasm just to save themselves, and to satisfy, and leave me alone. 

That was 1941. By that time, we had not heard of mass murder or anything like that, or could even conceive of it. A beating, a killing, a shooting all around the city. What happened by then is the Jewish stores-- you know, merchants-- were taken over by German supervisors, sort of. Management. You understand? Any Jewish owned store was-- there was a name for it. They took over, like in a bankruptcy, somebody takes over. And the Jewish owner was only a worker in his own store. And they managed the money, or whatever it is. 

And during that period-- during that period, talking about 1941, was a transition period from bad to worse. You had, on some kind of trumped up charges, this man that owns this store, supposedly some money purpose-- his manager accuses him of something, and the other guy of something else. And they hung them in the middle of the city. And by my order of the German government, the whole city has to come out and watch. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember such a thing? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I remember. How can you forget it? 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Can you describe-- a group of people massed together, you know. Like at a rally, with-- what do you call it? 

INTERVIEWER: Gallows. The 

SUBJECT: Gallows set up not far from the church. But that doesn't mean anything, but that's just that corner of the streets, that particular corner. And the particular names, particular people, hung up there for 24 hours. We saw them hanging, or everything. What do you do? You cry. You're afraid. You worry. I guess this was part the scare tactic, or whatever. And it happened a half a dozen times or something like that during the year. 

INTERVIEWER: How did those people go to their death? 

SUBJECT: I did-- you see, by the time they were brought over there, we weren't in contact. I guess they come from jail or wherever they kept them. And all that you see, they go up on the gallows, and all of a sudden these two people swing. 

INTERVIEWER: And they said nothing? 

SUBJECT: I didn't hear anything or saying anything. We don't know what stage they were. Beaten, conscious, or what. At least, I didn't know. But the city was ordered to come-- men, women, and children, and everybody. And you saw as many as you could see, people witnessing what they've done. And names they will still remember, but of unimportance. But that started types of terror, slowly. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say something to each other after such a thing? 

SUBJECT: You say privately, in your home, and you speak with your neighbors and so on. You always figure that there's always, as somebody said, at one point you can buy them, you can appease them. At one point you can buy them-- of course, more political termed people think, well, how far can Hitler get away? France declared war, and England declared war. And at that time, we still knew these were the major powers in the world. How far can he go? And he has to be defeated. 

And of cruelty, we knew of cruelty because we've heard about him. We heard about Hitler over the years. We listened to the radio speeches back in the 1930's, you know? Remember, the only radio in the whole neighborhood, people were listening. And came up, and you shut it when you heard it. But you don't believe it's going to happen to you. 

And then we come back from situations like this, and most of the time we get encouragement from the Judenrats that we'll deal with them, we'll try to save ourselves. Just buy time. Buy time-- that was the big thing. And you want to stay alive for the day that it's going to end. 

And it's 1941, and that was that period what happened-- you got caught or you got there. And I said, they organized working groups. And also in 1941, started the first working groups to be sent into Germany to camps, called arbaaz camps, which is working camps, under promises from the Judenrat that you just go to work and you'll be taking care of. The youth, particularly the youth have been selected to a list, whatever they chose. 

Most of the time what they chose is working people-- 500 one week, 500 another week. And so people were sent away from homes everywhere to Germany. And that was 1941. Some of my family were sent away, and some neighbors. Everywhere somebody was sent away. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brothers? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And 1941, there still was a period of time, even if you went to camp, there was some communication with the camp. And it became clear, as the months went by, that something was wrong there. And as I said, communication was still right, meaning once a month a postcard, something like that. And the postcard, which was sent censured, no question about it. But signs came in the script, sort of indications of what's happening. And not wanting to believe, but you had to believe. 

And to give you an example, the writing was-- the writing amounted to, when somebody wrote he is very lonely for this particular person, and this particular person always named a baker or a butcher. You know? Lonely for that person. I wish I could see him much more or see him, and so on. Or I wish I were with a particular relative, which is already dead. You know? That was the script. And the wording, the wording that the card was allowed to write is so forth and so on-- I'm all right, and I work. But I like to see him, and I like to see this. Greet him and greet that. And all the person indicates of something, there was a type of script, that indicates something is wrong at that camp. 

INTERVIEWER: That when they said, I'm missing somebody, that meant that person was already dead? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, no. It was missing-- I'd rather see, or I want to see-- they'd rather be dead. They'd rather be dead. Or whatever it is. I came to understand later what that means exactly. We knew at home, what it is. Anytime they associate anybody with the baker and the butcher, it just indicates food. Food. Starving for food. Food. And when they indicate somebody already dead, years ago-- 

INTERVIEWER: It means, I'd rather be dead. 

SUBJECT: Or I'm close to it, you understand? When they greet somebody who already died three or four years ago before, and elder in the family, this was an indication of what's happening in the camp. So at first, they advertised for volunteers, a list, but then things get to be known, talked around, and the youth start to hide. They don't want to go, if they were assigned to go out in the work camps. 

And what happened is they couldn't supply the quota, because they came in every now and then with bigger amounts of people. And the youth start to hideout. And that precipitated that as long as the Jewish community couldn't supply, the Germans came in and grabbed whatever they could. Their old tactics-- surround the house, surround the streets, surround the market place. Grab whatever they could, and shift away. So this form only worked for a while, until it's been known what it is. 

In the meantime, you would hide out. And we also at that time got to the point that we tried to flee the country, or go further in. You always think that somewhere is better, or you hear somebody smuggled themselves. And then groups, they took off. Some young people took off in groups. Some got caught, and the bodies were brought back later to the city. Some made it-- very few. But that was a foregone conclusion. It won't do any good. 

And by that time, we're talking the beginning of 1942. It was a year of transition with camps. And living in the city, again, was from day to day. And anything and everything happened. Just killings, abusings. You heard so much of abusing women, too horrible to describe. And abuse, rape. 

INTERVIEWER: By German soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. And so much so, the horrible part of it is it's been done in family homes. They grab them and take them away. They came to the houses and pulled people out and did what they want, understand? You heard it here and there and there-- neighbors. You talk about it, nobody will tell you they saw it, but I know of neighbors. Again, this is just of something that's an indication of what's to come. It was almost kid stuff to what was expecting us, you understand? And not us knowing, but thinking that's the horrible thing that happened to us. What more can happen? 

In 1942, the beginning, myself I was already employed at a German factory about 10 miles away, or 15, with an elite group that a special Sonderkarte which means special passport to travel-- or not travel. Travel, we were transported by convoy bus, plus from one connection to another, and then a four mile walk to a particular chemical factory. And there was an elite group, which I was, at that time, lucky to get into it. By commendation, that I could get into that group. And that gave me the privilege of not having to go to a work camp, because I was employed. 

And there were a couple of hundred of us. And I was one amongst many people of higher class, sort of, with connections that got to that type of group that could work. The work was one of the horrible jobs you can imagine. Not getting into the detail about the work, which is not important, but at that time I worked with the group. Started at 5:00 in the morning, and came home at 9:00, 10:00 at night. 

And as I said, we had to make-- at the one place, we had to gather in the middle of the city, and then take a tram ride, then a bus, and then four to five miles walk under arms, with the tank, and bought into this big factory. Mostly loading coal, coke, which they used in the chemical factory. It's a pesticide factory, something like that. And again, that was considered really something privileged, to be almost untouchable. 

Until one early morning in February or March, the end of the winter, at the point of the first gathering. 

INTERVIEWER: 1942? 

SUBJECT: I think 1942. They surrounded the whole group of us, 200, on the tram way there. Shipped us out. Instead of going to work, took us all out, and so on, of course, and marched us to the train, which was not too far away. They shipped us to Germany, to a work camp. That ended-- that ended the whatever I know of what happened to the city, which I never got back there. 

However, I've been informed later, in the camp-- which a new life started, sort of, what transpired in that city after I left. Months later, you know, during camp life-- during camp life there was always transitions where people came in and transferred from one camp to another. Some camps got always replenished with more people after some died. And a person from the city, my city, from my street as a matter of fact, came which I met in my own camp there-- mid-summer, early July or August-- and revealed what happened in that city. And basically what happened there is that the first time was the first time at the city. All I heard had happened before in other parts of the country. 

They surrounded it two block area, you know, square. Germans. That would have happened days after I'd been shipped away. This has been related to me. There's no secret about it. They surrounded and took out every person man, woman, and child. Everybody. And shipped them over to Auschwitz. And nobody ever came back from there. Something I'll tell you-- that's where the rest of my family went, outside of two brothers which were already in camp from before. And this is what happened in the city. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your mother and father? 

SUBJECT: Everybody. Whoever was left went with that first transport to Auschwitz. And that was the beginning of extermination camp work in this area, that area of the country. 

INTERVIEWER: When you left the morning to the tram, you didn't know what was going to happen? 

SUBJECT: No. It happened two days later. I didn't know until midsummer. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't have a chance to say goodbye? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER: You just left? 

SUBJECT: Goodbye-- what is a goodbye? I left at 5:00 in the morning, the house, and then I was gone. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say something on that morning to anyone? 

SUBJECT: No. What was there to say? You just go, and you figure you'll come home in the evening. And an hour later, at that point they guarded us and shipped us off to Germany. And there was no way of communications. It's not that-- and by that time, remember I told you before, there was some communication from camp. Some postcards at that time. When I was still home, at the beginning of the camps, used to send postcards home. It was some sort of a once a month mail. 

And I remember when I got there and mail time came, I sent-- I had no answer. I just sent and keep sending and sending-- I had no answer. And until mid-summer, when somebody came from that city, the neighborhood, and told me what happened. Why I don't get any answer. The whole area, that particular area, was at that time was the first transport for extermination in that city. 

INTERVIEWER: But when he told you that, did you know where there were sent? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to them there? 

SUBJECT: You heard it over the years, through the years. You had it to begin with-- you see, while at home still, you hear things you don't imagine. You figure that couldn't happen. Brutalities, this kind of killing, that kind of dying. But when you are already in camp, you see what's going on. People dying left and right, getting killed. You don't want any more things like this. You hear it. 

INTERVIEWER: You heard of Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: The first time-- we heard of Auschwitz over the years we were in camp, other camps-- Buchenwald, Majdanek. We heard of all this. Because you heard of transportations of people-- I don't know why they did this. I myself had been shifted from camp to camp. And I'll tell you the reason later. They always did this. There was a merchant, we used to call him, at least in the first years. A German. We used to call him the merchant of the people. He came along and spoke to the commander, and said I want 100 people, and give me that kind. And he needed them for specific work some other place. At least, at one time when I was shipped out, they needed cabinet makers, carpenters. 

For my first camp, which I was-- my first trip, as I told you, they put me into camp and all the people, they put us on the road work, building a highway, Autobahn. And it consisted of just standing in front of a mountain with your pick ax. And you cut the mountain down, stone by stone. And fill up the trolley, whatever it is. The push wagon. And dump it at the side of the hill. And that's the way hundreds and hundreds of people like flies working around the mountains, and to the side with the shovels. That's the way I spent some of the time in my first camp. 

Incidentally that camp, which I was told my brother had been there before me, but has been shipped some other place. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: What Autobahn did you work on? 

SUBJECT: I know the locality. 

INTERVIEWER: Worked where? 

SUBJECT: It's in Oberschlesien, near Gleiwitz Somewhere there. Somewhere there. 

INTERVIEWER: And today this is a big road? 

SUBJECT: It's one of the major Autobahns. I mean, I only worked part time, but the thousands of people worked there for years. Slavery. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you driven over this road ever? 

SUBJECT: No, I haven't been back there particularly. But I was living on the other edge of the Autobahn. What I'm trying just to point out-- you asked me did I know about Auschwitz? Once you get to camp, you see the life and what's happening. You know what's happening right in front of you. 

I mean, it also happened that you go into a life of camp. You've got to consider so many facets in that. How do people work, how do people die? And what is the name Auschwitz came in, even before somebody comes. There's always a grapevine. If it's not legal, it comes-- a soldier, a guard, will utter a word. You know that in the camps to begin with, they had houses where you deposit the sick or the invalids, and so forth and so on. And once in a while, the warden comes and takes them away. And you know, they go to Auschwitz. You know? Because they're not useful anymore. These are camps that didn't have their own extermination ovens. It was considered a small camp, that particular one. 

And you know-- and as I said, you know from people that transitioned from one camp to another. And you also know, you also learn a little later that at Auschwitz, they had Arbeiter groups, work camps. And if you talk of Auschwitz, you know also people survived Auschwitz. You know that. Survived Auschwitz and survived Buchenwald. Then you got to in, and what's happening? So many people went to the gas chamber, how didn't you go? But there were at times, at times when a transport went to Auschwitz, that the needed at a particular time people for workers, they separated the healthy ones and they put them to work. And 90% of them died at work. But some survived. 

And at other times, when they didn't need it, they didn't care if you were as healthy, as strong as anything. You just don't need it, and you go in there. But part of knowing, it was no secret anymore over there. You can't relate a secret to anybody-- there's nobody to tell. You talk about yourself. 

And as I said, when they transported from the city, that particular time, they transported people to Auschwitz, was the first in that area of the country. And that was the beginning of 1942. And later on, we find out it's already started-- in history, or what has been retold-- started already in 1941 in other parts, in the upper part of the country. 