INTERVIEWER 1: And as much as possible, personal memories, not a general statement. It's good when you-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: What things that happened to me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, it's good when you say something, but to say what here, what place. But otherwise, personal memory-- what happened to you? How-- if you talk of transports, what you saw. If you talk labor, what you saw-- add what you saw and what you thought at that moment, if you can remember. 

Are we all right, to start? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tape is rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. OK. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, my name is David Lipstadt. I was born in Warsaw, Poland in 1920. I come from my a middle class family. My father was a jeweler. And we had a store, a jewelry store, in Warsaw. 

I had a quite happy-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you speak a little louder? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I had a quite happy childhood. As far as I can remember, I was well adjusted-- didn't have any problems. I went to a public school first, at our cheder, and went to a Hebrew gymnasium, and I became involved in Zionist causes. I became a Revisionist. I was a follower off Jabotinsky. 

And then I started to feel the anti-Semitism in Poland and Warsaw. This was a time when they had the-- government was in favor of eliminating the Jews from commerce, eliminating the Jews from the professions, and replacing it by native Poles. 

I felt the situation became very desperate in 1939. We heard a lot of German propaganda when the Polish clergy-- where they can help fight against the Jews, starting with the ritual slaughter. So when the war broke out on September 1, 1939, I was in Warsaw, and I felt maybe this will help solve the Jewish problem. Maybe this will be a start of something to get us equal status with other nations. 

But I was pretty soon disillusioned when I saw what happened in the first seven days of the war when the German bombs began to fall on the Jewish sections of the city. And I first encountered-- that and badly hurt people laying on the streets-- burned people, especially on the eve of the-- the Jewish New Year-- and when the situation became worse, when the city of Warsaw was surrounded for 27 days, and there was no food, and people were dying. Finally, when the siege was over, and the Germans marched in, the real tragedy started. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you see them-- the Germans marching in? What did you see? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, they came in-- first on-- on motorcycles. I remember those big, heavily-- a lot of weapons. 

INTERVIEWER: Armed? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Heavily armed, I'm sorry, yeah, Germans. And I saw this-- there's a different-- there's a different life. The situation has changed completely. They-- we didn't have-- you didn't have any rights. We couldn't walk the streets. We had to make room for the Germans on the sidewalks, and we were supposed to walk on the road. We're supposed to greet them. 

And then day after day, new, uh, rules appeared. And they started with the arm band, which we had to wear. And they have-- our life was just worthless. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were at the time with your family? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I was with my family, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who was in the family? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yes. We still lived-- we had a little-- we saved some merchandise from the store. And we were-- still have some money, and we were buying the provisions that were available. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have brothers, sisters? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I had two-- two sisters, one older and one younger. And we lived in the same apartment. Of course, we feared for our lives because I when we-- when they closed the doors on the courtyard, and suddenly in the middle of the night, you heard knocking on the doors. And the Germans would come in and direct somebody out. Nobody knew who was going to be next. 

The situation prevailed for-- through the winter of 1939 where they-- we weren't safe on the streets. The German patrols would ride the street and shoot at people at random. So every time when we saw a German vehicle, everybody would run into the courtroom-- the courthouse-- and hide. 

But even at home, we weren't safe. They used to, like I said, would come in and drag people out, and they would disappear, or they will be left on the sidewalks. And they would be picked up in the morning and buried. In the spring of 1940, the situation has changed a little for the better. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were then 20 years old? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I was 20 years old. A lot of my friends who escaped from Warsaw were writing letters home stating that the conditions in Russia are bad. There is no-- there's a big influx of immigrants. There's no food. There's no place to live, and the conditions are bad. 

The Germans somehow learned about it, and they tried to lure those people back into their domain. And they have let up a little. The conditions became a little better. They were only taken out prominent Jews, Jews in the professions, political figures. 

This brought back a lot of people from Russia back into the-- into the-- areas occupied by Germany. And this situation lasted until the Fall of 1940 when, suddenly, they have began to build a brick wall in the middle of the Jewish quarters. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You lived in the Jewish quarter at that point? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: At this point, I was out of the Jewish quarters. And they have ordered all the Jews by a certain date to move into those-- into this area behind the brick walls. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see the building of the wall? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: They have taken Jewish laborers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well they were-- they were-- they were building a brick wall. And this created a big panic because people didn't know what's going to happen. And as soon as they found out that they have to move into the ghetto, everybody put his belongings, whatever they could transport, into the ghetto and tried to find a place to live. 

There was a-- an exchange of apartments between the Jews and the Poles in which the Poles, the few Poles who lived in the Jewish quarters, moved out and exchanged apartments with people who lived outside of the-- the Jews who lived outside of the Jewish quarters. When we moved into the ghetto, we had shared an apartment with a family which consisted of a mother and six children. They had two rooms and a kitchen. 

They lived in very, very poor conditions. They had no food. They had no heat because everything was very, very expensive and very hard to get. We had even brought over some coal from the old apartment, big lumps of coal that you loaded on a wagon, and dragged into the new apartment. The, uh, the people-- the widow with her six children moved into the kitchen and gave us the two back rooms. 

I can remember vividly how they were spending 24 hours a day in bed getting up only to get a drink of water, hot water, or whatever little soap or little food they could get. But most of the time, almost all of the time, they spent in bed all together. 

In the meantime, the Germans kept pushing all the people from the small towns and villages surrounding Warsaw into Warsaw. They have taken up all the schools, all the public buildings with those refugees who couldn't take anything with them but the bundle of belongings, including the sick, the old. They were all there. 

And they were provided by the Jewish community, which consisted-- yes, when they formed the ghetto, they also formed the Jewish police. The Jewish police had no weapons. They had nightsticks, and a shield, and a hat. But this was-- they were guarding the ghettos. They were guarding the exits together with the German police. The hunger became so terrific little children five, six, seven, eight years old would come out of the ghetto, buy a few potatoes, hide them on their bodies. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see that? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yes, and tried to smuggle them-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think you could tell us, you know, what you saw? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, we saw this was a daily occurrence that the children were smuggling out-- going out through the either-- either going through a-- a hole in the brick wall, or there were places where there was just barbed wire. They would sneak underneath the barbwire, go out-- out-- outside of the ghetto, and try to buy a few loafs of bread, a few pounds of potatoes, bring them back on their bodies, hide them on their bodies, and sneak back into the ghetto. 

It was a tragic spectacle to see how those tall 6-- almost 6 foot Germans were fighting with those four or five-year-old kids and trying to shake out the last potato from their clothing. The Jewish police would help them in this task either by-- well, this was part of their job. And nonetheless-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you doing during this time? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, we were in the ghetto trying to make a living. There was still a little commerce going on among the Jewish people. There were people who were liquidating businesses, people who had stores where they salvaged-- we salvaged their merchandise and tried to sell it. 

They would-- they would try to live, to buy bread, to buy necessities of life. And the restrictions kept piling on top of the one on top of the other. Every day, there was a different order. First, we started with identity cards. They wanted everybody to be productive. Everybody had to work for the Germans. 

And there's the sense there was very little industry in the ghetto, very little-- very few jobs. There were only jobs available in the German armament factories. They were making uniforms, and rucksacks, and belts, and shoes for the German Army. So there was a scramble to get into those jobs. 

Well, first, they took the-- there was a factory would consist of a German manager and a Jewish manager, who would take orders from the German manager. First, at the beginning, they wanted only skilled labor. Well, the skilled shoemakers, and the skilled tailors, and the skilled, uh, uh, upholsterers became workers for the Germans. They were making the uniforms, and belts, and shoes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But did you-- did you have any profession? What did you-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, I was-- I was still at school. I didn't have any profession. The only thing I knew what I learned from my father and in the jewelry business. And my father didn't have a skill which was suitable to get any of those positions. 

So we had to bribe the manager, or we'd probably have to bribe his German manager, in order for my father to get the job. So my father succeeded in getting the job for him, and my sister in one place, and my mother and my younger sister in a different factory. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know how many karats of diamonds you had to give for a German? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, there was no, no-- there was no karat of diamonds. He would only say to my father, this general manager's wife is coming to see him, and he would like to give her a gift. He would like a-- a watch with the bracelet. Those occasions were very often. She was oft-- she would very often visit him while he would have to visit somebody. 

But you have to remember this time the Germans, who pushed into this small area a half a million Jews, there was a tremendous amount of sickness, especially older people, sick people, young children, who were left without-- in the cold, in the winter, without nutrition, without sufficient food, without sufficient shelter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see it? Can you describe it? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, there were-- they were walking. You could see daily a brother and sister walking the streets with rags on their feet tied with string, walking like two skeletons and begging for food. The Germans had given the people in the ghetto rations, food rations, which consisted of a quarter of a pound of bread per day. I would like to add that the bread didn't have any-- well, maybe it did have nutrition. Because it made-- it was made from potato peelings with a little-- little flour mixed in. 

So when a-- when a-- when a housewife would go into a market and try to redeem the coupons to get their rations, those desperate kids who didn't have anything to eat for days would reach in into her basket and grab whatever she had taken, gotten just now, and right away, momentarily, bite into it without knowing what it is. Sometimes they bit into a piece of soap. But their hunger and the desperation was so great that they did it. 

Of course, this housewife would fight back because she needed the nutrition. She needed this piece of bread just as bad. So there were tragic, tragic situations, and those kids would walk, and walk, and walk in this cold until they would die on the streets. 

When they would die on the streets, they would just be left there because every day, there were hundreds of people, hundreds of corpses, laying on the street covered with newspapers. And this could happen in front of a cafe where people with money-- there were such too. 

There were people who were engaged in big smuggling who brought in not-- not like this kid a couple of pounds of potatoes, but they would bring in a whole carload of potatoes into the ghetto by bribing the Germans and bring in a whole load of-- of cabbage or a wagon full of potatoes. Those people could afford to go to the cafes, to go to concerts. 

And there were also people, very enterprising people, who did business with the Germans. There was a-- an outfit which was buying the pieces of fabric, which was in abundance in the ghetto. People were-- people were taken away. They left their-- their apartments with all belongings, with all the housewares. 

So they would buy those materials-- buy them and make handkerchiefs and make all kinds of materials out of those. And those were import-- exported into Germany. And those people were making a lot of money, and they had connections with the Germans. A lot of them were also collaborating with the Gestapo. 

While my father and my sister were working in this shop, I was working on the German railroad. I used to go out in the morning, it's 6:30. We used to meet at a certain spot, and the manager, group leader, would take us out. He had a permit to bring out the 125 or 130 people to work for the-- on the German railroad. 

INTERVIEWER 2: These were all young men? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Those were all young men. And we used to go out, and they used to bring us-- we used to be out of the ghetto, work on the railroad fixing the rails, fixing the-- doing all kinds of manual work. 

Now, there was a little benefit from it. By being outside of the ghetto, we had an access to food, which was lacking in ghetto. Now, how did we get the food? By bringing stuff out of the ghetto. Say I would bring out a couple of tablecloth, a couple of sheets, and I had the contact. They were Polish boys and men following us on the route to work. 

And I would give them an order-- bring me a pound of butter. So he would yell to me, what do you have? I would tell him, I have two tablecloths, and six sheets, and towels, which I would give to him. And he would run, and put it away, and then bring me a pound of butter, which I would hide and pray that on the way back the German guard would not search me thoroughly and take away this pound of butter from me. 

I even once, we-- we weren't very orthodox. But we were believing Jews, and we never ate anything that was not kosher. One day in desperation, I brought in some lard into the house. And my mother said to me, as long as I am alive, this is not going to be eaten. 

A few days later, the lard was still at home, but my mother was taken away. I worked on the railroad until 1943. In 1943, on the 6th of May I believe it was, or was it June? No, no, no, no, this must have been 1942. They have ordered-- yes-- before I mention this, I would like to mention that what the Germans did, knowing that they have half a million Jews in this small area, they tried to divide the people, to conquer-- divide and conquer. 

How could they do it? By telling that they believe every productive person has no worry whatsoever. As long as you're productive and work for the Germans, you are assured that nothing will happen to you. This broke down the morale of the people in the ghetto. It formed a division between the productive and the nonproductive because when the-- when the-- when the-- made a razzia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Translation? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: On the streets. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Round up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: A round up. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: A round up, right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, I thought-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, a round up. And some-- and you could prove that you were productive, you had a ident-- identity papers proving that you are working, they let you go. So this gave them-- this gave them a chance to round up the sick, the old, and the very young because they are not productive. So they have to be resettled. 

As they have taken out all the young, and the sick, and the nonproductive, they started taking the people who are less productive. Little by little, they started taking people away, and away, and away, and breaking the resistance because people were trying to, oh, I'm-- trying to delude themselves that, oh, nothing will happen to us because we are safe. We are productive. We are working. 

Finally, when there was about 50,000 people left and people started coming back from those resettlement places telling what is really happening, and the resistance grew. People said, no, we're not going to go like this, like sheep. They have started-- they have collected all the people on a certain day. They said they'll-- everybody has to gather there. And we-- they wouldn't-- they wouldn't tell us. They wouldn't say to anybody that you are going to Treblinka because everybody knew Treblinka was a death camp. 

So they said, we are-- they have discovered two new places. They have named two new places where people will go to work. And the propaganda was working day and night telling the people, you are going to work, you are going to live better, you're going to have it better. But we have to-- everybody has to get out of this specific place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they inform-- by what way did they-- uhh. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: By-- by-- afisze. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Posters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, posts. They placed posters. And they have driven around with loudspeakers in cars and told the people, they wouldn't-- they wouldn't come out with it. They never told the-- the all the-- all the rules were on the death penalty. 

If you-- if you violated the rules, you-- you are-- you will be automatically sentenced to death. But if you're law abiding, if you are not doing anything illegal, nothing to worry about. So they took on those-- the remainder of the 50,000 Jews. They gathered them all in one place, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was this in-- was this in this hotel? I don't-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, no, no, no. And they gathered those people, and they-- they started the selection. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were there? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Oh, yes. The selection was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you can describe what you saw. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, oh, yes. The selection was the most-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [Inaudible]. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: There were-- there would-- every group would get on with their leader. They would take a shop of a few hundred people, and there would be an assessment. And Polish police was assisting them, and Jewish police was there. And they would say-- let's say you have a group of 600 people. We'll cut it in half. 

There were men, women, working in the same places, sometimes husband and wife in the same place. And they-- they would march in front of this assessment. And he would tell you either go right or go left. At the beginning, nobody knew which is-- which is better, to be at the right side or the left side. But as the group grew larger, people could tell those are younger, those are stronger people on the right. And the weak are on the left, so they knew what's going to happen with the people at the left. 

And there was a case, which I have seen myself. It was a couple, a husband and wife, and they separated them. And this-- they sent the men to the right and the woman to the left. And she said, no, I want to go with my husband. And she ran into his group. And the SS-man drew his gun, and he said, go back there, and she wouldn't. And he just pointed the gun at her temple and pulled the trigger. 

The woman jumped up like a chicken and fell down to the ground. This was before our group was taken to this selection. When we came to the selection place of our group, we were cut in half like all the other groups. People whom I knew, my friends, were trying to hide their faces, to pull themselves up, to stretch themselves, to find sympathy in the eyes of this assessment. 

Finally, out-- when the group was cut in half, and they told us to move on, it was almost dark. And we were told that we will go out to our place to the railroad, and we'll be living in rail or in cars, in freight cars. The street was completely empty. And we were sitting on the road, five in a row, five boys in a row. 

And there were five gendarmes in front of us and big reflectors, lights, pointing at us. I had-- when we separated, my father and my sister were still there, and they were supposed to go back to the shops. We have divided what we had. 

So my father said to me, you are-- you are the youngest. You're the strongest. And he gave me a rucksack with watches from the store. He said, you are-- somehow this will help you maybe. 

| took the rucksack, and I took this box of-- his was-- like they used to have metal boxes of tea. So we had those-- I put all those-- those watches in the box and faced this gendarme. Knowing that I have some valuables, I tried to look at those gendarmes and see which one would be less bestialic, less-- more humane. 

And I saw an-- an older gendarme-- short. And I also saw one who was very, very eager. He wasn't looking just in the suitcases. He wasn't looking in the rucksack. He was looking at the end of the garment to see if something is sewn in. He was a specialist. 

So I saw what's happening to the five people ahead of me. I said to-- to my colleague-- because I was facing this guy who was searching very thoroughly. So I said to him, you have nothing to hide. Let me go to this guy, and you go here. 

And he agreed, so we switched places. And I went right to this short gendarme, and I told him-- they were very fond of Polish coins with Pilsudski on it, with a picture of Pilsudski on it. So the first thing I said, Herr Wachtmeister, ich habe five zloty mit Pilsudski. Mit Pilsudski. 

So he said to me-- no, no, no. Before this, he saw-- this-- this gendarme saw me switching places. So he called me, come, come, come. Dust hast keine Zeit. You are in a hurry. And he said, you come to me. And I don't know what happened. A miracle happened that the Jewish policeman came over to him and told him that there's a telephone call for him. 

So he went to answer the call, and I jumped on this little guy, and I told him I have five zloty with Pilsudski. And I also-- so he asked me, what else do you have? I said, I also have five zloty with a ship, which was also a coin they were looking for. I gave it to him, and he says, los. 

And he let me go on the other side. When I went onto the other side where half of the group was already searched, and I sat down on the ground, and I buried my head between my knees. And sure enough, the gendarme came back looking for me. But I took off my-- uh, shawl-- what-- uh, no , I-- threw off my shawl, and I hid my face, and he was looking with this flashlight going over all the people. 

But he-- luckily, he didn't see me. So we took off-- the whole group took off. We went to the-- we went to the railroad, and we slept there. And rumors came, start coming in that they-- one day they'll surround us and take us away because we knew that's not going to last. So we decided to go. In the meantime, my wife, who I wasn't married at that time, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were married at that time? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: And her sister had decided to get a-- an apartment outside of the ghetto and pose as Poles and hide there. So one day, I sneaked in-- into the ghetto, found all the others, you-- took at a car, a wagon, which was bringing out the garbage from the ghetto, drove the wagon with another fellow, with a Pole, and went into this apartment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You took the address of the girl that they knew. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, no, no. The girl was my wife. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were already married? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, we weren't married. Her-- her sister, which looked very Ir-- Irish, no-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Aryan. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Aryan-- rented an apartment, which was once part of the ghetto. As-- as they have moved out the Jews, they clamped down on the space in the ghetto. They have moved the wall. They-- they-- they crowded us more and more. So this was an apartment which once was part of the ghetto. But it was empty, and she rented this apartment under a Polish name. It's a married couple. 

And we all went there. This was a two-room apartment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was not your wife at that time. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was just an acquaintance? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No, she was-- we were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: A girlfriend. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And who-- you said we all went there. Who was it all? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, uh, my sister-in-law and this fellow-- then my father-in-law went there. My father went there. My sister went there. There was one-- and brothers of this fellow who rented the apartment with my sister-in-law, they have-- one day-- at one time, we had 19 people hidden there. We have built a false wall in case. 

And a few days later, we got married. My father-in-law wouldn't. He was a very Orthodox Jew. Well, it wasn't a catered affair. There was no reception. We had my father-in-law gave us the blessings. And-- and we became married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember this marriage ceremony? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: There was no marriage ceremony. We just said the blessings, the Hebrew blessings, and this was it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any other conversation? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did it feel to get married under such circumstances? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, we wanted to be together. And, uh, my father wouldn't-- wouldn't allow it otherwise, even under those circumstances. We were married on May 6th. On May the 9th-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In what year? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: 1943. On May the 9th, we heard the knock at the door. We all went into this hiding place. And, uh, the man who rented the apartment, who answered the door, came knocking at our shelter, at our hiding place, telling us that they, uh, blackmail us, who know that he has hidden Jews. They didn't know about him, but they told him, we know that you have hidden Jews here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was also Jewish. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Who? The-- the men who rented the apartment? Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But they didn't know? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No. They didn't know about him, but they knew that there are Jews hidden there. So what do you want? They said we want 50,000 zloty, and we will leave you in peace. Of course, we didn't have 50,000 zloty, so we started to scramble around for valuables to appease him. 

We gave him some, and they, uh, they said, no, we don't want this here. We want zloty. We'll come back tomorrow and, uh, get the zloty. You'll get the zloty, we'll give you back this. We knew that, uh, this will never happen. 

In the meantime, we know that this place is not safe anymore, that we all have to flee. Again, my sister-in-law, may she rest in peace, she died on the way to Australia. It was too much what she did during the war for all of us. Her heart let out. And, uh, so she started searching for a place, which will take in 19 people. 

The first ones to leave was my wife and myself. She found a place in a two-room apartment not far from where we were staying. And, uh, the woman agreed for a tremendous amount of money to-- to keep us. We went into this apartment. In order to-- to mislead any people watching us, I went to the roof, through the roof to the next-- to another building-- came out on a different street, but, also, I had my whole face because-- uh, Jews thought that since I had blue eyes, and blond hair, and spoke a good Polish that they'll never detect me. 

But, uh, the Poles thought differently. They could recognize me right away. So I hid my face bandaged. And this was a time when they were taking people out of trains, Poles too, and taken them to Germany to work. So, luckily, I got on the-- on the-- on the trolley. 

As a matter of fact, people have made room for me. The trolleys were very jammed. They made room for me to let me in, and I went to this place. I got to the-- to the apartment. And we stayed there. We stayed in a back room for three months. 

My wife and I were sleeping on a cot. After three months, she accumulated enough money to tell us to leave without any regard, whether we have a place to go or not. When we hesitated, she said, if you want to leave, the next day we're going to call the police. So we didn't have-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have any idea why she didn't want to keep you any longer? Was there any-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, she-- she told she had enough money to-- to last her a while, and this was the only reason she kept us, no sympathy-- no-- no compassion. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Doesn't mean she didn't want to take risk anymore. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No. So we left this place. And we-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, this is 1943. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: This is still 1943. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that's the time of the uprising. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you aware of anything at the end of the ghetto? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yes, wait a minute. In the meantime, again, my sister-in-law knew about the situation. The other people had found places too. As a matter of fact, my father and my sister were in the next building, same street. But everybody had very bad places. By bad places, I mean that the places had no hiding. There was nothing to conceal that there are more people in it. 

In the meantime, my sister-in-law started looking for-- for different places. And she went to a place outside of Warsaw on the outskirts, on the-- on the right side of the Vistula River. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean in Traga? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah. And she-- somehow she knew about this place, which she approached-- she approached the owner of the house. This was a burned out villa, which was-- the villa was destroyed during the fighting in Warsaw. The upper floors were all demolished. The basement was safe. And the laundry room was the place where we were supposed to go. 

But at the time when my sister-in-law approached her, she refused, but she gave her hope. She told her, come back later, maybe later. What it turns out was that at the time when my sister-in-law approached her, she had a Jewish family hidden. And, again, the Germans, trying to-- knowing that there are some Jews hidden in Warsaw and trying to get those Jews too. 

They have shrewdly announced through the Jewish Gestapo, Jewish members of the Gestapo, who worked with with-- with the Gestapo, to get those people out. So they have set up a hotel in Warsaw, where they said people with foreign citizenship can come, and they'll be let out. 

The first people with legitimate foreign citizenship were taken out of Warsaw. The second group, which they promised for $2,000 to give foreign citizenship were taken to this hotel, and they were walk-- they were-- they were moving around freely in front of the Gestapo. The Gestapo knew they are there. 

And they let them go in and out until one day, they surrounded the building, surrounded the hotel, and took everybody away. And this was the end of it. Turned out that this couple who was-- lived in this apartment, in this house, went into the hotel. The first time my sister-in-law went there, they were still there. The second time, they were gone. So she agreed to take us in. 

And we went there, and like I said, this was we-- we had a-- a laundry room, which was far superior to the accommodations we had before. We had the view on the windows, the ground floor windows were looking out into our garden. We had fruit trees. We had flowers. It was fresh air. 

And the landlady was a very religious person. She not only-- she thought of this-- well, the financial side was a factor too. But I think, mostly, as a religious person, she felt that she should help people in need. And, also, she thought she might maybe convert us. 

I helped her in this respect. I asked a lot of questions about the life of Jesus. And she couldn't give me an answer. She would look it up and come back next day and give me the answer. We were paying her less than we were paying the first woman, although the inflation was much higher and the money was less worth than at the beginning of our stay. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How much were you paying? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: We were paying 100 zloty a person a day, a day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which is-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: 200 zloty a day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In dollars, how much? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Well, I don't know how much the dollars were there-- were then. But you have to realize-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But in today, dollars-- what would it be possibly? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: For 100 zloty, you could buy maybe 5 pounds of butter. But if you live on the amount of money, and you don't know how long you'll have to live on it. And what will happen if you run out? It's a-- it's a very bad feeling. 

The only way we could save was by not eating. We could only save on food. And, again, my sister-in-law would drag cabbage and potatoes, the cheapest commodities available, as food. We stayed there until the Germans were retreating. I built a little hiding place, which we have never used. 

This, um, lady and her daughter-- they were-- their mother was divorced, but the father used to come once in a while, especially on a Sunday. And S-- and Sundays when they were going to church, when they left for church, they would lock the gate. There was a gate, which they would lock so nobody could come in. And we felt free in the apartment, in the basement. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you stayed there during the ghetto uprising? And during the-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Oh, during the ghetto uprising. 

INTERVIEWER 2: During the Warsaw Uprising too. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: During the ghetto uprising, we were-- I was already on the-- hidden. 

INTERVIEWER 2: On the-- on the Polish side. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah. Yeah. But during the-- my father was still in Warsaw-- was still in the city. My sister came the day before the Polish uprising. But my father stayed in the city, and from the roof of this house, we could see what they are doing to the city. Are they burning house after house? 

INTERVIEWER 1: To the ghetto? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, not from the ghetto, all of Warsaw, yeah, the whole city. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was during the Warsaw Uprising in 19-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: And, uh, nothing you could do. We stayed there until the Germans start retreating. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were mentioning this Sunday. 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, this Sunday. I'm sorry. This Sunday, like, usually, they-- they went to church, and they locked the gate. And we had the windows open. This was in the summer. We had the windows open, and the door-- the door leading into the hallway was open. 

And, suddenly, we hear a click at the front gate. My god, who is coming? They couldn't be back from church yet. So I ran to the front door and tried to lock-- to lock it, and I did. I locked it. Then I had to run into the other rooms and close the windows because anybody could walk in that was on the ground floor. 

And I ran-- I was always a step ahead of him because there were two rooms, our room and their room. And they had their windows open too, which you could just walk in. When they came back, he was sitting in the garden, and, uh, I hear the conversation with their neighbor. And, of course, the theme was what Hitler did and how wonderful it is to get rid of the Jews. 

And we were sitting there and listening to this conversation. And they come back. When they came back, he said to them, what is this here? I-- there's something funny going on here. I try the door, and I almost opened it, and then it's locked. And I-- the window closed in front of me. 

But somehow, they dissuaded him. They told him, oh, you probably-- they took him into the house. We locked our room, and-- so this was one of the experiences, but in general, we didn't have any-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was the neighbor? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: The neighbors have-- there was once a case where-- she was selling flowers in the summer too from the garden. And one day, a neighbor came in and wanted flowers-- wanted to buy flowers. And she went to get the knife. And the neighbor looked into-- we were hiding flat with the window on the same wall. So if you look into the room, you look inside the room, but it's less chance to see somebody if he's flat with the wall, with the window wall. You know what I mean? 

Anyway, we were hiding in a corner, and this person looked into the room, but didn't say a word. He never mentioned it to her. I don't know whether she saw us or not-- or not, but she never mentioned it to us. We stayed there until-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the man who tried to open-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah, this was her-- this was her husband, her divorced husband. He was the one who made the remark about how wonderful Hitler is by getting rid of the Jews. Then in-- the Germans started to retreat. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me, so during this time when you were in hiding there, you didn't go out? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not at all? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I never left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were always-- 

DAVID LIPSTADT: I never left. For a year and a half, I never left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your wife? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Only to go from one place to the other. My wife left a couple of times to go to the doctor. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To the doctor? Was she sick? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Yeah. In the meantime, my father-in-law died. He was in hiding too. And he died. And he was-- they took him to the hospital. And in the hospital, a nurse discovered that he is Jewish. He died the next day. They buried him in a Polish cemetery, under his Polish identity. 

And after the-- after the war ended, we exhumed the body and buried him in a Jewish cemetery. We stayed there until the Russian Army came in. And the first thing-- the first day I saw the Russians, we went out, and there was a tremendous movement of people, people going north, and east, and west, and south, and north. Everybody was going somewheres. 

And I was walking in the street. And the first Pole who saw me looked at me sadly and says, you survived, eh? He felt very, very bad about it. He was very sorry that I survived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Somebody you knew? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: A Pole. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just a stranger? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: Recognized me as a Jew and felt bad that he saw a Jew after the war. He was sure that none of us survived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you think-- how did you think that the Poles recognized you as a Jew? 

DAVID LIPSTADT: There-- I don't know. I can't describe it. But there is something about it. When we-- when we-- when we went out of the ghetto, the Poles had literally thousands of people just looking for victims, looking for Jews whom they could blackmail. There were-- every exit of the ghetto was packed with people standing on the other side, of course, and watching the people going out. 

And they were-- they were running after a person, and so, you were a Jew. You are a Jew. You're a Jew. Little kids would yell, he's a Jew. A lot of people got-- died because little kid-- little kids were running after-- the Germans had a hard time recognizing. 

I remember a fact, I was standing on the street with my father and my uncle. And we were all wearing the armbands. And this German soldier, just a private, went by and then turned back and said, why didn't you greet me to my father and my uncle. They, of course, greeted him. 

I didn't have a hat, so he looks at me and says, you're not a Jew. They couldn't recognize. If not for the Poles, a lot of Jews would survive. There were occasions when Poles have given their lives to save Jews. But the vast majority helped the Germans a lot. They couldn't have done it without the help of the Poles. 