[AUDIO OUT] CREW: Now. 

[MICROPHONE RUSTLING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Your name and-- 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, my name is Hannah Demetz. I grew up in Czechoslovakia. My mother was Jewish. My father was German. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your name, your maiden name? 

HANA DEMETZ: I was born Miller. My father's name was Max Miller. He was an attorney. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And tell us about your life in Prague. 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, I came to Prague when I was 10 because my father was employed by the state until 1938. And-- [SNIFFS] uh, I think I'll have to stop. I have to. 

[SNIFFS] 

[CLEARS THROAT] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you like-- 

HANA DEMETZ: It's OK. Can I start once more? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, by all means. 

HANA DEMETZ: I don't know what-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the town you were born in? 

HANA DEMETZ: Yeah, I was-- I was born in northern Bohemia and my father was employed by the state. He was an attorney. And in 1938, he had to give up his-- his job because of being married to my mother. There was quite a lot of pressure on him to get a divorce at that point, from-- from the officials and also from his family. 

But he decided that he would not divorce for racial reasons. And so he had to give up his employment with-- with the state and we moved to Prague at that point, where he started working for a private firm. Uh, I went-- I was, at that point, still a child. I went to school. 

In 1943, I was in the fourth class of the gymnasium. One day, there came an order that all the Jewish half-castes, as we were called, had to leave the school system. So I just had to pack up my bag one day and-- and leave school. And that was quite bitter. I was 14 at that point. 

I continued in a private school room. That was still possible at that time. But after one year, the private schools in Prague closed, closed down. And I was put into a factory where they were collecting the so-called half-castes, at that point. It was a factory which was in ammunitions factory. It was making hand grenades. 

And the working day was from 6:00 in the morning until 6:00 at night, seven days a week. We had one Sunday off a month. I was permitted to live at home, but of course, getting there took about two hours, so I would leave the house at 4:00 in the morning and come back at 8:00 or 8:30 at night. I was 15, 16 at that point. 

Uh, there wasn't much food, so it was quite-- quite a grim time. Uh, my mother died in 1943, just about that time. She had to wear the Jewish star, which caused problems because she was not permitted to walk with so-called Aryans. And of course, part of her family was Aryans, so whenever she went for a walk with me or with my father, she would hold her hand back over her star so as not to be getting anybody in trouble. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why didn't you have to wear a star? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, because I was considered a half-Jew and my father was Catholic, so I really was brought up as a Catholic. My mother died in 1943. She had a very acute case of an intestinal obstruction, which-- she started having pains one day, late afternoon. 

And my father tried to get the doctor to see her and she couldn't be seen by an doctor because her identity card proclaimed her a Jew, and you had to show your identity card when you were sick, when you needed medical attention. And at that point, it was already too late for a Jewish doctor to come and see her because Jews were only allowed to be in the streets at 8:00 at night, so she could not get the doctor all night. And then in the morning, when the Jewish ambulance could come and fetch her, it was already too late for the operation, so she died. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were your feelings about your father's family wanting your father to divorce your mother? Do you remember your feelings? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, well, it was something that they-- that I knew all through, ever since I could-- I can remember, there was no contact with the German part of the family because they had broken with my father when he married. He married in 1927. And of course, already then, it was very clear that some people, uh, were not-- uh, did not wish to be involved with Jews. 

My father's family was in the-- in the northern part of Bohemia, the Sudetenland, which was German. And my father married my mother against the wishes of his family. I have to say that my mother's family also was not too enthusiastic. But then when I was born, they were very, very loving and very kind, which was not true about my father's family. So that they demand that he divorce in 1938 really came not as much of a surprise. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel toward your mother? Because she had-- because of your mother's religion, you were-- had to suffer. 

HANA DEMETZ: I was very protective of her. [GULPS] I remember that when her family started being taken away, she was not allowed to go and see them because they didn't live in Prague, and at that point, uh, Jews were not allowed to go on trains. 

Uh, so I and my father went to help them and to say goodbye. And I remember that I was very protective of her. Then at some point in 1942, I think. I was still in school. We got a postcard telling us that an uncle had been detained in the Gestapo headquarters in Prague, and that we should go and bring him fresh underwear. 

And my mother took me with her. And I remember worrying that she would-- that she would have trouble wearing the Jewish star with me around. And I came there to protect her and this-- this feeling of wanting to protect her, I remember, was very, very strong in me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember anything that happened in school? You were in a Catholic school? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, I was in a-- in a-- in a public school. Uh, I do remember that some-- some of the kids were-- refused to have anything to do with me because, of course, it was known that my mother was Jewish. And I was the only so-called half-caste in class. So there were-- there was always a group of kids who did not talk to me, but there were very few of them. This was-- this was a Czech school and, of course, Czechs tried to be as nice, or as kind as they could to-- to people of my kind in those days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were some people angry at what was happening? Did anyone express anger at circumstances? Did you? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, I remember one teacher taking me aside at one point and saying that she's convinced that the Nazis certainly won't make it and everything will be OK after the war, and sort of comforting me. I have to say that in general, people were nice to me, personally. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you discuss this with your father or with your mother, what was happening in school, what was happening outside? 

HANA DEMETZ: I remember one incident when I was having trouble with a teacher who was a well-known Nazi. Um, he would ignore me in class and he would make snide remarks about me. And at one point, he tried to get personal. It was a very, very strange mixture of hatred and-- and-- and sexual interest. 

And I remember being very upset about this and coming home and telling my mother. And my mother said, I will tell papa about it. And she did, and I expected my father to do something, to go to school and tell the principal and make a scene because I knew that this teacher really-- being a teacher, could not do what he had done. And my father didn't do anything and now, it's very clear to me why he didn't, because of his particular situation and because of the fact that this teacher was a member of the Nazi party. 

But at that point, I was terribly disappointed with my father because he didn't protect me. And then my mother said to me, we can't do anything. You'll just have to get out of his way as much as you can. And I was 13 at this point and I was quite disappointed at my father's unwillingness, as I saw it then, to do anything. But now I know that, of course, if he had gone and complained about this Nazi, it would have meant that he probably would have been arrested. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened with your father after your mother died? Did you live with your father, did he work? 

HANA DEMETZ: I lived-- yes, I lived with my father after she died. He continued working for this firm that he worked for until the end of the war. And at the end of the war, he was taken prisoner by the Czechs because he was German. And of course, he was not married to a Jew anymore, and the Jew could not protect him anymore, so he was deported as a German to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you? 

HANA DEMETZ: I was in Prague and I stayed. My nati-- my nationality was Czech, so I did not have any-- any problems and I stayed in Prague. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Going back, how long did you stay in school? Did you ever have discussions with your classmates about the conditions? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no, no, you didn't talk about politics. You were warned by your parents repeatedly that you must not ever talk politics to anybody. I remember that my father listened to Beromunster which was the Swiss radio station which you could get without having the attachments for the short waves, which were confiscated at the beginning of the war. He listened to this Beromunster station and I was told very often never to breathe a word because this was something that one that simply didn't discuss. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you hear about brutalities? Did you hear the deportations? That's not politics, or was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to your mother's side of the family? 

HANA DEMETZ: My mother's side of the family was deported. There was a sister and there were her parents, and innumerable aunts and uncles and cousins. 

CREW: [COUGHS] 

HANA DEMETZ: But I did not talk about this outside of the home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you close with your cousins before they were taken? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, yes, I was very close to an aunt and very close to her husband. Uh, I remember helping them pack. And I remember that my aunt took with her a cocktail dress because they were going to Theresienstadt. 

And, uh, I guess my aunt assumed that she would have use for it there. That, at this point, seems fantastic to me. I remember that then, at that point, when I was 14 or 15, I thought it rather cool that she would take a cocktail dress with her. [EXHALES SHARPLY] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, how did she explain that to you? What did she tell you she thought Theresienstadt would be? 

HANA DEMETZ: I didn't ask and she didn't she didn't explain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you think she was going? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, I know that she took-- they all took, they all exchanged everything valuable they had for provisions. So they took a lot of food and warm clothing with them. And I just remember this cocktail dress because it just struck me as something very courageous to do. It's absurd to think about it that way now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever get any cards from them? 

HANA DEMETZ: Oh, yes, we-- they were permitted to write 30 words a month on a postcard. They had-- the 30 words had to be printed. And they would write, my dears, we are well and we are thinking about you, and how are you? And my mother would write postcards in reply saying, my dears, we are well, and how are you? And we hope you are healthy. 

And then that at one point, they all began to send my mother stamps. Every one of the people who were in Theresienstadt were allowed to receive one package. And you had to get together 20 kilograms of foodstuffs to send to them. And I remember my mother sort of covering her star and running to black market marketeers and exchanging her trousseau for food. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did she know they needed food? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, everybody needed food at that point. And we, ourselves, didn't have much. So because my mother had Jewish ration cards, and you only got black bread and potatoes on those, so we really lived on-- the three of us on two ration cards. 

And she was obsessed by the thought of these 20 kilograms for everybody that she had to put together. It was quite a feat to send off 20 kilograms of food when you had-- when you had none. And of course, at that point, the family was very large, so there were quite a lot of people to send these 20 kilograms to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wasn't your mother afraid to let you go and help your aunt pack? Wasn't that a danger? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, well, I-- I don't know how she-- how she felt about it. It was simply assumed that we were a family and we helped each other as well as we could. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what year was that? 

HANA DEMETZ: And this was 1942. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The postcards, they were always the same? How many did you get? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, they were always the same. I remember being struck by the fact that they always said the same thing. There never was any-- any variation. It was always, we are well and thinking of you, and how you? Sometimes there were not even 30 words. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they confirm receipt of the packages? 

HANA DEMETZ: Yes, yes, once an uncle wrote, uh, don't send tomatoes because they were squashed. And the censor had crossed out the sentence because apparently, it was considered to-- could have had two meanings. And the tomatoes my mother put in out of sheer desperation because she couldn't find anything to put in. And she had exchanged some pillowcases for tomatoes and put them into the package. And I remember the-- the reaction. 

And then of course, around early 1943, the cards stopped coming because they were all put into transports and sent to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you know? 

HANA DEMETZ: I didn't know at the time. I only know after the war. We didn't know. We really didn't know what was going to happen to these people. I remember that after the war, I spent days waiting for somebody to come back. And only when the first newspapers were printed did I read what-- what had gone on. 

I remember at some point in 1944, my father was speaking to somebody who had-- who still was able to listen to the BBC. And this man whispered something to him. And my father said, I just don't believe it. They couldn't do that. This was 1944. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father was an attorney? 

HANA DEMETZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did he ever take exception to the change of legal status, of those people who were considered undesirable? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Different ration cards, different treatment, different schools? 

HANA DEMETZ: It-- he saw-- he did. Of course, he did, but if he had done it publicly, it would have meant death, and not only for him, but also for us. So, uh, no, he didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew that. How did you know? He knew that. 

HANA DEMETZ: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: He knew that it meant death. How did he know? 

HANA DEMETZ: Um, well, because you would always hear about people who simply disappeared. There were neighbors with whom my parents were quite friendly. They had a lot of-- lot in common. The husband was German and the wife was Jewish. They didn't have children. 

And at one point, the man, who was then-- who was an engineer and who-- he was supervised by a Gestapo man. At one point, he lost his nerves and slapped the gestapo man, and we never heard from him again. He was taken away and, uh, was shot. 

Um, there was a cousin of my mother, this was in 1939 in northern Bohemia, who took a gun when-- when-- when a high-ranking SS officer came to confiscate her villa, and shot him. And of course, she was shot immediately and her whole family was shot. The children were taken away. I've never seen them again. Everybody knew what would happen. So not many people [SNIFFS] did anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what was the city like during this time? You finished school and you went to work. Do you remember your feelings on the street, at work, wherever you had to go? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, I remember one day I was going on the tram. And there was a man with a star standing on the platform. This must have been in 1941 or '42. Jews were only allowed to travel on platforms of trams. They were not allowed to sit inside. 

And a group of SS men came onto the tram and they asked everybody to show his ID card. And they ask this man with a star, and he showed it. And they started slapping him and took him off the tram. And he turned around and, I think, was hoping that somebody would defend him, but the people just-- just pretended not to have noticed. Everybody-- everybody just looked ahead of him himself. And the tram went on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what you felt at that moment? 

HANA DEMETZ: I was horrified at nobody getting up and-- and doing something. But then I realized that-- that nobody could. It would have meant death. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The city-- was it dangerous to travel in the city if you didn't have a star, or only if you had a star? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, no, I think-- I think Prague was one of the few places during the war which was relatively undamaged. There were two air raids towards the end of the war, but nothing besides that. And the Czechs moved freely. [SNIFFS] There was no visible terror. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you aware of the ghetto area where the synagogues are, the famous synagogues of Prague? 

HANA DEMETZ: Yes, I was. Of course, everything was boarded up during the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The streets were closed? 

HANA DEMETZ: And the streets were closed, yes. There were windows boarded up. The synagogue was behind a wooden fence. I knew it existed, but the Germans had made an effort to make it disappear. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The old cemetery, the famous cemetery? 

HANA DEMETZ: You could not enter that at all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was anyone, were you, aware of the objects that were being deposited there, or-- 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No one knew? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no, I'm sure-- I'm sure this was done by night. And if anybody knew about it then, I-- I would have guessed-- I would guess that they kept very quiet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: As a half-caste, as you were called, did you feel any concern, anxiety that they would change the policy and half-castes would also be made to suffer? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, it was something that you expected. I know that in the fall of 1944, the male half-castes were put into a labor camp which was outside of Prague. And it was just a matter of time for the female half-castes to be taken away also. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this time, you lived in the same apartment in the same part of town? 

HANA DEMETZ: We always-- yes, we moved into this apartment when we moved to Prague in 1939 after my father had to give up his state job, and we lived there all through the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you deport yourself? How did you-- how did you handle yourself publicly and in the streets and at your job and-- do you remember? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, of course, I-- I was-- I was very young. I was a teenager. I remember that sometime in 1944, I picked up a-- a leaflet which had been [SNIFFS] 

dropped by-- by American or British airplanes. It was a leaflet written in German, telling the German soldiers to give up. And I picked this up and I thought, oh, this is terribly exciting. And I put it into my pocket and carried it around. 

And when I showed it to some friends at the factory and they were horrified. They said, if they had found this on you-- 'they' meaning the Germans-- they would have shot you right away. How can you carry something like that in your pocket? And I remember one of them picked it up and burnt it and-- and flushed the burned paper down the toilet. And she was very upset about me being so careless. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were your supervisors at work like? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, this was a situation where you had 500 or 600, uh, half-castes, plus the Aryan wives of Jews, or Aryan husbands of Jewesses. It was a factory which was owned by a German Aryan and we were supervised by the SS. Uh, they stood around with their guns, watching what we were doing. 

Uh, I remember I carried once-- something across the factory yard. I was carrying something very heavy. And one of them was sort of marching towards me. And the thing I was carrying was quite heavy. I was undernourished and I couldn't jump out of his way fast enough, so he slapped me. And then he just walked on and, uh, I walked on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it that you were carrying, what were you-- 

HANA DEMETZ: It was a pail with some liquid which you poured into the machine so that it wouldn't overheat. It was a sort of a soapy liquid and it was quite heavy in the pail. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were you making? 

HANA DEMETZ: Hand grenades. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were-- you, personally, I meant. What-- 

HANA DEMETZ: I, personally, was handing hand grenade halves to somebody who was pressing the halves in a machine. And the factory was bombed in March, 1945. And then the last six weeks of the war, we spent clearing rubble because it was destroyed to the ground. And I remember finding a box full of hand grenade-- hand grenade halves, and being very pleased at the thought that the Germans wouldn't be able to use them anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you frightened of being hurt by these partially completed hand grenades? Was it dangerous? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, yes, I'm sure it was dangerous. Making hand grenades probably is not without its dangers, but I was 16. And when one is 16, one doesn't think about getting blown up. One simply, uh, goes along and-- and tries to laugh about other things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anyone try to-- to sneak any of the hand grenades out, or use them for resistance, or make contact with resistance people? 

HANA DEMETZ: Um, that, I don't know. That I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were the guards in the factory ever, or-- 

HANA DEMETZ: We were searched when we left at 6:00, yes. So I never heard of any arrests in the factory, which makes me think that probably nobody did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [COUGHS] 

Were the guards ever violent to anybody in the factory? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, well, there would be some slapping, yes, as in my case. But not more than that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sexual advances? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any attempt to make contact with the resistance? Did you know of anyone who did? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did it make a difference that you don't look Jewish at all, and blond and blue-eyed? If you had looked more Jewish, would that have made my life more difficult? 

HANA DEMETZ: I don't think so. I had a friend who was the same mixture, as we called it, as I. And she looked very Jewish. And she did not have more problems than I did, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you feel the attitude of the Czech population towards you changed in the years after war? From before the war, the attitude towards Jews, I mean, not towards you personally? Did you have any examples of that? 

HANA DEMETZ: [SIGHS] 

Uh, it's very hard to generalize. I-- I grew up in a milieu where-- where there were many friends. And of course, friends remained friends. I was too young to notice subtle degrees of-- of-- racism. 

INTERVIEWER 2: At the end of the war, you were 17. Did you notice any overt anti-Semitism then? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no, no. I remember one day I was coming home from the factory and the train stopped at the train station. The tram stopped at the tram station-- train station. And people were running towards the train station and nobody quite knew why, but everybody sort of joined. And there we-- on the platform, we saw a train of concentration camp victims which the Germans were shipping somewhere. 

And I remember people standing there weeping quietly, not saying anything much because there were SS guards everywhere, but weeping. Then they chased us out and we went back to the tram. And there was nothing to say, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your father ever mention any sense of change in attitude toward him, discrimination toward him because he had a Jewish wife and a half-Jewish daughter? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, there are people who simply did not associate with us and there were people who were friends and who remained friends. Uh, one sort of knew about people, who is on this side and who is on that side. Uh, and you simply shrugged off the ones who did not want to have anything to do with you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you ever see any of those people now? 

HANA DEMETZ: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: None of the friends, either? 

HANA DEMETZ: I see the friends, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What has it left you with? What do you feel about the Germans, about people? Do you trust people? 

HANA DEMETZ: I do. I generally trust people. I always give people the benefit of the doubt. Uh, I find that I have old friends whom I've known almost all my life. Uh, I have made many new friends here. 

I would-- I-- I would not call myself a suspicious person or an untrusting person, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is your father still alive? 

HANA DEMETZ: No, my father died-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

HANA DEMETZ: --in the 50s. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Germany? 

HANA DEMETZ: In Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have a chance to talk to him after the war, did he-- 

HANA DEMETZ: I never had a chance to talk to him because he was deported in 1946. I did see him before he left. He was deported to eastern Germany and then escaped via Berlin to Western Germany in 1951. But by that time, I was already in the United States. 

And we corresponded and I sent him packages. And then the first time we went back to Europe in 1958, he and I saw each other for the first time and he died the second day, of a heart attack. So I really saw him only for one day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you marry, in Europe? 

HANA DEMETZ: I married in Europe, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is it your feeling that most people needed to make contact, or have a close personal relationship with others who had similar experiences? Has this been your-- 

HANA DEMETZ: Yes, yes, I think so, mm-hmm. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you talk about that? 

HANA DEMETZ: My former husband came from a family which was very much like my own. His father was German, his mother was Jewish. And this was a very, very great bond for us because we reacted the same way to things and we shared the same jokes. And it was simply the same experience that we had in common. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A sense of humor, was that intrinsic to-- 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, the sense of humor was very important because you had to keep the ability to laugh. Yes, that was something that was very, very important. 

INTERVIEWER 1: As a part German, what did you feel about the Germans who were oppressing you? 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, I knew that there were Germans who were oppressing me, but there were also Germans who were like my father, who did not. And for me, that was very crucial that there were people like my father who were, uh, decent. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any feelings about Germans now? Did you feel they knew? Do you feel-- what feelings do you have about it now, in the light of historical revelations? 

HANA DEMETZ: Well, I find myself, whenever I go back to Germany, I find myself being sort of careful. I wouldn't say suspicious, but careful with people of a certain age, people who are, let's say, over 60, at this point. Because I will always say to myself, I wonder what he did in those days. But people under 60, that's-- that definitely is an age question. People under 60 I find I have a lot in common with, uh, I can talk to them openly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever visit Theresienstadt or Dachau, or-- 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh, I went to Theresienstadt, yes, when I was still in Czechoslovakia '47. I never went to Dachau, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel in Theresienstadt? What did you see? 

HANA DEMETZ: I wept for a long time, wondering where the graves of my family were because there are no graves and I find that very hard to take. My grandparents had a gravestone made before they left. I only found out about that after the war when I went to the little town where they had lived. And my grandfather was quite a prominent citizen in this little town, so the city takes care of the grave, which, really, is only a stone and flowers. Nothing in it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [WHISPERS] Wow. I can't let you go on because that was like a-- I mean, you said it all-- nothing in it. 

HANA DEMETZ: Uh-huh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If there is anything you want to tell us that I didn't ask you about, please do. I'm sorry, but I just-- 

HANA DEMETZ: No, no, I think I-- I'm sorry. In the beginning, I-- I got-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no, no, no, don't think about it. It doesn't matter. It doesn't, it doesn't, no, it's the-- not important. [SIGHS] Woo. 

[CLICK] 

I don't know what they remember, but, uh-- 