SPEAKER 1: OK, we're rolling. 

SPEAKER 2: All right 

SALLY FINKELSTEIN HOROWITZ: My name is Sally Finkelstein Horowitz and I come from Poland. I was born in Zwolen. And-- a small town. It was between to the east there was Lublin, and to the west was Radom. And we had about 70 kilometers to Warsaw to the north, and Krakow was to the south. So we were right smack in the center of Poland. And when the war broke out, I was 11 years old. 

And on September 3rd, the bombs came to Zwolen, even though it was not a industrialized city. But the bombs were falling like unbelievable. I remember I was playing with my girlfriend who survived-- she is in Israel right now-- and when the bombs started to come at us, we ran downstairs to the basement. And then when the bombers flew away, the place was a complete, like a inferno, complete and engulfed in fire. And I was scared because I couldn't get to my parents. I didn't know if I would be able to make it because I walked out of the door and there were flames. But somehow I went over to my parents, which-- and our house was bombed out-- and they were at my uncle's place. 

And then after this, the Germans, the planes came again. It was in the afternoon again. And we were all running to the woods. And the bombs were just-- the planes were just following us, and we could see they just came swooping down at us from the-- we could see the goggles on their faces. And they were spraying to people with machine guns. 

And my grandmother lived with us, and she was quite old at the time. So my sister and I were holding on to the arms to run into the woods. And she kept saying to leave her and we should run. We're children. Of course we wouldn't leave her. And right next to us there were just people falling, dying. I don't know from the shock or from the-- what do you call those sharp nails? The pieces of the fragments. 

And then we were in the woods overnight. The German-- how they got there so soon was always a puzzle to me because the war broke out September 3rd, and by September 5th, they were there. So we were in the woods, and they were spraying the woods with-- what do you call those big guns. 

[INAUDIBLE], no. They, I don't know-- the big guns, and my father covered us with branches so we wouldn't get hit. We survived that. And then when we came back home, everything was bombed out. And we just huddled together in little rooms with whoever we could. 

And then, there was the ghetto. We were all carted to one place of the city. And it wasn't a big town, but they still brought in from different small towns people, and everybody was in the same place, sleeping wherever they could. It was terrible. 

Then there were patrolling us all the time. And sometimes the Germans would knock at the doors at night, and say ich bin ein Arzt, I'm a doctor. And if there were girls, they said they have to inspect them. They weren't doctors. So when we heard the boots walking-- I remember my mother used to-- we were living with a family, and they had all together, we must have been in two rooms about 15 people. So they made a little hole in the wall so we could run out and hide. 

Then my grandmother lived with us. And she died in the ghetto. And they permitted to go to take her to the cemetery. And in the cemetery, I remember, I was a little girl, and we went once to the cemetery, somebody died, somebody got killed, actually, before the war, and there was a stone, which I still remember. It says from the 1200-- it went back to the year 1200. 

And there was also a synagogue in our town, which I cannot forget, because it was-- the paintings were on the ceiling, and there were very thick walls, and the doors were very thick. And I was always in awe of that synagogue. I was felt it was a very holy, holy place. Well, this was burnt down. 

And then, the holidays, of course, we had the Yom Kippur, which stands out in my mind, where it seemed to be very, very holy. And this too might sound ironic, I went to a Catholic school. Because in Poland, the schools and the government were one-- the government and religion was like one. So I went to the Catholic schools. 

And during the times when the war was on, we always think there are people that they'll do something for you. But it's unfortunately just the opposite. And when we went in the ghetto, my father and my little brother went out to hide in a village. And I somehow refused to be in the ghetto. I just always wanted to get out. So one time, I went to visit my father. I was very, very close to my father. 

So when I was in that village, there was some non-Jewish people, but most of them of course were Polish people. And there was one family who was Jewish. And they lived in that village. They were our neighbors before. And I was sitting. And one of the young ladies there taught me how to knit. 

And all the sudden, I was sitting. And I feel-- I see somebody standing there, so I picked up my head. And there was a man standing there. And he says to me who are you, who did you come to visit, because they knew who was supposed to be in the villages. And this was a Polish man. He was the eldest of the village. 

And I told him I came to visit the Jewish people. So he started to yell are you Jewish. And I say yes. He says you wait right here. He's going to bring me to the Germans for coming out of the ghetto. So while he went into the people to yell at them or something, I ran to the Polish women who my grandmother knew from years back, and I told her what happened. And so she said to me go hide behind the-- they have like where they keep the weed in the shack-- not a shack, it was a big place like in the field. I've forgotten what they call those things. It's like a house where they keep-- 

SPEAKER 1: A barn. 

SALLY FINKELSTEIN HOROWITZ: A barn type of a thing. I should go hide behind the barn. For some reason, I don't know why, something told me not to go there. And I went across the street. I became friendly with one of the girls there, the Polish girls. And I told her what happened. And I told her I'm scared. So she said, come with me. And we went up in the attic to hide in the attic. 

I remember my heart was pounding so bad. And she was laughing. She says don't be scared. I was scared. I was the Jew. So he kept asking everybody where's the Jew, did anybody see that Jew, where is the Jew. But nobody told him anything. And then after he went away, he wanted to take away from that Polish woman the farm and everything, and she told him, she went behind the barn there. 

So they went to look for me. And of course, that's when he started to scream and holler where I was. And then when he went away, I started to look for my father. And I was scared. My little brother was at that time about six years old. And so my father say don't worry, I will give him a bottle of vodka so he wouldn't bother you. But meanwhile, I was scared. 

So I wanted to go back, back where, to the ghetto. I always was a minute too soon for things, to get away from things. I went back to the ghetto at the time they were catching people who were trying to get out. So they were shooting people. And I came in about a half hour before the shooting was there. Now the next night, when I was in the ghetto, those Jewish people who were in that house, the next day the Germans came to the that village to get the weeds or pigs, whatever they came to pick up. 

And those people were scared, so they went into the woods. So they all were killed. They just shot them. Now we were in the ghetto for a while. I don't know, must've been a year or so. And it was horrible. They were always taking us to work. And they took out the rabbi, and they make him-- they made him walk on [INAUDIBLE]. They would pull his beard. They were pulling his beard and blood was coming out. And they really hurt him. And then every other day, there was something else. 

SPEAKER 1: Is that the rabbi from the synagogue you mentioned before? 

SALLY FINKELSTEIN HOROWITZ: No, he was the chief rabbi. And he was-- he always used to come to school on Fridays to tell the principal what time they have to have the Jewish children out of school before the sabbath. And the synagogue was burned. It's funny, I went to a Catholic school, but I also went to a [INAUDIBLE]. So as a child, you always wait for miracles. But of course, there were no miracles. 

And then in '42 or something, in 1942, they were trying to-- they were taking out people from the ghetto and they were starting to send them to concentration camps. And then there was-- no, '41, I think, it's just a jumble with me. There were-- we call it [INAUDIBLE]. I don't know what you call it here. We were sleeping, and all the sudden, we heard the church bells, and trumpets, and bands, whatever they did, Juden, geh raus, alle Juden geh raus, and we all had to get out and meet in the market place. 

And there was a lot of shooting and a lot of hitting. And then they made us march 12 kilometers. And for some reason, a certain person, the people we stayed with in the ghetto times, one of their daughters got married. She was 17 or 18. And she was pregnant. And we were walking the 12 kilometers, and she was-- until I had my own children, I never thought of her too much, but I can't forget her. She was very big. She must have been eighth or ninth month. 

And it was very warm. It was the second days of-- in September, it was the holiday, Sukkot, the second day of the Sukkot. And she wore her father's trench coat. And her feet were very swollen. She wore big shoes. My mother, and her mother, nephew, and her father, and a few people made like a circle around her. So did the Germans, and Ukrainians. There were [INAUDIBLE] too, there weren't just SS. They shouldn't see her, because they were afraid they'll do something to her. And her feet were so swollen. 

And my mother had some water. She always used to give her a little bit of water. And then we came to the train station, because Poland did not have a train station at the time. And we all sat down on the ground. And we were joined by people from different smaller cities and ghettos. 

And there were trains in back of us, while sitting on the ground. There must have been 10,000 people or so. And we could smell like chlorine from the trains. But we didn't know this was going to be for us. And while we were there, one of my sisters, a few days before was taken to a farm, which was a few kilometers from my home town. 

And I don't know, for some reason, one of the Germans was walking by where I was sitting, and he pointed to me. And I said-- no, he was looking. And I got scared. And my mother made me bend down and hide myself behind her, because we didn't know what will happen. So he passed by again and he pointed I should get up and come raus. 

And my mother pushed my other sister, this was her fear, go, you'll have to take care of her. She won't be able to wash her hair. This is the last words I remember. And they took-- he took out about 21 women, girls. And then everybody started to run. Everybody sensed something wrong. And there was a lot of shooting, a lot of beatings and the shootings. And we walked another three miles to the farm where my sister was there. And we worked there on the potato farm. 

And anybody who made a move was shot right away. And we picked potatoes from early in the morning until late at night. And when we got there, we were housed in a barn on straw. And of course at night, it was in the middle of the field, we heard screams and noises. 

So some of the Polish people told us that they were pushing those people who were there, they were pushing them into the trains with like hammers of kind. Just we never hear, of course, my mother. And we were working on that farm. And they had those big German shepherds always on us. And the food was horrible, naturally. But at least there was potatoes. 

And one time-- and there was a German where, when it got colder, we worked from very early in the morning until late at night, until we couldn't distinguish between a potato and a stone. Then one time, I decided I'm going to sneak into the village and buy salt. Because the German went for a rest. So I came back, the German was there. And he had a rifle. And he told me to turn around. And I heard the hammer click, and I heard my sister crying. It's just, it's funny. 

And there was a foreman, who was Polish. They didn't have any children. His wife decided they wanted to hide me out. And I didn't want to go without my children. So he just came by and he grabbed his gun and the rifle. And he says, I [INAUDIBLE]. And just the survival is just unbelievable, from one way, from one time to the next. And then when it got cold and there was no more potato picking, they took, picked out-- we were a hundred people there, men and women. 

So they picked out again about 35. And I was one of them, my sisters, my two sisters. And we were sent to Skarzysko. Skarzysko was worse than any concentration camp you can imagine. It was an ammunition factory. And the first thing with greeted us were people with yellow faces. They were all yellow. They work with some chemicals or something, and they were exposed to I guess whatever it was there. And they were all terribly yellow. I was so frightened. 

I remember, it was terrible. And then we was sent to a different part. And we went there more than about two or three weeks, and I got very sick with typhus. We were worked in a factory, an ammunition factory. Now if you stayed back, they shot you. So you had to go every day. They used to wake us up very early in the morning and count. 

There was the counting, the counting. The counting used to drive us crazy. And then when we got to the factory, we were counted, and then when we came back, we were counted, constantly the counting. If anybody tried to escape, we had like three shifts. We would go at different times. The factory was going day and night. So regardless what time we would come home, they would make us go out. And there was somebody by the name of [INAUDIBLE]. 

When we knew he was coming, we knew it wouldn't be good, so every 10th person was shot. Just like that, one [INAUDIBLE] in the middle, and we had to stay there. And then at one time, there was-- we slept, it was a very big one room, whatever you call it, a barn of kind. And they had those beds, like in four layers, no straw, and no nothing. And then people were getting sick. And I had to typhus very bad. My hair came out completely. 

And there was no food, naturally. They gave us a piece of bread, which wasn't bread. I don't know what it was, ersatz of some kind. It was one once a day. And once a day we got some soup, which was like dirty water. And my sister, I have one who is in St. Louis, and I was the youngest of the three sisters, whenever she sees me, she still cries, because I was growing, and my spine was completely curved out. 

And I had no hair on my head. And then one time, there was-- on a Sunday, they were taking people, [INAUDIBLE] and rights and links and rights, and my sister found some place a piece of red paper, so she put it on my cheeks, and she put two pieces of rags on my head so I wouldn't look so devastating, or devastated. And then she-- somehow, I made it to my sisters. And then in the middle-- 