[BEEP] SUBJECT: So they called. The Sergeant saluted me. And he was in line. Then I passed by. And I say Bubi in German, get out of there. Get out of there and come with me. He says, I'm afraid to do it. I say, that's your only chance to stay alive. You won't make it even to the station. 

So finally, he came out. And we walked. And I was talking to him. And he walked out of the car that the Sergeant there saluted me. And I took him back down to Dolly's grandparents. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm. 

SUBJECT: To Dolly's grandparents, but to the [INAUDIBLE], who were friend of ours and my patients. And they kept him. They hid him, overnight him. Then the sister came. And in the morning, I had a horse and carriage take him through the Terebleca, the border town, where that peasant-- 

INTERVIEWER: Took him across. 

SUBJECT: --took him over to the-- to the boat. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER: Hm. 

SUBJECT: So then we got the papers. And we-- we came back to a different kind of stops into the city where I was born. 

INTERVIEWER: Sarat? 

SUBJECT: Sarat. The house where I was really born and grow up was bombed and was destroyed. But we had a front house where you divide with an aunt and uncle. And she lived there. As a matter of fact, I have pictures that we took inside, the houses that I stayed at. The whole city changed. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were able to take your own property back easily? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't take anything back. I didn't even ask for nothing back. My aunt and her daughter and son-in-law and the kids lived in that house. But we couldn't even stay one night. That's another story. So we went to family things. But we went ar-- I went around, and to see my mother was sick, you know, with emphysema. And I rented from peasant an apartment. 

And we stayed. They stayed. And we stayed there for a while. And stayed there not of a while, a few days. Then we decided to go to Bucharest. We left. Bella and Margaret and my mother-in-law and I went to Bucharest. We looked for an apartment in Bucharest to find. Was very difficult because everybody came to Bucharest that time. 

We finally found a little house in Bucharest, which we also visited and took pictures. Well, they're still there. And we stayed-- we there until then we brought back. We brought them home. But my mother was stayed in Sarat. And my sister-- my other sister left, also. Black market, like my brother-in-law did through this connection I had with her husband. They were already in Radauti and Bucharest. 

And but my mother and-- went. And my brother-in-law went to make the-- the school to take his baccalaureate stayed in Sarat. And my sister, the other sister, came without her husband. He was still in Russia. He came later from Moscow back. 

She got a-- a job as a teacher. She had a bachelor in French, and I think. And she was teaching not in Sarat, in Radauti, which is 20 kilometers, a bigger city, French. And we stayed there in Bucharest. I was traveling quite often. 

INTERVIEWER: This is already after the war. 

SUBJECT: This is-- this is-- 

INTERVIEWER: Clearly. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Clearly. 

SUBJECT: We arrived in Bucharest in May '45. The war ended that day. 

INTERVIEWER: So you got back to Sarat The war was still on. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And by the time you got to Bucharest-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. A week-- couple weeks later, yes, the war ended. And we arrived Bucharest in May. Maybe it was two weeks later. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Or three weeks. The war ended that day. It was-- because I remember the whole thing in Bucharest. We tied to settle in Bucharest. And I-- but I was traveling quite often because I left my mother there. And also-- and besides, there were people were just starving. People were just falling dead from not eating. 

The Russians took away everything when they came into occupied. There was no food at all. So I would travel and bring some food with me from the-- from the other part, you know, from the peasants there back to Bucharest. And so I-- to stay, they wouldn't let us stay in Bucharest. As a doctor, they didn't need any doctor. 

So I registered to dental school all of a sudden to have a authorization to stay in Bucharest, because everybody came to Bucharest. And I-- I really didn't want to become a dentist. But I went to the lectures, I think, for over there. The meantime, I tried to get something to make a living from something. You had to pay rent. And we had to eat. 

So for medicine, you couldn't. But they were, you know, selling some sulfur, bringing in from Hungary, something like that, or Saccharin anything like that. So-- but most of it, we lived from my mother-in-law again opened a little store in Bucharest. [LAUGHS] She really survived us. She was unbelievable. 

I'll tell you an incident. We-- during the Russian occupation, they called me one day, the Director of the Health District from the Gordencov was his name. He says to me in Russian, we need a doctor to go to Helsinki, to Finland-- imagine from there to Finland-- for prisoners, you know, to-- so you know you'll never come back. During the war to travel, it's like, who'd want to? 

I said to him, why me? I have a family here. So he said in Russian, [? [SPEAKING RUSSIAN]. ?] I know very little Russian. That means, a woman you find all over. You'll find a woman in Helsinki. What do you care you have a wife here? Shows you what dependency families had, what it meant to the Russians, family. Anyway, my-- my mother-in-law found a nice letter, you know, hand thing and gave it to him. And he-- he let me go to stay. 

INTERVIEWER: We're going to have to wind up or down, whichever direction it goes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: As we can. 

SUBJECT: Yes, that's right. 

INTERVIEWER: So when you-- you were able to stay in Bucharest-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --for a while. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: And then you came to America. How much longer-- 

SUBJECT: We-- 

INTERVIEWER: --after that? 

SUBJECT: No, we went-- we stayed in Bucharest, was '45 to '47. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. 

SUBJECT: And '47, we decided to go to the United States, to Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: And that-- 

SUBJECT: So we went. We left my brother-in-law and Bella in Bucharest, in that house, because you couldn't take, because we went black through the borders. I mean illegal. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I say black, illegal. And we went to Szatmar, which is the border line in Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER: Hungary, yeah. 

SUBJECT: My mother-in-law and I, we stayed there with people we knew for a few days. And they got a connection and took us over and out of sight. It's a whole story again, and with And we went to Budapest. In Budapest, we got a connection to Vienna. 

We came to Vienna. We lived in one of these displaced person camps in the beginning, a short time only, because I got work as a doctor. And I sent home when I was born in Vienna. So as soon as I sent up on Vienna that I got-- that I have occupation, she got a one trip exit officially. So she came officially from Romania to Vienna when I was settled. 

And then in Vienna, I worked first in one of these ambulance, ambulans in one camp. And then there were many social workers. Somehow they-- I was speak-- I spoke Yiddish. And I knew German. So one suggested, why don't you become Assistant Chief Doctor, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHS] So they took me out from that [INAUDIBLE] where we lived with other 20 people-- we have pictures of that thing-- in one room. And they gave me a room. And I started to be the middleman between, you know, the rehabilitation to hundreds of thousands. Through my hands must have gone through-- I don't know how many thousands. I mean, hundreds of thousands probably exaggerated because it was the big-- the big exit is that time from Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary. And they all came into Rothschild Hospital, which is a landmark in Vienna. And I was in charge, really. 

I have a letter from [INAUDIBLE], who was the director for Europe from-- which I'll show you later-- from the joint who writes that the history of the peace will be written one day, the fact that after the guards was there. And this was what I did in Vienna for-- from '47 to '51, we decided. 

I went in 19-- my mother, in the meantime, came to Israel, officially, to Constanta with the-- to my-- my youngest sister with her husband, who went to Yugoslavia from Bucharest. They went to Yugoslavia, Cyprus, and Italy. Then they came to kibbutz in Israel. So my mother went to them. 

And in 1949, I think it was, yes, I got a letter that my mother was very sick. If you want to see her, come to see her. So I flew from Vienna to Israel. And being that I was at a very big job, so-called, I mean, officially-- the pay was nothing-- you know, I had all the services. I had a chauffeur and a car staying. And I had for my daughter was born was sick a nurse, you know, Vienna, you know, just a-- so they gave me an exit for a month to Austrian authorities, who had no because I was a-- Staatenlos. I was without a country, really considered, you know? 

So the-- being that I worked for the-- I helped them, you know, the Israeli who were tyring. You know, they brought in, you know, that's not [INAUDIBLE]. And I was there. So they said, go on. Look for a job in Israel. Whatever you find, we'll give you. This was right after they became-- it was 1949. 

But in the meantime, my mother-in-law went to the United States. She had a brother here and a sister. And the brother was there already. But she went here and I [INAUDIBLE] with my mother there for a couple of weeks. And I came back. And I, you know, my wife wouldn't go anyway back to Israel. So I said, let's go to the United States. And we got-- this is how we decided then in spring of '40-- of '51 to go to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm. 

SUBJECT: So we flew to Salzburg. And we stayed in Salzburg quite a while. We stayed in Salzburg for a very, very tragic happening. Our daughter was born in Vienna. From the flight, it was a military flight, I don't know whether it's this. Anyway, she got encephalitis and started to have seizures. And she's still sick. She's in a special home. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm. 

SUBJECT: This is the end of. And so she-- we got stuck in Salzburg. And instead-- and being that I was working, I was connected with the HIAS and with the Joint, say let us go by train first class to Paris to Le Havre in Paris and then visit the Queen Elizabeth to New York. In May of '47 we arrived in New York. That what ends to here, the Am-- this called the American dream. 

INTERVIEWER: That's the-- that's that, that leg. 

SUBJECT: This is my-- 

INTERVIEWER: --the last leg, yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I mean, this is just me. I didn't give you things, you know. Being in a position like this, you could see. Just to give you an idea of what was going on from a man who see it from the side and was afraid to even-- meanwhile, I told Bella this today, as a matter of fact, or yesterday. I was waiting once at Backnang, the railroad station. There's and off-- there's a lieutenant. Oh, we were friendly. And here was a restaurant in that station where you could buy big white bread for-- for a couple marks, for pennies, for nothing. 

And right away, you could recognize the Jews. They were dressed in sack, you know, almost naked-- and this was winter-- looking in the garbage cans for food. So I went out. I was afraid, you know, there's ever was a sergeant there, you know, and I'm a Jew. Because he can say, what is this your business? 

So I went over to-- to lieutenant. I said to him, these are Jews. What can you do for them? So he-- you know, it's not that simple. 

So he went over to the Sergeant. He says to him, why don't you get some food? Come on. You know, he took him. He opened up his-- where he had his bread. And then from his-- he didn't go in and buy. And he gave them, you know, so they had a good meal to eat and all this. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Just never for instance you passed by a station, train station, like by the time. And you could see they came to the selling queue. Then everything for nothing. And at the same time, you would look 10 yards on there. People wrapped in a sack, naked. 

INTERVIEWER: Starving. 

SUBJECT: Picking up from the-- from the floor. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know, from the ground, dirty, you know, whatever 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know, this is what you saw, you know, pictures. I mean, this is-- this what-- what happened in Transnistria. Mostly died of typhus. The first winter, that's when my sister Molly went. Most of them were not prepared. They had nothing. The Armenians took them over. The ones who came over there, as most of them they killed on the way. 

They didn't have where to-- to sleep. They were not prepared, not camp, nothing. Stayed outside, the winter. And-- and this was very cold winter. The-- the snow sometimes covered the houses there. So this is what was more or less going on as a witness. It was partially involved 

What I did, for instance, was a camp on the [INAUDIBLE] where they-- when they retreated from the camp. This was a very strict camp. And it's a lot of people were killed in that camp. And they passed Prokhorovka where I was the first time. And among these things were cousin, among these people Rinzler, who is in Brazil today. 

Change his name. He's-- he's not Jewish anymore. Doesn't matter. He's a multimillionaire, but this is not about. Anyway, he-- he was among those things who was cousins or son. So I found out they came in to my house where I stayed. And I-- I gave him, you know, everything I had. 

Not the only thing, we had shirts and socks and things. And he ran away. Then he survived, because he just run away. And he-- he managed to come back to Czernowitz somehow. I don't know how he did it. But he managed to come back. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were able to help him out? 

SUBJECT: I help him. I mean, whenever I could. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know, him, I helped. Not only that, there's other people, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --I gave. It was very difficult to really get involved. And besides, it really is-- it looked like it's so-- because you help one, you just didn't have any ways. No one realized that eventually, because what I told you before, that people come to me like I should save their lives. They would bring gold pieces, Nikolai from the old Csar gold pieces. I could have accumulated like this. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: But I thought to myself, who needs it? I don't know whether I'm going to be alive tomorrow. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Who needs all that money? I could have a-- I could have filled up a-- but it was, you know, you really didn't know because every time I saw the-- the sergeant come in I know, who knows what is coming to me? 

INTERVIEWER: Right, mhm. 

SUBJECT: Who knows what orders he has? So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: You're very welcome. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. 

SUBJECT: And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: And then we could go on, and on, and on-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. You know, I didn't know I can talk so much. 

INTERVIEWER: Your testimony has been very help-- well, it's a very, very rich-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Rich. 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't know whether you need it, whether it was interesting. 

INTERVIEWER: Very much. 

CREW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Very much so. 

CREW: Yes. 

SUBJECT: OK. I'm glad that I helped you. 

INTERVIEWER: So thank you. 

