SUBJECT: So when I remember this atmosphere of the selection ghetto, we all was our pain. Part of the Germans had some feeling for us. My friend cried because she didn't know what happened as every one of us was our friends, was our families. And one of the Rotes Kreuz 

INTERVIEWER 1: Red Cross [INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: Red Cross sister. German. One of them cried with her. The other had been ugly, angry, nasty, hostile. Two people in the same road, and two different reactions. But suppose we have been coming back with anxiety, fears if we will see our families. And here is the joy on the streets. We have been on the carts with the soldiers and this plebs on the street have been, it was a kind of collective joy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The mob. 

SUBJECT: The mob. And always somehow this memories are the mob, I am afraid about every mob from those days. We came and this time my mom was, but others mothers hadn't been, of my friends. And you had such a change when nobody stayed. 

I remember my friend Misha [INAUDIBLE], a musician. He's not alive. And I remembered how he changed from one day to the other. This hopelessness, this, it was before full with vitality. He played on violin Beethoven one day before in this situation. 

Next day after this selection when they killed and destroyed, September '42, October, I don't remember the dates. He changed in a kind of apathetic, depressive. He didn't took care for himself. A total withdrawl and that we have been working since they took us to working. 

Population to the camp because they built on the Jewish cemetery. By chance, I give a lecture in Boston Brandeis two days ago, and one of the students have been there. And as expression of her, she shared with me, she gave me the picture. 

She was from the, from the camp. She brought the monument on the camp, which I have it here by chance. It is very interesting how we are meeting. Her parents have been to the same camp and she's in Brandeis. 

So we came to this camp which was built on the Jewish cemetery. And it was a terrible camp. People have been killed every day. We went out from the camp and it was important to work with the Wehrmacht. And in Wehrmacht, the German army, they had been different people. 

I guess those, but also many people. Some of them in no position to Hitler and no position to war. They couldn't-- some tried to tell me in a way. I could tell stories as stories, but also about the difficulties. 

The Polish police was one of the most aggressive but also Jewish police. The Jewish police have been chosen mostly by people who have been more aggressive. Um, I don't know if I can tell that every one of them was collaborator but they had been called so-called Ordnungsdienst. In service of-- how would you translate order? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INTERPOSING VOICES] the order. 

SUBJECT: Order. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Public order. 

SUBJECT: And they have the uniforms and they felt strong. And, of course, in such a way they could save, save families. They have news save families. Nice. Some would save children. I remember some of them, and there was such a discrepance between them and the others. 

And I [INAUDIBLE] as I worked, served at the Ger-- Wehrmacht the army. So I could meet also Poles and I have no [INAUDIBLE] total feeling of isolation. And we went also to the ghetto. Ghetto have been long existing. 

So I could see my mother in the ghetto. And that was and so I could smuggle her bread and so on. And that was very important as a motivation to live. To bring her something. We bribed the soldiers that they should bring us to baths in the ghetto. In such a way we had communication with our families. 

Until March was this so-called liquidation of ghetto. My mother had, couldn't get work. And as others, they have been on the blonde women in ghetto. Everyone who had grey hair, hair had been afraid about the verdict of death. So everyone was blond and it was terrible to see the old people blonde as if it would be a kind of guarantee not to die. 

And in March, the commandant Goeth. Viennese. Huge. Two meter. He was a commandant. And to make the, and I remember, it was one of most, most painful things. So we're ghetto, we couldn't come in because they had been Ukrainians and SS. 

And I spoke through window. With my mother, we had been on the street with the soldiers. And there had been the barbed- It was so difficult to speak. 

And illusion again. I sent her butter through a soldier. Not only not to be confronted since this is the last meeting. And we spoke and she said that I should take care of myself. And I said to her how she should go into this maybe that she can smug-, she can come in the camp. The camp was the saving place. 

And, of course, she and her sister who lived at the same time in ghetto, and her children had been killed. So I stayed in this Plaszow camp and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Deported to-- 

SUBJECT: No, not yet deported. I had been in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How about your mother? 

SUBJECT: My mother, I don't know until now. But, uh, now I know that they came to Belzec and they had been gassed there. And it is also interesting that people tried always to live for us. My mother tried to live for me and maybe for my sister and get to Warsaw. 

And always illusion. When we got the letter, it was in '42. Through a Pole, from husband of my sister. They had been quite rich and so-- and we had all the time letters smuggled from the ghetto and through the cannalization. And then beginning of '42, we got the letters that she is, that she is, was her child. 

They tried to smuggle the child out to have Polish, um, a nurse. And in the same-- he tried In the time sometimes they have been taking by the police. And, and, uh, I got a letter from my, from this, from husband of my sister that say that he got a letter from east, from Russia. Says they are living in camps and everything is fine. They are working. That was the German propaganda. So they had to sign letters. 

Well, so my mother lived a few months was illusion, but then she said to herself I feel that [? Manya, ?] my sister-- she's not alive. And then it was really-- the motivation to live life was always connected to if you have somebody, somebody to live. But then I stayed alone in this Plaszow, in this camp, and I worked with one of my best friends. Was a poet. [INAUDIBLE]. Young. One year older, younger than me. And we work in Steinbruch, in the stone-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Quarry? 

SUBJECT: --quarry. A gang of 12 people. I didn't work more there. It's German, it was a German Wehrmacht. It was in the camp. A terrible place. I lived, I worked there three days. I couldn't live more than that. But it was the same thing came an SS man, Laika. 

Puppet, we called him. Beautiful, blonde Aryan. A kind of a, I would see a Greek god from Phidias. Das Deutschland Division. And he began to kill. And, um, I, I had, he, I had, um, to take the stones from one place to other. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A wheelbarrow? 

SUBJECT: Yes. A barrow. And, uh, so I run. And I wish-- and then I am hearing shots. Six, seven. And I wish to say, [? Haskill. ?] I thought, here what happened? And here I see [? Haskill ?] is dead because he, he had to, he-- I don't know why. Yes, he killed him. 

And I found poems in his trousers, which I remember the poems and they will be part of the book. And he wrote a poem about love and about his feeling. He called it was a very, it was a sonnet. In sonnet form. Says there is no hope on which we can-- it's the armada was lost. There's no strength in the world who can save us. 

And, uh, that is [? Haskill ?] [INAUDIBLE]. A wonderful young man. And, um, somehow a friend of my family who was in police because we stayed only four of us from the whole group, he took me out from this work and I went to other camp. On the factory we were, um, which was outside of Krakow. 

And, um, that was a special camp. It was a special came from different points of view. Um, we, there had been two factories and people lived together. One of the factories, which we didn't know, was belonging to a German who saved 1,000 Jews. And his grave is now on Mount Sinai in Jerusalem. a Christian whose, his last will was to be buried between his people. 

And this man, he was not a holy man, he was a rather a man who loved life, a drunkard, and he had a double roll. 

INTERVIEWER 2: His name? 

SUBJECT: He was a member of Nazi party. One of the oldest members in Czechoslovakia. Schindler. Oskar Schindler is his name. He is known and now there's somebody writing a book about him. And he took over a Jewish, uh, factory. And he got a lot of money from the Jews and he saved them. 

And for the way I remember him because I didn't work in his factory. I, that was a Emalia factory and I worked in [INAUDIBLE]. I worked-- we have done, we've built, um, um, Kuhler in-- how do you say Kuhler? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Coolers. 

SUBJECT: Coolers for the airplanes. And it was us, but we have a common camp. So always when there was, um, when the SS came, so he made orgies with women, girls, a lot of drink, drink in such a way, and also he beat Jews when they came to kill. So go away, and he beats them, in such a way he saves them. 

Like beating and playing the role of the aggressor. And he was giving bribes, enormous bribes, to the high SS officials that they shouldn't take his Jews, they shouldn't kill his Jews. And, of course, part of the things that he got also a lot of money. They are rich, very rich Jews really helping working in his camp. 

And that was a camp that from one point of view there was kind of a life. You could sing religious songs. Our soul is waiting for god. They have been a kind of, um, meetings between boys and girls. Holocaust is not a uniform, nothing can be uniform. There are up and downs. 

And this camp, it was so different from Plaszow. There was a kind of life. You could smile. Uh, you could be ironic. You had connection with Polish factory workers in the factories. We work with them together. And there have been different really stories. I met a Pole who worked with me and he's giving me a picture, he's showing me, of his girlfriend. 

And this girlfriend was a friend of mine from school who lived as a non-Jew. And I had to hold myself not to say that I know her, you see? So that was, that was the situation which was so difficult. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Geographically, where was this camp? 

SUBJECT: It was in, um, Gregorzki, was a part of a suburb of Krakow. And there I have been in NKF. NKF was the name of the factory where I worked. And there was Emalia. And the workers, the Jewish workers, we lived there. And it was because of him not a fantastic life, but let's say one-- I remember the song. A Jewish song. Oyb will macht man mikh far prezident. What I will do if you would make me a president. So. Ago 

INTERVIEWER 2: How'd it go? 

SUBJECT: And people have been singing together Oyb will macht man mikh far prezident. So it, he was, he was a son of a Badchen. It is a kind of marshelik. It is a kind of role of a Jew who is playing clown on the Jewish weddings. So he was his son. 

Or I remember that we have been really singing this song nafshenu khikta le'adonay. Our soul is waiting for god after the work. And the German meister came. "Weiter singen, weiter machen." They didn't disrupt. And there had been some of the German engineers especially, uh, quite decent people. 

And but what we know later on there had been fighting between the Nazis and the decent. So there was a very gifted engineer, Jewish, who was a scientist, and he helps them. So he had a special roles, so the other Nazis could not accept it. 

And then I remember a young boy of 12 years old, a son of a scientist. He didn't know what it, he sung. Da-da-da, da-de-da-da-da-da-da. It's intonation. And a volksdeutsch have heard it and he told the SS. And what I told you now is the atmosphere and they have been hanged and we have to see them both. 

So that, that had been the scenes. You had to be on our appellplatz. And you are seeing the two bodies-- the youngster-- five, four times he fall. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Four times? 

SUBJECT: Four. The body. He, he, he would-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: He didn't die. 

SUBJECT: He didn't die. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they hanged him again? 

INTERVIEWER 2: They kept hanging him again? 

SUBJECT: Again and again and again. So that was until liquidation. And the march was the liquidation of ghetto Krakow. In '44 we lived there and the Russians are coming closer to closer. and Schindler took his people via Auschwitz, but he saved them into Czechoslovakia to a camp. And he saves them. Nobody died from his workers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the-- 

SUBJECT: He saves them and the last days he gives them also weapons. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the Schindler factory-- 

SUBJECT: Oskar Schindler. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. In his factory, where did you live? How were your conditions for living? 

SUBJECT: No, in ours that is something. We lived in barrack in the camp with SS officers and so on. But he could mitigate them. He gave them a lot of bribes. A lot of drinking. And he played the role as if he's trying to use the Jew as slaves. That was his motivation. 

And they are are good workers, so he is working for the industry. And he worked for the industry. This factory worked for Germany as they have doing, um, different things. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you get food? Was it-- 

SUBJECT: Food was very scarce. But they, in Emalia, they had. That was the difference. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did not work for Schindler? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't. I have been always sleep-- we had one barrack and they had the other barrack, but in the same camp. So they had much better conditions because they had food on the factory. We have been typical, typical concentration camp and one of the-- but also not so typical some ways if I compare to later on because it was a working, it was arbeitslager. 

But it was under, it was aussenkommando from Gross-Rosen, which was really a konzentrationslager and vernichtunslager And one day they made one doctor, I remember, say said we should not run away. They made a tattoo. And the tattoo, which is on my hand made a doctor who was a pupil of Freud, Dr. [? Blasberger. ?] Old man. He was then 78. They killed him later on. 

So it was a different kind of situation as before in Plaszow. And later on-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hillel, that's not a number. 

SUBJECT: No. KL it is konzentrationslager. That was typical for, for this camp, Gross-Rosen. And then we, it came to evacuation of the camp. I had also some friends in the camp. We had some we could hear politics, we had hope, we tried to run away. 

And what I didn't mention before in ghetto Krakow, I told you about the shop about the organization of camp fighters. It was a special group who have been fighting against the Judenrat also. And it was very secret because they have been afraid, the Judenrat gestapo will know. 

And this new class of people, the head of them was Dolek Liebeskind, his sister. Wonderful young people. 17. His sister was 15. They smuggled weapons and the Polish police fight against them. Somehow there had been rumors. 

One of them is living in Haifa. Poldek Wasserman. They took bombs and they throw onto restaurants where German officers had been living. Babylon Esplanada. And they had been killed about 50 Germans. And that was something to know this triumph. 

But of course, they found them and they had been killed. First they have been on the Jewish cemetery and then Jewish hospital. They found every one of them through some of the Jewish collaborators who was gestapo, which have been-- I don't know if the people told you before, but there have been such people as well. 

And, um, one of them Spitzer she wrote, in Gestapo, she wrote diaries. The diary of [INAUDIBLE], which was published in Krakow by the historic commission. She had written on Montelupich, in the jail of Montelupich to talk about everything, everyday as a triumph or so. And she knows that she is will die and so on. 

So that is a group of ZOB, which will be mostly from Akiba, Ha-Shomer ha-Tsa'ir, Hashomer Hadati, from zionistic organization, organizations. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was, how was the diary preserved? 

SUBJECT: She smuggled from gestapo of Montelupich. It was a Gestapo jail. It was also smuggled in toilet and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And all the members were killed? 

SUBJECT: All the members have been killed. Only one, who run away on his own part, Poltek Wasserman, he stayed alive. He was our Pol- first attache in Warsaw, in Poland after '49. 

INTERVIEWER 1: First Israeli attache. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And, um, so in Krakow, always there have been some ties with the outside world. There was always hope that you can run away, but the majority of Poles have been so aggressive, hostile. Some took-- I remembered I lived two weeks as a non-Jew. When I ran away, I didn't told you. 

Say we called them Shmaltsovnitse. You had to bribe them. If not, they take the trousers. Of course, for boy it was your circumcision. And if you have money so they didn't give you to the Germans. But if you have money. If you have money. If you had no money, there was no possibility. 

So that you had nowhere to run. And that was the situation in the outside world. So we came to, after the liquidation of our camp, we came to Plaszow. And from Plaszow we came with the train to Terezin in a small factory. We worked in tank factory. 

It's also very important to understand that how you could share. In Krakow, you could share the word. I remember it was my friend who said before we left, if you will live, tell my brother about me. I told him. In Israel, because my brother was a pioneer. And he told me, if you will live, tell my aunt. 

So the telling was a very important thing. And in the nights, we can be caught still speak, plans, running away. Always having plans. Where, what to do, and always the hopelessness. So when we came was the train and the fear that we know about Auschwitz. 

We went through Auschwitz two days and later on we came to Terezin to this factory, this camp. And there have been the first time also non-Jews. Spanish fighters, Austrian, and criminals. And the criminals wore the green triangle Have been so, they had been so-- they had been sadist. Criminals. 

And, of course, the Jews have been scapegoats. And who is speaking now but in Holocaust? Yes, there have been also others. But who have been the others? There was such a differentiation. The French, they had letters, they had food they got from International Red Cross, they had communication with the outside world. 

The Germans related to them differently because they have some feeling maybe. It was '44. Austrians, some Catholics. Russian soldiers have been very strong, very together. And, um, they have been very young also. Most of them 18, 19 years old. 

And it was interesting that, um, guardians have been also Russians of Vlasov. So soldiers of the army of the collaborator. Of the General Russian collaborator. So they have also some ties because the Vlasov soldiers thought we should be in good connections with the Russians. That was '44. 

But the Jews had been totally isolated. And I would say that the most of the working people in this factory have been not-- you cannot say that they have been sadist, but the soldiers, also soldiers, German soldiers in the camp, not SS, have been very aggressive, hostile. Well, so is the SS. 

And sometimes I remember some position. It was a terrible hunger. We had nothing to eat. And one man said to me in the night from my town, I work in night. I'm so hungry. And my daughter and my wife, they are on Aryan papers. And I will see them if I will stay alive. 

And I don't know why I give him my bread. I thought I have nobody more. No, nobody to live. It was not a heroic act, but it was rather I am telling you as a kind everyone has such episodes. The sharing, which was important. Also there we could pray as a non-observant Jew. I prayed with the others, and it was so important. 

One of them smuggled a small, small seder. And I remembered-- it was '44-- the Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur how we fasted. How we took also Passover. We didn't ate bread so we ate, we drink only water. Things which had been always connected with not to accept the slaveries, what they are thinking about us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know by that time that the armies were coming? [INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: We know. We know, but I was very pessimistic. I didn't thought that I, we will stay alive. My father was always optimistic. I remember when the Germans rode, they came out from Rostov because of some-- so my father says, oh, they are 50 miles from us. They had been 1,000 miles. 

And I was rather always pessimistic. I didn't believe somehow that, um, that we will stay alive. And then it was a bombardment of Dresden. And who knows that that was the biggest bombardment. And we, the camp was on the highest, um, it was on the al ha'gag. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The roof? 

SUBJECT: On the roof. Built on the roof. And that first four bombs had been falling and people began, no, one on the other. And we had been about 500 and about 100 people had been killed. But this feeling of triumph, this wonderful feeling that Terezin is bombed. And the SS run away. 

And we came in the fields and we took what was in the field to eat because everything was burning. So Terezin was one work of fire. But later on, they took us again and the whole work. The factory, factory was destroyed and we had to rebuild it. And it was cold, and it was, it had been terrible. 

We had nothing. We had only our lices and we had only no water to wish, to wash. And there was epidemic typhus. And it was also something characteristic. The kapos have been mostly German criminals and one was a Jewish kapo for the Jews. 

He was a German Jew and he related to the Ostjuden as something terrible. And this man was had typhus exanthematicus. And I don't know why when I run away, I had to go back and I had to take him. This man who related to us with a hostility and so on to me as well as a kind of Ostjude. 

So other story, there was a half Jew. German. So he spoke, he had problems of identity. And, of course, we are not, we don't like to speak about it. But that is that people who had the feeling I am a Jew, I am belonging, we can pray. They saved themselves better. They have a much better spirit. 

And this man spoke with a pride. My brother is on the Ostfront. He was a half Jew. And his brother was fighting on the east front as a soldier. And during this bombardment-- and he was also always collaborating with the criminals and with SS, and they killed him during the bombardment. The Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Jews. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Jews Killed him? 

SUBJECT: Yes. He was a coll- collaborator, and there was a kind of vengeance. And, um, so it, uh, I, to make-. So Terezin was bombarded and the Russians are coming. And so we had to walk. And that was a hunger march and it was terrible. And people have been killed and destroyed until we came to Litomerice. 

Litomerice is a town and a camp in Sudeten Deutschland. And, um, we came out 400 and we became 100 or less than that to Litomerice. And Litomerice was, again, um, sickness. And from all the concentration camps they came. It was near Theresienstadt under, near Elbe in the last days. 

And I, um, have, I, I have heard that they are wish, they are wishing, they wish to gas all the Jews in Theresienstadt. So again, I tried to be a non-Jew as a Pole. They took the Jews, I stayed in the Litomerice. It was a terrible camp because there was aristocracy in wonderful conditions. All the criminals, and political Germans, and so on, they had to, to eat, and they had uniforms, and they had no-- they lived. 

And we, that we have been in the kind of quarantine without nothing. And people have been dying there and we have been closed in. They threw bread in so everyone have been-- it was a terrible animal situation. But somehow, most of the people died there. And those who stayed, they took us. 

And three or two days we have been on trains who try to get out, but fortunately didn't. And then, um, I came to Theresienstadt in the last days and I was sick but I didn't know about it. I weighted, my weight was 28 kilo. 

But after the liberation, I remember, it was not a fantastic feeling of freedom. It was because maybe I had not the strength. And I went to Litomerice and I remember as the German soldiers are coming, coming in columns. And some of the women and men take their watches and their trousers and beat them up. And I tried to defend them. 

It was also something-- I said to them, we shouldn't behave as they are behaving. That wasn't the same day. It was in Litomerice, a beautiful town. And I went to a German because also Germans ran, run away to a house, and I went to the library still in my Pascha. And I found from Heinrick Heine "Das Buch der Lieder." The poems of Heinrich Heine, it's a book of songs. 

And that was my word trophy. And one day later I become, became very sick after the liberation and I had typhus exanthematicus and I had been Russian hospital many months. And, um, from there when they asked me where you would like to go, it was a Allierte Kommission. The Commission of Allies, Allies. I said to Palestine. 

Well, so I came first, they brought me from the Russia to the American zone, to Minhen. I was also in hospital there. And so that is that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have any friends? You mentioned the friend that was killed. 

SUBJECT: Yes, friends I had all that time. And, um, all the time I had friends. And that was not only important, but it was, I think, one of the most important that I am writing about for question of friendships, the question of fantasy, how fantasies working. And that is something that I am building on my own experiences and my experiences as a man who is working with survivors. And I work also with children of survivors. 

After the war, I became educator near Dachau. When I went out from hospital, immediately I took children who had been in concentration camps. As a teacher educator, I built a kind of hakhshara. So preparation for Palestine. 

So all the time I had friends. Um, only in the-- also in Terezin I had a friend, only-- and then in the last two, three days in Theresienstadt in Hamburger Kaserne, I met again a friend. And, um, during the ghetto we had friends and we had all the time connections and relations. And that was something most important for us. The friendship. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever-- without imposing on your work at all-- I wonder, did you ever talk with your friends about some day hoping to see them again? Meeting them again? 

SUBJECT: Those friends? Oh, yeah. Not only that, but my friends are coming here, those who are living in United States. And one of the problems is how can you be a therapist and a friend. But still, I am very strong, we have very strong ties. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you were in the concentration camp, you talked about someday seeing them? 

SUBJECT: Who some? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were in the concentration camp, did you talk together about someday seeing one another in different circumstances? 

SUBJECT: I told you about this. Maybe it will came a day. There was always a vague hope maybe, but there was a kind of irony. Irony was a very important style. Uh, sometimes we thought what, um, we said, well, if there would be a big requiem after us in, in the church in Krakow. Or in New York they will make a great cottage they would say, after us. 

Always we have been sometimes hoping, sometimes we, we, we have been hopeless. But that it was a, there had been mixed, uh, feelings. And sometimes hope, sometimes despair. It was not something which is as written in the books. Uniform. Some one small experience awaking so much hope. 

And always also in concentration camp was, uh, relating to those who left away. And if you can pull a song of, um, a banal song, a kind of a popular song about separation from two lovers could awake so much emotions and feelings. And people have been crying through the songs after their families. 

From other point of view was a song about hope. You will meet him again. And this song was used also expression of the hopes that may be somewhere, some time. And that feeling if not I, you'll stay alive. [INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the song? 

SUBJECT: There are many songs. Songs have been most of the, have been one of the most important defenses also against traumatization. The singing of songs. Some have been very banal songs, you know. A kind of popular schlager what we called, but they have meaning. 

Some have been poems. A lot of poems people have been writing. Um, during the ghetto especially, there have been a lot of poems written. It depends from the phase in which you have been. It was Sunday, it was Saturday, it was after. 

When women, for example, uh, ones I know from [INAUDIBLE] I from, from the [INAUDIBLE] have been, had, everyone tried to rebuild a life, internal life to remember what was happened to show on the boy on the other side. 

So always there have been glimpse of life and glimpse of hope again. And always you tried to get some glimpse from the outside world. Where are they? Always the question was where are they? They. Why they are not coming? 

And also maybe I didn't tell you when we have been in this camp in [INAUDIBLE], uh, English airplane fall on our camp. It is, it went, and they shot him. And one, and one, it was really, uh, one of the barracks have been burned totally, but there was no one in it. No human being. 

And we found the Bible. It was an Australian pilot we found also. And what a feeling. Here somewhere come from the outside world. This feeling. Of course, you are sorry for him, but here they are coming. We built on it. They will come. They it, is alive. They didn't forget us. 

We had the fantasy that maybe they wish they know about our camp. And there have been discussions of course and so on and so on. So that had been such [INTERPOSING VOICES]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The plane was sent to your camp because they knew about your camp. That was the fantasy. 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, yes. That was something that maybe they are bombarding the industrial center center. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever think-- because you are a doctor now, Dr. Klein Did you ever think they were putting drugs in your food to calm your mind or to-- 

SUBJECT: No. No. I had no fantasy about it then. I don't think that they had done it. And but when you are asking me-- so I remember that, uh, in irony one said to the other boys that they give them a soda. Soda said to influence a sexual, uh, impulses. Sex Because they didn't understood when people are so hungry, when you are getting 800 calories, you cannot have sexual desires. 

Some. The couples who had bread, who had to eat, they had sexual desires. In concentration camp, we have seen it in Terezin, the criminals took young boys as almost sexual objects. They had been terrible to young boys who identified with the criminals. 

Feminine and very, um, good taken care of. They lived with the couples. They have special rooms. And the object of envy, and anger, and fear because they had been love objects of the couples who were killed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you say killed- 

SUBJECT: Strangled. I need to tell you a story. There was a power couple and it was in the, in Christmas '45. And he's giving a speech in Terezin. And he's speaking every now the freedom will come. The end-- the war is going to end, but the Jews must be killed. He was an inmate as us are inmates, and he gave his speech. A criminal couple. Power. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A German? 

SUBJECT: A German who-- I was beaten by him terribly one, uh, day. I know I have spectacles and some how I work on a machine and I said that I can't see. It wasn't true. I wish to go get out, to see the world, you know? And for, and also not to work. 

And I, so I said to my meister, I cannot see. And, you know, and, uh, and, and because I had done something-- we always we tried to do sabotage. You know, and I have done sabotage. I took too much of the, uh, how to say it. It was, they would make steel to for the tanks. Well, and I, uh, I was beaten, but not terribly really. 

And then he sent me to the, then he, uh, towards the camp and I was sent to the doctor. And I remember two strong soldiers took me and the Germans-- it was, uh, it was maybe February. It was a beautiful sunny day. Snow, nature. And they look on me as in somebody terrible. 

And I thought maybe that I would see some, some, someone. Some was in Germany some Mitleid, some empathy. But all cold, or rejected, aggressive looks. And we went to the doctor. She was a woman. And she also was afraid to touch me. Maybe that is why we had lice since we had no water. 

And we came back and that was-- and I had to work in the night. Night shift. And in the day, I didn't got my food. And not to have soup, and not to have some, this small part of bread, it is dying. And so I came to him that I didn't got my soup and I had to go to work. And he have beaten me. My god. But, well, later on we tried to find him, but we didn't found him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned lice. Were-- you mean you were expected to work and you had no way of keeping clean? 

SUBJECT: The first, uh, the first month after the bombardment-- so we got it was only one uniform. But once in two weeks, something like that, we could wash ourself with hot water. And we got a half soap for two people and a kind of-- that was that. 

But we tried. It was very important to be clean, and that was one of the obsessives. It was a need to be-- the body image was very important. Not to let yourself go. So you, you wash yourself with cold water. We had no at all-- and it was wintertime. We had no-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Towels? 

SUBJECT: Towels. But after that bombardment, there was no water. There was no hot water. It, it, and [INAUDIBLE] it was, of course, um, then they took us to Litomerice and so on. So it was on the way to Litomerice was nothing to us. People died from, from sick, sickness, from typhus, from dysenteria, from typhus exanthematicus, from hunger. So that is, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Weren't the Germans afraid of contracting disease from you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They have been afraid. And so for later on they made, uh, two weeks before we left Terezin they made, uh, they tried, because they had been afraid. They made, um, they took us to, um, bathroom and, say, made a different kind of disinfection. 

By the way, the disinfection was also one of the terrible experiences because you lose not only your everything, but you also your hair. And they made in that terrible way and also the couples. Always you have been kicked in your, in your genitals by them. It was not only-- uh, it was at, yes, they had been sadist. 

So that was always something connected. From one point of view, it was wonderful that you can put, um, wash yourself. Otherwise, we had been always afraid because you know about the gas chambers. That they would come water [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said the disinfectant. What disinfectant? 

SUBJECT: Carbol. The Carbol Acid. It was a specific kind of disinfectant. Not DDT, they had no DDT]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did they use that? 

SUBJECT: Everybody- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did they use it? 

SUBJECT: When, um, after this epidemic they use it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: After they shaved you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. So they took us. The whole body was [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were most of the people you were with young? 

SUBJECT: Uh, most of the people have been late adolescence and adults. And it's interesting that there have been groups. From groups of people from their own town, and it was a kind of a cohesive group. And if you have somebody, it was very important how you could sleep together. So you sleep together one body to the other so you could get some warm. 

On the Appellplatz the same kind of technique to develop that one side, that two sides would be warm. Uh, you had to develop techniques how to go, how to walk not to lose energies. You had to develop techniques how to defecate and to get satisfaction from it. 

You had to develop techniques how to eat in a way that, um, was that you could think about it the whole day long. In the morning and the night. And it was terrible-- I remember a Russian steal from me my, uh, my, uh, ration of bread. So it was something, you know, terrible because you, you hope [INAUDIBLE] you haven't, you haven't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean satisfaction from defecation? What did that mean? 

SUBJECT: Well it is something that you are feeling that your body's still functioning, and that is something which is also very important. So there are specific things that it is very difficult for more, for psychiatrists with experience that is maybe they know more about it. That you are using your own body as a source of satisfaction when there are no other satisfactions. 

As persons also, of course, after severe operation, when they have the first defecation, it is also this feeling I am existing. I, still, it is something. So that would be of this quality of using your body as a source I am existing. That is not the change of the whole body image that you are, and nothing the fear about being mussulman. And you knows the expression of being somebody who is a kind of stupors they can not at all-- 