INTERVIEWER: Just tell us where you were born and your life before the war. 

SUBJECT: I was born in Krakow, Poland in a Jewish religious family. My father was a businessmen. It was a family of many people born partially in Auschwitz. My mother came from Auschwitz, the place famous for Auschwitz. She was-- most of my family had been killed on the same place that they had been born, in Auschwitz. 

And my father was from Krakow. My childhood was quite a happy childhood of a Jewish child from a good family. Quite of good of people. And I was brought in a Jewish way. I was going to a Hebrew school called the Education Hebrew School. 

My mother language, first my mother language I am sorry to tell you was German. Because my mother, being born in Auschwitz and living in Vienna, just spoke to me in German. And in Krakow, the life of Jewish people in Krakow was very active. And I was not yet 14 years old when the war was broken. 

But all my memories from my childhood was just happy memories, even from this terrible place Auschwitz, I got very good memories, because I used to spend my vacations there being with my family there on holidays. And then I remember it was a little Jewish town, was a very Jewish tradition. 

When the war was broken, it broke out in Krakow. We have been already feeling it in the first day. Because I was already playing, throwing bombs on Krakow on the first day of the war. And looks to be a very quick war. Looks to-- my father was still with us. He told me, it is going to be a blitzkrieg, very quick. I lost my father very early. And I-- we had been doing all kinds of ghettos, running from one to another, trying to escape. What is going to be already understand what is going to be. 

I save myself alone. I lost my family. I lost my parents, I lost my brother, I lost my grandparents, uncles, cousins, everybody. I am the only survivor. I have a cousin who survived from Auschwitz. And I passed three borders to escape. I went through Slovakia, Hungary, Romania. 

Takes me one year since I left ghetto till I came to Israel. I came to Israel on November '44, before the war was finished. It was before. We had been the first coming in. The people in Israel have been not aware what was-- what happened. Nobody likes to listen, because it was so obstructive. Nobody was prepared to hear us. It was for shock for us. 

And maybe this is-- maybe the first shock they couldn't believe in it makes such a influence on me. Until now, I prefer not to speak about it. Even my family is not aware of what happened to me. I never discuss it. My husband doesn't know much about it. My daughter doesn't know much about it. 

It's difficult for us to speak about it, and it's maybe some self defense, self protection. I wouldn't like to speak about it. We would like to forget very sad. It happened, such a tragic thing, but everybody safe who likes be conscious and to be a normal active, normal to run a normal life. Try to forget. It's not easy to forget, but I tried. I got a lot of dreams at night. 

You see, I I-- every single day I'm doing I think is under the influence what I-- what happened to me, what I saw through the terrible years, yes. But my self defense is, you know, to go on, not to think too much about it. I try. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you recognize any of those things that you do that you know come from that time? 

SUBJECT: A lot of things. 

INTERVIEWER: For example. 

SUBJECT: I am very nervous. Maybe I am very active. Maybe the activity is part of my nervousness. Yes. I never slept good at night. I would like to learn as much as possible, to see as much as possible, to-- I still feel like it was the time was running that maybe it's going to happen something again. I am very anxious about my family, about my daughter, for instance. 

I'm always in a terrible tension what is going to happen to her. And there are some signs that normal mother doesn't feel about a normal child, you know? This oversensitivity, maybe. And there are a lot of things that I think when when I think it over are under the influence what happened. 

INTERVIEWER: You said it was a very big shock to you in 1944 when you came to Israel and in Israel, people didn't believe. 

SUBJECT: My own family didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER: You had family here? 

SUBJECT: Yes I got-- I used to have an aunt and an uncle. And when I told my aunt that my grandfather was shot on the street, she couldn't bear it. She couldn't believe it it. She told everybody, I got a wonderful nice. She escaped, she is alive, but she's stuck in such a nonsense. She came out of it a little bit crazy. People have been not prepared. The press was not writing about this, and nobody knows about it. 

INTERVIEWER: But they knew you escaped, so they knew that other people did not escape. What did they say? 

SUBJECT: This time they have been not aware about it. It was November '44, 4th of November, '44. Here still was not a sign of what happened. They know that was a tragedy. But nobody believed it was in such a mass that so many people have been killed. And the family is not coming back. Nobody is alive. It seems that normal people couldn't believe in it. This time was still something that nobody could believe in it. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you-- in that year that you were traveling, how did you do-- what happened? How did you manage? 

SUBJECT: It was, I don't have to tell you, it was very difficult. It was very dangerous. Many people tried. I didn't have nothing to lose, because I-- when I escaped from ghetto, it was not already ghetto. This was-- there was the last ghetto in Poland-- Bochnia. And there was the last group who be left in this ghetto. We had been left for making the liquidation of this ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Making what? 

SUBJECT: Liquidation of this ghetto. It was the last ghetto was in September '43 was finished already. The people had been taken out to partly to Auschwitz, children and elder people. Some other to a very difficult with what is called Lager camp before this execution. 

And this one who've been chosen to be left there have been chosen for very difficult work to do. They've been left people in bunkers. And they found them and they shot them. And people have to undress them and, you know, to-- to not-- to put them on a fire, because every day they have been burning the bodies they found. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were doing this work? 

SUBJECT: No, I was not doing this work. There have been some friends of mine doing. I went for a very difficult job to work by lagerfuhrer of this-- lagerfuhrer was the chief of the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Camp director. 

SUBJECT: Camp director. As a cleaning woman. Yes, I was doing all my black work, very hard work to-- not to do the normal people other people have been doing. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: I was 17 and 1/2, almost 18. No, it was '49, yes? Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: '39. 

SUBJECT: '43, sorry. And they been left people to make, for instance, to take the clothes out, women's clothes, men's clothes, to look for gold, to look-- and each day we have been left less and less, because each day they shot some of us. And my father used to have a lot of Christian friends, which we have been in contact with them during being in ghetto. 

And I used to have a lady who used to live out of ghetto. She came special to this little town, Bochnia, when we escaped to be next to us. And through her, I came in contact with friends of my father. And I found a way to escape through the border. It was not legal to Slovakia, from Slovakia to Hungary, and from Hungary to Romania. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say you found a way, what was that way? 

SUBJECT: It was somebody who gave me a contact to a man on the border between Poland and Slovakia. It was wintertime. It was November. And I escaped through this that I first of all went out of ghetto. It was also very difficult to escape, because we have been surrounded with three times with these Polish police, German police. And were some-- next to us have been Ukrainian. 

And we couldn't speak even with the Ukrainians. They have been very dangerous people. But I found a way, and I escaped. I took even with me two people, grown up people, not to be alone. I was afraid to. And this lady, a great friend of ours. She was visiting us here in Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: What's her name? 

SUBJECT: Janila Kovalik She's not alive anymore. She was killed by accident. She was like a-- very difficult to find such a great human being like she was. She was a friend of Jewish people. She was a wonderful lady. 

INTERVIEWER: She was not Jewish? 

SUBJECT: She was not Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: She was the one who had followed you from Krakow to be with you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, and she saved two children who are living now in [INAUDIBLE], very religious children. She was working with the family, friends of our family, and she saved the two children. She had done in ghetto a bar mitzvah to the children. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she Catholic? 

SUBJECT: She was very religious Catholic. She told me when she was here, she said, the life with what I am doing, everything is all right with me, but she is sorry I'm not enough religious to her. She was accept by our president here for a thanksgiving her that she was so wonderful to children of Israel. And she found me a place, and I was hiding during a couple of days out of ghetto. 

I was allowed to be during night in a room and during day, I had to be outside in winter in snow in a little made from wood. It was not the house. Like it was a storage for wood. It was terrible cold and I came with really frozen feet. And we suffered a lot the three, four days we had been staying in this wooden house in snow. And after they came, a car was rented through some friends. 