ELIZABETH DOPAZO: From the past. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK, fine. Then take them out, so that they're not in confused with your notes. And Craig, will you just keep the camera, you know, waist up. 

CRAIG: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Wait a second. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Dopazo. Would you start by giving your name, and just say what about this interview? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well my name is Elizabeth Dopazo. Formerly, my name was Vickert before I was married. And I live in Brookline now, and married, and have two children. But originally, I was born in Germany. And the time I remember the most is the time between 1933 and 1946, '47. [SIGHS] What-- so you want me-- 

INTERVIEWER: You said you never told it-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, I never really spoke about it very much for the past 30 years or so. And many of my friends don't know about my background. I would say even my husband doesn't know all of it, because I was always somewhat reluctant. And I had placed myself into such a situation that I thought it had happened to someone else. And I-- it worked very well for me. I know psychologists and psychiatrists, they usually, you know, say you should let it out, and all that. But this has worked very well for me for many years. 

I-- I would think when I-- because you think about it daily. Everything I think about daily, about my father, everything that happened in my youth. But I think of it in terms of-- not now, of course, in the last three years, since I've got involved in this. I know it was me. But before that, I-- it worked very well. I thought, well, I saw that somewhere, in a movie. It happened to somebody. And far removed. And then, in time, I even began to think, well, did that really happen? Or have I read it somewhere? And it worked well. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Worked well how? In keeping you-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, in keeping me fairly cheerful, leading a perfectly nice, normal life. Normal-- can be considered normal. And perhaps that's my nature, being cheerful. And that's what I was all these years. And I didn't want to talk about it. Sometimes when-- when I was surrounded by people who were talking about these things, I would say, well, I'll-- excuse me for a moment. I wouldn't want to be involved. 

And I didn't want to see pictures and movies of that era. And whenever I was somewhere where it was shown and it-- because constantly you're reminded of it by something-- some little incident, something-- I would say, oh-- turn off in my mind. No, no, leave it. No, that-- not let's dwell on it. 

And I, even when my mother wanted to speak about it, I regret it bitterly now that I didn't talk with my mother, who suffered so much more intimately about those times. I would always say to her, don't let's talk about that. It only upsets you, and you start crying. There's no point in it. And just let's just do something else. Let's think about something else. Don't let's talk about it. 

And I know now that perhaps she wanted to very badly. And my brother and I, we always would dissuade her, and say, no, no, that's too painful for you. Don't let's talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER: What changed your mind? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, what changed my mind was really this. When I started working in the Lincoln School in Brookline as a Title 1 Aid to the children-- it's a program, federally funded, you know, helping sixth, seventh, and eighth graders to-- to be average in the class, if they're somewhat slower. And it's a very fine program. And as I was doing that, I saw that they started to teach the Holocaust in those grades in the Brookline schools. 

And once in a while, I would hear little bits and pieces. And I would think, now wait a minute-- that's not what I recalled. This is not quite the way it was when I was a child. I don't know where they got their material from. No doubt everything is authentic and true. But in my own experience, it's somewhat different. And perhaps I could be of some help, even to clarify some sort of things. 

And also to-- perhaps people would like to hear it from a German point of view, because I had heard comments that-- from different people. Oh, yes. It's all about the Jews, and they wanted sympathy, and so on. They should get sympathy, I know. But you know, this is-- I'm just telling you what I heard. That there's-- you know. And then it's all from the Jewish standpoint. 

And I thought, well, since my own father was in the concentration camp and being German, perhaps it would add to the whole curriculum if it was brought out from somewhat a different perspective, you see. And I thought-- and so, I approached the teacher who was teaching the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER: You haven't explained to us. Would you explain to us that your own background-- you were-- explain about your religious background, your cultural background. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, I will do that. You want to let me do that now. So I approached the teacher and said, would you like me to occasionally sit in, and perhaps I can add in some way? And then I explained to him, and he said, oh, great. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you explain to him? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: I did. I explained what I will explain to you now. Well, you see, as I grew up in Germany-- in Saxony, which is now the Russian part of Germany-- what I remember the most is this. I was born in 1929. So I was four when Hitler came to power. And my father, who was a representative of the Watchtower Tract and Bible Society of Pennsylvania, which the headquarters were in New York at that time. 

And we were Jehovah's Witnesses. And my father was a traveling district overseer. We had a business, a barber shop for men and women-- a beauty salon. And my father had a manager, because he was traveling so much. And he spoke also five languages. And he was sort of well educated. And he loved corresponding with people from all over the world, and so on. 

So when Hitler came to power, almost immediately, he was arrested. 

INTERVIEWER: For being a Jehovah's Witness? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: For being a Jehovah's Witness. Exactly. Because Jehovah's Witnesses, which is not commonly known in this country, and you know, time and time a little surprised by this that people don't realize that Jehovah's Witnesses were badly persecuted along with the Jews right from the word go. And when we had meetings in our house-- Bible discussions and so on-- neighbors would go to the police and denounce us, and would say, those people there, they are meeting. Who knows what they are up to? Who knows what they're doing? 

And then the police would come and investigate. They would confiscate our reading material-- Bibles, Watchtower, and Awake-- those Bible-based magazines that Jehovah's Witnesses publish. And then he would usually be interrogated. And sometimes, as I recall from what my mother told me, four times he was arrested and sent to prison-- an ordinary-- well, ordinary-- ordinary type prison. And he had to work in the stone quarry. Which the prison actually happened to be nearby where we lived in this small town in Saxony. 

And my father and mother were very much in love. My brother was a year younger than I was. And you probably can imagine, it was heartbreaking for her when my father would walk by in a column of prisoners. And-- mm. Excuse me. 

INTERVIEWER: The little town that you lived in-- how many generations had you lived in that town. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Oh, my grandparents and great grandparents had lived there already. They were all from Saxony. 

INTERVIEWER: Had they been Jehovah's Witnesses? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: My-- well, not my grandparents on my father's side. But on my mother's side-- my mother came from northern Germany, from Lubeck-- from a very beautiful Hanseatic city of Lubeck, which is near Hamburg on the Baltic coast. And she had actually eloped with my father down to Saxony. So she was from North Germany, and her parents had been-- were Jehovah's Witnesses. 

And so anyway, going back-- in 1936, one morning we were having breakfast, and the gestapo just knocked very loudly on the door, and just stormed in, and at pistol point arrested my father. And I had neglected to say that when he had-- those prison terms, they were usually short. And then he was released for lack of evidence, or lack of that they could prove that he did things against the Fuhrer and against the German Reich and so on. 

And so but in 1936, they came and uh-- and took him. And he said, you can put your gun away. I'll come peacefully. And that's the last time I saw him. So my mother was arrested also at that time. And she was able to take my brother and myself by train under police escort to North Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: May I stop for just one moment and ask-- you lived in this town a long time. You were German, German origin. Yet the neighbors would be suspicious of you? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes, they would. Because, you see, in that small town, when Hitler came to power, most people were very much for him, because of-- how can I explain? Because of the-- there was a Depression as you're aware of. And things were very bad and economically and in such ways. And the promises he made-- and so it appeared, it appeared to most people, oh, I'm going to do this for you, I'm going to do that for you. And oh, great. He is a great liberator coming now. 

So when anyone was not for Hitler, it was against him. There was no going middle way-- how you want to say it. And neighbors-- we had not been-- how can I say now? Already before Hitler came to power, Jehovah's Witnesses were sort of looked at not all together kindly. And were consider somewhat of-- well, kind of strange, and weird, and so on. But so that was why. Because they weren't-- they weren't fully aware of what we were trying to do. 

But many friends we had in this little town, they were also arrested. I mean, my mother-- after my father left, and my mother was able-- was delivering us at her mother's door step in Lubeck, she was not allowed to go in, even. They took her then and there to prison. And we stayed with our grandparents. 

And my mother saw my father at a huge trial for Jehovah's Witnesses. And they had to go in and face the wall-- had, you know, face the wall, standing there, waiting for each of them to be sentenced. And my mother received a 2 and 1/2 year prison sentence in the women's prison. And she was, at the time-- well, let's see now. 1936, I was seven. And she was-- she was born in 1909, so she was a young woman, very young woman, and very much in love with her husband. 

And there they saw each other for the last time at this big trial for Jehovah's Witnesses. And so, my mother had to spend six months in solitary confinement. And on two occasions there were rats in there. And-- excuse me. Well. And so, my father was imprisoned at first, and then later on transferred to Sachsenhausen concentration camp. 

Now, I want to say right here before I-- it escapes me. Unlike Jews, who were not notified of if someone was killed, or died of natural causes in the concentration camps, German citizens were informed. And when they received prison sentences, they even were able to write a card or some little thing once a month. And so they had, in that sense, privileges, such as they were. 

Now, Jehovah's Witnesses also had another unique opportunity. Every few months-- I don't know, I can't say for sure how often-- but every few months they were given papers they could sign and renounce their faith, and state that forthwith, they would support the system-- the regime, the Hitler regime-- and then they would be released, you see. Now, only a handful, if that, did that, out of the thousands that were in the camps. 

And my father had the unique-- another unique opportunity to be released, because my uncle, my father's sister's husband, had a very high position in the Nazi party. And she implored him, time and again, to do something for my brother, whom I love. That type of thing. And he would do it. He would try his level best to get my father out. But he couldn't get him out, because my father would not sign those papers renouncing his faith, and saying, yes, from now on, I will support the Hitler regime. And-- and there were thousands of others who did likewise. 

Now, the very few that did sign-- there are two known cases to my knowledge-- that, when they did sign, one of them was shot in the back as he was leaving the concentration camp. Because it's ironic, but the authorities in the concentration camp, they also hated people who were not loyal to their-- it's crazy. But you know, that's how it was. 

And so-- and then, another thing, what also loomed ahead, but that's not the reason they didn't sign. If you renounce your faith, and you say, all right, I'm going to support the system, and you realize what is waiting for you, what would have waited for them is, at that time, when the war had progressed already, they would have been sent right to the Russian front to where the most devastating fighting was going on. They were doomed anyway, you see. 

So they, according to their belief, they would prefer to die for what they believe was the right thing to do. And because-- Jehovah's Witnesses also believe that they will be resurrected and to a life, and because it's promised in the Bible. So they believe all that, and therefore, it was not as difficult for them to stick to those principles, because they had those very, very strong beliefs, you see. 

Now, my mother, on the other hand, after 2 and 1/2 years, she was released because of good behavior, and so on, somewhat earlier than her sentence was. And also she signed-- not that type of paper. That was only given in concentration camps. But to the-- if she signed a paper to the effect that she would not meet with other Jehovah's Witnesses again. 

And she reasoned in her mind, and she felt very guilty about it for-- I think, until the day she died, that she signed it. But it was only to say that she wouldn't meet with other Witnesses. And she figured in her mind, well, I don't know them in Northern Germany. I only know the ones from Saxony. And when I'm released, it's war time, I'm not going to meet with them. I want to see my children so desperately. And I want to be out. I want to know what's going to happen to my husband. And all these things-- I mean, millions of things must have gone through her mind why. And so she signs, saying, all right, I'm not going to meet with them. And so she was released. 

I remember the thing that she wanted to do the most when she was released-- go to the ocean and see the wide, open sea-- be free, you know. But she could hardly do it, because she had to report to the police once a week. She had to work in a factory. And she had to sign another form that stated that she would not reveal any kind of knowledge she had of prison or other institutions, meaning concentration camps. Because it's amazing how news even trickles out from concentration camp. Little things are smuggled here and there. 

I have a letter here from a person-- my father's very best friend-- who was sentenced to death. And under the sentence of death, he wrote a small letter of encouragement to my mother. And I have that letter here. And so things became known of what was happening in these camps. And that is why my mother had to sign that she would not reveal this whatever she knew, you see? Now is it. No, it's there. 

Anyway, so as time went on, my brother and I, we-- we went to school. Actually we were-- we were refused. Not every school would take us. But we did find one. And because we were a detriment to the school, my brother and I. 

Here's the letter. I found it. It was a very small letter. And it was from-- from my father's friend, who wrote this under-- being under the sentence of death. In four weeks it was to be carried out. He was to be shot. And it's all in here. And it was smuggled out. And he encourages so his Bible, scriptures, and to stay firm, and not to retaliate, because, as the Bible says, Jehovah will repay. And so on. And so this was very encouraging to my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: When you went to the school that finally took you, what were the circumstances? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, this school, where we finally went to, my brother and I, it was co-educational. We were boys and girls. And we had all the subjects that your students have here-- math, music, even religion. I can't remember anyone taking it. That's true. It was not encouraged. But it was there. And then we had geography-- beautiful maps and a globe in the classroom. And science, very well-equipped science room. 

Much emphasis was placed on physical fitness. We had a beautifully-equipped gymnasium. And history was taught somewhat differently. We had to remember dates, and sort of remember who fought whom, and what was the outcome. And much emphasis was placed on the Roman Empire and glory of it. Very little about the downfall, that's sort of funny for me. 

INTERVIEWER: How did-- how did the subject of the Hitler regime surface in school? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: It did not surface very much. I'd like to point that out also, that in different regions in Germany, it was-- the situation was somewhat different. I'll give you an example. My grandmother told me that when Hitler made one of his big speeches just outside Lubeck, people threw things at him. I don't know what they threw. I mean, people-- whatever people throw at-- tomatoes, rotten eggs, something like that. 

And he was so utterly infuriated that he made up his mind there and then, I'm sure, that when he came to power, he would take away the independence from Lubeck. Hamburg, Lubeck, Bremen, and Danzig, they were Hanseatic cities with their own independence. And so he took that away from Lubeck. And after that happened, he never visibly showed himself again in Lubeck, ever. Whenever he came through in a limousine or on a train, he would draw the little curtains so people couldn't see him. Because naturally, there were many people who wanted to see him. 

But by and large, people in north-- north of Germany are somewhat more reserved and conservative. And when he came as a foreigner-- I mean, Austria wasn't German at that time. So there he was, a Catholic-- ah, that's already the last straw for-- for most people in Northern Germany. It was like a red rag to a bull. So and then with his brash way of speaking, it just didn't appear to them. 

And I'll give you another example. My uncle worked in a factory. I don't recall if it was war related or not. He never was-- he wasn't in the army. But anyway, he worked in this factory. And it probably was somewhat war related, because Himmler, who was an absolutely most hated, despicable character in Germany, next to Hitler, he came to make a speech at this factory. And because the workers did not appropriately applaud his sort of fanatic speech, another speech was made by the company boss-- director of the factory, whatever. 

And he-- he said to the workers that they had behaved despicably, that they had not applauded this illustrious person, and according to what they should have and what was required from a patriotic German at that time. And therefore, grave consequences would follow if this were to happen again. And this was a very common phrase by the gestapo, and police, and people who had any authority, and were very much in the system. If you don't do this and this, there will be grave consequences. And that already put the fear-- I mean, that put a great fear into people, because they-- these were not idle threats, you see. And so-- so this is, this gives you another instance. 

Also, I want to point out-- I may forget it-- it gives you another extreme example of how people relate under different circumstances to each other. My uncle-- another uncle, my mother's twin brother-- he was in the army. Just German Army. It was something also that I like to point out. Most people, I'm sure, are familiar with this. But to students-- I mostly relate to students eighth grade and freshman in high school and so on, because those are the years I remember the most. So I relate to that. 

But what most people don't realize-- young people, particularly-- is that the SS, for example, the SA, which are the brown shirts, the strong brown shirts, yeah, and the gestapo, and the German Army-- now, you have to make a distinction between those factions, you see. And there's a tendency to think of Nazis-- that's it, Nazis, and some Germans, and then the Jewish question. And so it's not as simple as that. It's really very complex now. 

Going back to my uncle. He was in the army, and he was a private in the army. And he would spend all his time all the war-- all through the war, while Germany occupied France, in France. He had a wonderful time. Never suffered or anything. Never saw any fighting. Never had to use his gun. At the end of the war, he didn't even know where it was. He had to look for it. And then he threw it away, because he didn't want the Americans who came then to think he was-- you know, had a gun, even. 

And now he was on leave one time, and he was working in his mother's garden. And a friend of his, who had been a very good friend in school, also was on leave. And he was in a full SS black uniform-- full outfit. And he was walking by. And so my uncle stopped him. Oh, hello. Well, what his name was, it escapes me now. My uncle told me. 

And so he said, hello, how are you? So this person, who had been his very good friend all through school, said, how dare you say hello to me? Don't you know our greeting? And my uncle said, well, so he said, next time I see you-- how long are you on leave? Was what my uncle told him. And he said, next time I see you, I expect you to greet me in the proper way. And he extended his arm and said, Heil, Hitler. And my uncle was really stunned, and he didn't say anything. So I just throw that in as an example of what can happen. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in school. Your mother was in prison. Who were you living with, and what was your relationship to the Hitler Youth? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Oh, yes. Well, we were living with my grandparents, as I say, and they told us, as I recall, daily, when people ask you things, in school or anywhere, about anything, you don't know anything. You just say, I don't know. And it was very difficult for us, for my brother and I, to act dumb all the time. Because well, so that age, when you're 12, 13, and you think you know already so much. You want to say, well, it's so and so on, and defend your parents. 

And so because we were told many times that, by certain teachers, that, you know, your father's a coward, you know that, don't you? He won't fight for the fatherland, and look where he is, and this type of thing. So we felt about that big. And there were even times when we said to each other, well, why can't we just be normal Germans like others, and kind of blend in, so to speak. Not be Nazis or anything, but just be ordinary people, so that we don't have to be always saying, I don't know, we don't know this, and we don't know that. And it's just, oh, we felt frustrated. 

But then on the other hand, when my grandmother explained, well then, what would you-- if your father then probably would be in the army and-- and he would die anyway. And she explained it in a simple way. Because we were children, after all. Then we would say, yes, yes, that's true. That's true. 

And then, we didn't have too many friends. We didn't actually look for any, because we were always afraid we would say the wrong thing, and then they would tell their parents. Because some parents had already told their children not to play with us because of what our family stood for. And the very difficult part was in the mornings, in school, when we had to say Heil, Hitler. I mean, that was the thing. We all had to stand each one of us behind a desk-- A students were in front, B students, C students, and so on. 

Now, if you happened to be a C student, you can kind of hide a little bit, maybe behind somebody, and avoid to say Heil, Hitler once in a while or something. But if you're an A student, you're right there in front of the teachers. No way you can escape. And what we did sometimes-- drop a pencil, or sneeze a little bit, or cough over it, and so. And then it's been said. And you didn't say it. 

But you can't-- how many times are you going to do that? And there's so many days in the year. And the teacher looks already at you, because we were the only ones that were children of Jehovah's Witnesses in the school. And they were-- all knew all our background. So they would have us stand in front of the class, and say, now, you say it separately. And you say it, Heil, Hitler, in front of the class. Because the rest of the class all loves Hitler, don't you? And the kids, they say, yeah, you know, yes. 

And so we were-- we were did we always just felt that we wish we were invisible, and we-- that the war would end soon. That was our most concern. If that war would end soon, and Germany would lose, then we'd be all set. And so as I say, many times we had to do it separately. 

And we-- at first we-- oh, and then, I forgot to say. The teacher would ask, who told you not to say, Heil, Hitler? And we-- oh, we thought immediately, oh, dear. Now, if we're going to say-- which we had been taught all along to be so truthful, that is part of, you know, the-- our religion, to be always truthful. And then it became a real mental anxiety. 

Now, we cannot tell the truth. If we say, oh yes, my grandmother told me, don't say, Heil, Hitler if you can possibly avoid it. Then we-- we, we, we thought-- but by the time we get home, she won't be there. And she will have been picked up. And then what? Then we'll go to our aunt. Well, they're not for Hitler, either. Then the next thing, you see. And in our minds, we blew it all up, and we thought, well, that's it. We're going to be totally alone. And then what's going to happen to us? 

And so we said, no, no, no, no. My grandmother didn't say it. No, she didn't say it. Your grandfather said it, then. No, he didn't say it either. Then why didn't you say it? Well, I-- I just-- I am too slow. So that means you're stupid, then. Well, you know, well, I don't-- I mean, I'm just. Well, what is it then? What are you? And then we were pointed out, you know, as being not entirely bright and so on. It was a hassle. I don't really like the word, but that's what it really was. 

And now I lost my thought. Now what were you asking me before? 

INTERVIEWER: I asked you about why you joined the Hitler? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Oh yes, yes. Just before the war ended, normally the gestapo would not come to your house and ask you to join the Hitler Youth. You wouldn't have to, because people, they knew, at a certain age, and you would join the Hitler Youth. But in our case, because we didn't go voluntarily, one day the Gestapo came to my grandparents' house. 

Well, the gestapo never come to make a friendly visit. They only come because there is some real reason. And so we were shivering. I-- My brother, I-- well, Id don't know how if he was shivering. I was. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the scene of their coming? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes. Yes, yes. My grandparents, they owned a house and just outside Lubeck. And they came, and they knocked on the front door, and my grandmother opened the door. And we-- usually, when someone knocked on the door, we all were right there-- who is it and so. And my brother and I looked, and we saw them in these long leather coats, just the way you see them. And I'm not talking about Hogan's Heroes and stuff like that. I mean really, really serious, when you see some serious movies. So sinister looking and-- aw, it's just horrible. 

And so they said, you have a granddaughter, Liesl Vickert, and she is now the age, join the Hitler Youth, and so on. And by such and such a time, such and such a day, we expect, and so. So they left. That was it. If not, there will be grave consequences. Passing words. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did your grandfather do? What was he-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: He was a carpenter. And he had his own little shop. 

INTERVIEWER: Right there? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Right there. He had a workshop in sort of another part of the house. And he was not-- well, he must have been in his workshop. I don't remember him opening the door. It was my grandmother. So they left. That was it. And so when they left, my grandmother was crying. And I said, don't cry, grandmother. Don't cry. Don't cry. I'm going to join them. Not when they say. I'm going to join tomorrow. You come with me, we get the uniform, everything, and I will just fake my way through. 

Now, it's already 1944. The war cannot last much longer. You keep saying that yourself. Germany isn't doing so well. And we're going to lose the war. And then it won't be so long. I can feel-- I can fake it. I actually fake a lot of things up to now. 

INTERVIEWER: Was what to fake? I mean, you were a German child? What's the difference? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes, yes. But to fake being so patriotic for Germany. Fake the enthusiasm for being in uniform, marching, singing, and all that stuff. And so, I don't know. If I faked it too well-- I feel badly about it sometimes now, because they wanted to make me a leader. But I did escape that, because the war ended then. 

But I just would like to say the little things that one did as a child, and you felt really good that you did something. When we would have to raise the flag-- I remember a particular time, particularly a time in Austria. We were sent to Austria-- the various schools were sent to Austria into the mountains for evacuation purposes. And our school went for six months. And then we came back, and another school took our place, and so on. 

So while we were in Austria, the teacher and the Hitler Youth leader came with us. And so we were marching then on Sundays, and we had one pair of shoes, and we saved it for that day. And so-- and during the week we helped farmers after school, and so on. And I remember sometimes I would drop the flag, especially if it had been raining, dropped it in a mud puddle. And I'd look down, and I'd feel really good. 

And then I'd say, oh, oh I'm sorry. Oh, dear, oh dear, oh dear. And then I would be given a lecture, and saying, now, listen, and all this. And I would say, well, this was an accident, you know? And then afterwards, I'd feel, oh, that's good, that was good. As a child, I mean, that's the type of thing that I would do. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any of the songs you sang in the Hitler Youth? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, as I mentioned to you before we started this program, all these many years, except the last three years, many of these things have been lying dormant. And I have not wanted to talk about it, or go into it deeply. And I-- it worked very well for me. And I have disassociated myself from it, and thinking, well, I've-- that was somebody else's life. And it didn't really happen to me, and so on. And-- and it worked very well, actually. 

But-- but what was it we were talking? 

INTERVIEWER: I asked you about songs. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Oh, the songs, the songs, yes. So the songs, because I did not like to sing them. And I actually-- I hated those songs. I hated the marching, the singing, their uniform, the whole bit. So I do not remember too well, except when I hear movies, and I hear them singing the German songs. Then it comes right back to me, and I remember all the words, melody, everything. But I could not right now. No, I can't. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you show us some of the pictures and things that you've brought? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Now, I also would like to say that our teachers-- most of our teachers did not, in any part of the curriculum and during school, tell us to hate Jews. Now, in other parts of Germany-- Bavaria, Nuremberg, Dusseldorf, Berlin-- all those places where they had put on those big huge parades and everything, I'm sure that there were, you know-- and most places, maybe, in Germany. But not in our school. I don't recall that. 

In fact, we only had one huge picture of Hitler in the headmaster's office. So in some respects, in-- in our part of Germany, it wasn't as evident, except in public places. I'd like to point that out, also. It might be of interest. In public places, everywhere you went, there would be a sign above the door, "Our greeting is Heil, Hitler." And if you went in, even in a restaurant, and you did not extend your arm and say, Heil, Hitler, it would be very likely that strangers-- anyone-- would come up to you and say, excuse me. Do you see what it says up there? 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean, extend your arm? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Well, I didn't want to do it. But this is how-- when you say, Heil, Hitler, you are-- 

INTERVIEWER: In that traditional? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes, yes. The salute, you see? I don't want to do it. But so you extend your arm, your hand, and hail Hitler. So if you didn't do it, strangers would come and say, well, you see that greeting up there? That is our German greeting. Why didn't you say that when you came in? Then you'd-- perhaps you'd mumble something like, well, oh, I forgot. I just thought I'd say hello. And anyway, I don't know anybody here. Why should I say that to total strangers? 

And they would not give up, you see. And if there was any kind of suspicion that you were not fully for the reich, it's likely someone would follow you home, and that's it. They would-- you would have to go to the police, and you would be interrogated as to your loyalty, and what is your situation, and so on. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't see any signs, caricatures about Jews, and-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes. Yes, I did see some. Yes, I did see some. And also there were certain songs we were not allowed to sing, because they had been composed by Jewish composers. And then we would sing them at home quietly in defiance, and say, what beautiful songs. Why don't we-- this is insanity. And then my grandmother would say, yes, well, here is all right. But please don't sing those songs in defiance outside. You'll get all of us into trouble. And you know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any courses in Russian kind of-- raciology? Did you have-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: No, we didn't. This is it, you see. This is-- well, sometimes when I hear things, so it's a little foreign to me. Because we did not have courses in raciology and things like that. We-- we really didn't. And if we did, my brother-- I can't speak for him. He was younger. I wish now I had talked much more with my family members about these things. I'll have another opportunity in October. I intend to go to Germany. 

But we didn't speak about these things, as I said before. Plus, of course, we also had the war to contend with. We were bombed. And we had an apartment in Lubeck. My mother, after she was working in the factory, she rented an apartment for us. And we lost that and all the belongings we had then. And we then rented a small wooden house near the-- near the-- near Lubeck. 

And so we had-- as children, we had these daily decisions to make, how-- where to hide because of the bombing. And this was a daily occurrence. And that was, in itself, very frightening, because we never knew really where to hide. You couldn't hide in basements. Most people-- or many people drowned in their basements because the water pipes burst if you didn't get a direct hit, even. And if you just kept walking, it was very likely you could be hit with-- and many people were-- with shrapnel, the jagged pieces of steel that, after exploding the shells in the air, that, you know, come down. 

And so there were all those other things to contend with. Now I would like to also show you a few things here. I have here a book which my father wrote in prison when he was in prison. And they took-- they tore out many pages, which didn't seem-- which seemed to be a threat to them in some way. These are all Bible scriptures of encouragement to people. And they actually let my mother have that after he was transferred to Sachsenhausen. 

Now, I have here the telegram that was sent to my grandparents. You see, Jewish people-- where were they going to send any notification to? That's why Jews were never notified. But German citizens, when they died, or were killed, or something happened to them, they did notify them. Now this is a telegram that was sent to my grandmother, and it simply states, son-in-law Otto died of heart failure. Kommandant. My father was 35 years old. 

And I'll show you a picture of my father. And then-- but I have here also another document which may be of interest. This is from the concentration log at Sachsenhausen where he was. And he was in-- he was-- his number was 79 in block 35. And this-- these are actually his-- his-- this is his handwriting. And this is the last piece of writing we have from him. This is in a goodbye letter. 

And on the back, it says, this prisoner has refused steadfastly to change the error of his thinking. And therefore, all privileges are taken away from him. Now, you may wonder what the privileges could be in a concentration camp. But for Jehovah's Witnesses, there were certain privileges. For example, maybe not for all, but for my father there was. There was a privilege. 

And which was, because he was a barber he was allowed to shave the personnel in the camp. Because the Jehovah's Witnesses were the only ones they trusted that they wouldn't cut their throats, you see. Now that privilege was taken away from him. And then 14 days later, after that privilege was taken away from him, the telegram comes, saying he died of heart failure. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Will you show us the picture? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: The picture. Yes. The picture of my father. Where is it now? This is the very last picture of my father. 

INTERVIEWER: He was a very handsome man. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes. He was a handsome man. And this is the last happy picture. We have a family picture. This is-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was your father's profession? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: That's what he was, a barber. 

INTERVIEWER: By profession. 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Yes. He was by profession that. And he didn't have too much opportunity to practice and so. Incidentally, I'd like to show you my brother, also. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any pictures of you in the Hitler Youth? 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: One. Except I'm not in uniform. There are some in uniform. I was not at that-- on that day. But there are some. Oh, this is the picture of my mother and us, also the last picture I have of her before she went to prison. Yes, now. I'm not so well organized here. As people commonly think of Germans, so well organized, but anyway. 

Now, what was I looking for? Oh, that picture of the Hitler Youth. Oh, this is the age that I remember the most. And that's the time mostly I'm speaking about. But this picture from the-- ah, here it is, here it is. Here it is. Yes. There are some in uniform, and I'm in the foreground with the braids. So this is how it was, and the whole period, there are many, many other things I could relate. But how much time do we have? 

INTERVIEWER: I guess we're just about-- 

ELIZABETH DOPAZO: Fine. Fine. So then the war ended and things were-- became vastly different, of course. Yes. So I did not use my notes, even. I had other things to say. But that's all right. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 