SUBJECT: So now all of a sudden the train stops. They opened the doors, and everybody out of the wagon. So I see people in uniforms. They have big trucks. German uniforms everywhere. 

So I grabbed my stuff, and I put-- everybody had to put all their stuff next to the train, and the minutes, we put everything down, the trucks come. They picked it up, and that was all gone. Whatever I say it, in the minutes was gone. OK, now we start to walk to the destination. I see railroads going in and out. I see people in there-- regular people, civil people, Polish people-- seems to me, they work there maybe. 

So you still got a chance maybe. You don't know what's going to be. But now they're claiming-- is this possibility they're going to take us to the gas chamber? 

INTERVIEWER: You said [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: That's-- we are between us. None of them are from my city, but this person-- Polish people says-- 

INTERVIEWER: They knew. 

SUBJECT: --you cannot go to the gas chamber now. And they said that. For a minute, I can't even think anymore. I completely-- I lost myself. I wasn't hysterical, but I couldn't think no more. I give myself up for whatever happens now. It's going to happen. 

So we went to some officer. I hear a yelling from there. As we're going to their camps, people would yell, I'm from this country. And the other one would-- what country you are? I didn't tell him what country, but somebody would say a different Yugoslavia before Hungary. They would say yell to each other to divide. 

Then we went through some kind of office. They take our names from what we come in, how old we are-- next, I find myself-- others in the street. I see big doors everywhere. And they told us strip down. Take everything off-- nude. Took it off. And then minutes, they took everything away there too. I was standing there naked with everybody standing naked. 

Now I figure I'm going to the gas definitely. There's no doubt about it. I'm sure. I can't even think no more. There is no explanation. And minutes after that, they opened those doors, and they were yelling in in that area. I go in. I see there the showers. We would go there, standing and waiting. 

What's it going to be now? Now I figures to myself, it is my chance. They're going to send the gas probably through this thing. What else they could do? They didn't. It was a-- water for a second coming through that shower-- stopped. We're looking each other-- everybody's scared, scared. We don't know what it's going to be now. 

After that, everybody yelling this way, that way-- you don't know which way to run. There's people running that way. They're everywhere. But finally, we got to one area we had to go. And was the standing out trucks outside with people with their uniforms, one was giving me their shirt, other one the other things, the shoes, the hat. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I felt good when the water come out, but I still couldn't trust that. I was still, I'm dead. But when they give me their uniform, then somebody next to me said, you're safe. As long as you got the uniform they gave you, you got a chance now. 

INTERVIEWER: When it was-- it was on for a minute, and then it stopped. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Then between then, and you go into the trucks to get the uniform. How did it happen? Did everyone-- 

SUBJECT: Not even thinking. It was like there's no more brain in you. You don't know. You're just-- you're walking like you're not no more there. You're just walking. You don't know. You're just walking. You don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you feel terror? 

SUBJECT: I felt that I'm going to be probably beat up or something. I always felt the terror from them, always. In my mind was that probably they're going to beat me now. I saw that in that Backa Topola how to beat those people. And how they cry, those people, I figure, it's-- it's-- it's coming to me now. 

When I got that uniform in my hand, they didn't give me a chance even to put it on me. Naked-- holding in my hands. They throw me onto another truck-- bunch of people on truck, and they was taking us already. 

I find myself on railroad station again. Now we start to dress up. They throw us in the wagons again. In the wagons-- but before we've been thrown in the wagons, I told you the story before about that the Russians showed up in his car, ask who is from the city, before we've been put in that, trains. 

When we got in the planes, it was an older German soldier with a gun. He was assigned to that particular wagon. Each wagon has his German. It was an old man. I would say maybe 60s. 

And in the middle of the train, they have water, drinking water. And under for a first time, since I've been transported so many times-- they had this hay that you could lay down in it, you know-- that you feel a little bit more comfortable. You're not on there naked wood. 

So we're all in now in the wagon after that thing that happened with that-- the Russian fellow. And we're standing, and we're talking to each other, what's going to-- what is the next thing going to happen? But some of them tells me that now, when they closed the wagon doors, that wagon is going right in the gas chamber. We're not going to stay there. 

So I was now preparing myself. I'm going to die in there in the wagon. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you would prepare yourself. [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I said to myself, yes. I felt inside, I'm going to die. I'm going to die. Now I'm going to die. They closed the door. Definitely we're going in the gas. Then minutes-- maybe 15 minutes or 20 minutes later, they opened the door, and there's a young German officer-- jumped in the wagon, and grabbed the gun, and took the gun out, and started to beat the German old soldier-- actually was beating him. He figured his gun with us. 

INTERVIEWER: He decided to beat him? 

SUBJECT: He's the-- the German soldier. Because he left-- he was outside-- left us inside with his gun. He forget his gun. He got beat up from that. And then he come inside now. I can't be killed now. The German guy is inside with me. He can't be-- he can't go in the gas-- that what tells me, the logic. 

And then he says, this German soldier, what place you are? [INAUDIBLE] that is the Jewish people answers from Hungary and so forth. He says there's no not from that war. That's what he said, because he was now-- he was in that situation. 

He was beaten in front of us from his own German fellows. OK. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] what did he say? 

SUBJECT: He said he's not done for the-- for the war for everybody. And the train start to roll out. Again, we're looking through the [INAUDIBLE] windows. We see now France. We're going to there and everything. And that, the German soldier said only this. 

You are all going for the labor camp. We felt good. Maybe now, they have changed. It took us maybe, I don't know, almost day and a half to reach the destination. That was Silesia. I find that later that Silesia-- never heard of a Silesia in my life. 

The train stopped. We walked out of the train, but we didn't get-- they didn't-- those numbers, I never even know they exist, and they're putting numbers on people. They tattooing them. I never knew that. I looked the railroad station-- I want a record in the case I get ever free that I could remember that railroad station. I couldn't memorize it. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't? 

SUBJECT: No. I was so emotionally involved. How I going to survive? Meanwhile in the train during that trip, they give us a piece of a butter and a slice of salami. I have my strap uniform. I put it in the jacket. 

When we arrived there, that thing was all melted-- nothing-- only salami was in that [INAUDIBLE] salami, and somebody told me, do not eat it. That could be from humans. They're made from humans, that salami, and that's awful. Now I find out that they're making all kinds of things out of the humans-- they're talking about. 

We arrive to that thing. We were standing outside waiting, and the Germans showed up and gave us some numbers. They put it on our neck, a little string with a piece of thing at the time I got my numbers from them, and I remember the number 33579. No way, you could forget that. I get that number. 

And sure enough, they took us in one built-- a backyard, a big building. And they was talking about that building used to be off a factory. This is the place where we're going to be. And they didn't took too long. They was calling everybody from age 16 to 30 to stand out from their line, because they're going to be treated differently. So I'm thinking to myself, no, I'm not going to stand there. I'm-- I'm not going to. I'm just going to wait. 

Maybe they're taking them who knows where. We don't know. Most people stand up, getting out of their line. The truck arrived. They throw them all in the trucks, and they told them they're going to Canada. 

INTERVIEWER: To Canada? 

SUBJECT: So that-- their camp was around backyard. They took him around, and bring him back, and they told him, you're not in Canada. [INAUDIBLE] all kind of jokes they made with the Jews. So now I was glad that I didn't volunteer, because that's what would happen-- them tell me I'm going to Canada-- that they're going to be saved, those Jews. 

OK, so now we here, and I got my bunk bed over there. They call that Wusterglersdorf I don't know what was it-- they called in German, but that was a-- that's a Polish little town in Silesia That's not too far away from Breslau. So next morning, they took us to work. They would line us up, and they'd divide people. 50 people are going to go in this area to work, 25 people going to go in that area-- they divide us all-- what area we're going to go. 

I was put in one group. We went up in the hills. There was building homes for Germans in the case, if they're going to have to get a push from the Russian troops, everything, there's going to be a Silesian line. They called that Silesia. Silesian line-- they're going to build a line to stop the Russian army. That's what I overheard-- telling-- people telling each other. So we went up there to work every day. 

They took us up, and this mountain was all stones. They gave us in our hand-- the how do you call when you-- you know, it has only that thing on it once-- 

INTERVIEWER: An axe? 

SUBJECT: Pick. 

INTERVIEWER: Pick axe? 

SUBJECT: Pick axe-- they give us in the hand. And we lined up. We had to hit that stone-- chip their stones down. And then when they come, the trucks, they were with the French people-- there was their drivers, the French people, they would load the stones up. But I took some to chip something, because every time I hit, that would jump back. I couldn't chip it. 

And people who was in charge, they wasn't army. Army was walking around with their guns, but people in there-- there would be people from all kinds of countries. They were supervising us. There was anti-Semitic people. They would come and give me a slap through my face if I-- I could not chip it. No way, that I could chip. 

Matter of fact, I was already a little bit weak. Even I was, you know, good-- in the good, physical, but you're getting weaker and weaker. And every time I hit that thing, I can't chip it. And he was hitting me and beating me for that. And I didn't know what-- what it's going to be now. 

That was the first day. Second day, we went down, a beating every day. Beating-- we're coming back with us, always beaten up not from the Germans-- from those people being in the job. Then-- by the fourth day or fifth day, one of my friends from my city, I find out that they took him away. He had the first lice. 

I never know what is lice. He says he has a lice. My child, there's a lice in the camp. If you have that, they're going to take you, and you're going to have a problem. You're not going to come back no more. They didn't say where you're going to go. 

They took him, and he was out maybe for a couple of weeks. They're assuming they brought him back-- put him again. Then they changed me on, because they found out that I have a trade. I learned a trade like a kid-- that I know something. 

They put me in another-- another place that I'm going to go out like a-- you know, one was-- it's more like a professional, you know, fixing things. Because in my trade, I learned to be a plumber as a kid. So they took me out, and we went out and fixing things. 

They put me in the blacksmith shop. They have a blacksmith. They would bring the horses. They would-- the Jews-- the Jews was good about that. They know how to take care of Polish Jews. They know how to take care of blacksmith. I never see Jew blacksmith. First time, I see a Jew blacksmith. 

I was a plumber-- not a complete plumber. I know what to do and everything. But first time I see people, there are-- there are now tanks to do over here, and they used them. So I fall in that group, and I have a friend. 

He was-- he was a tinsmith from Europe, and he was in that group. And I was getting along with him, and at the night, I would go back to the camp. He would be in the different area, and I would sit and thinking about things-- what's going to be the next time? 

I would go to visit him that night. And he would look at me. He says, what's a matter? You must be very hungry. 

And I said, yeah, I am hungry. He would have a piece of bread left over he didn't eat. He was so-- already so skinny. He would, go ahead, eat it. He wanted to save me. I wouldn't take it. He was pushing too. No, I say. Max, I don't want it. 

But you must be hungry. I see your face. But my face didn't really set in. I was heartbroken. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't go in there for the food. 

SUBJECT: I was heartbroken. I needed somebody to listen. And then we have a two teachers from my city all down there. They used to be my teachers, and they didn't give me something to tell me, don't worry or anything. They were scared for their own lives. They was lost. 

So I used to talk to him and say, Max, what are we going to? He said, look, don't worry, Ripp We're going to work tomorrow. We're going to do this and that. Tomorrow, we work-- same day, same day. And we was working day by day, getting beating every day here and there. Then they took me to build a railroad station. They put me in another group. 

INTERVIEWER: But you knew already how to work-- how the work was going. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. But I come out of the Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you? 

SUBJECT: I know it. I know it. This is only a little time. I'm getting a little time yet. It's not part I'm going to [INAUDIBLE]. So we went out to build a-- 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: To live. 

INTERVIEWER: You're lost, and that you're-- 

SUBJECT: Every time, I know it. 

INTERVIEWER: --that you are out of time. 

SUBJECT: You're going to come to that. You're going to see how I figured those things all out. And take me to the railroad station-- it was carrying the railroad-- the piece of that heavy, so they have maybe 20 people cutting that. So they have special things-- device. One guy, one's left and right, and then you pick it up. 

And then they want you to put it on your-- your shoulder and carry it. And maybe 20 people, same time, carrying that one-- one iron-- you know, part of the railroad, OK? And I was a short guy, and I would always go. And I would just put my shoulder up. I really didn't carry anything. I didn't even make it, because everybody else was higher than I am, so I didn't have a load. The Germans saw that. He pulled me out, and he beat me up. I didn't carry that day that thing. 

So that night, then we're going to go back to the camp again. And all of a sudden, they tell us, everybody lay down on stomach-- everybody. Don't look up. I figure now is the time. Now they're going to shoot us. 

I know my father was killed like that. From the rear, they shoot him in the head. So maybe now they're going to shoot me. And as I was laying down, I almost fell asleep, but I heard shots. 

One of them tried to escape, and they got him, and they killed him right there. So that was a warning for us that if somebody tried to escape, this is what he going to get. He's going to be shot. So then all of a sudden, everybody up. But I was sleepy already. I was-- you know, I didn't even know where I am. 

And we stand up. Now we're walking back to the camp that night, and we slept over. And I find out in the camp, there is somebody else tried to escape, but he did. There's-- this fellow, he's still living. He's in the Israel now. I met him in Israel. 

What if he dead? As we were, went out to work, and they have the French people there in the trucks. And he got in somehow with a French guy. He helped him out to escape, and but they got him. And they brought him back. 

When they brought him back, this is the first time I saw. They put on his back, a circle, a white circle. That means he is not supposed to leave the camp no more. He is always in the camp. They was waiting for something, I don't know for what, but he never supposed to leave the camp. He was the only one. 

When we would go in morning and then work out, he always stays in the camp. And the third day or fourth day, when we come back to the camp, they lined us all up. His father was in the camp too. And we was standing, and we see that in the backyard, they're building there things. But I know what is that, because in Yugoslavia, they used to hang people every week, the partisans. Every week, we had that, so I see that. It's going to be hanging. I knew it. 

They're going to try to hang somebody. And in my mind, I knew it was this fellow who tried to escape. That probably is-- standing there, they put a chair underneath the rope-- a regular chair. And they brought this guy out, and stand him up on that chair, and they put the rope on his neck. Now he's standing on the thing. We're all are watching that, but in my mind I don't believe that's going to happen. No way could it happen that I'm going to see this. 

Immediately that, his father-- they didn't brought his father down. They kept him upstairs that he don't see what's going on. Now the Lageralteste he was from Czechoslovakia. He's supposed to do this thing. So I don't know what happened there. The commandant of the camp, the German-- there was some kind of-- there was talking about in German back and forth in front of us. We standing and waiting. 

And he is begging, the commandant of-- this German, the Lageralteste he is not going to do that. He can't do it. Even he was Lageralteste even that's his duty to do that. This is from the German commander. He has to do that. He is not going to do it, because his religion forbids that. 

That minute, as they was talking about that, the German make believe that he flipped in the chair, so the chair swinged, and he was hanging. So he did it. The German did it. I couldn't believe that I saw that. Now I see hanging too. What's going to be next? 

And I said to my-- we're getting closer and closer every day. And after that, we all went back. They was giving us our portion. I didn't need a portion no more. I have my portion when I saw it, I knew it. That's it. I start to cry. 

There was another young fellow in that room. He was from another town from Yugoslavia, and he vouched for me. He didn't say nothing. Then a week later, I remembered my sister had the birthday. The children had theirs. I remember my-- my little niece, those-- drops falling out of her eyes when she has not birthday. That's the day, and I cry. 

He said, what's the matter with you? Are you crying? Don't cry. Put them on the side. From this point on, you think about you. You want to survive? You're not going to survive. If you're going to keep crying, and you're going to weaken there's no way you could survive. 

He said look at me. I don't think about my father and mother, only me, nobody else, in order to survive. Thinking and thinking, I said to myself, it's not the surviving, revenge is the correct-- is the answer. If I stay alive, I want revenge. They have to pay. They have to pay dearly for what happened to me-- to my family, and I'm going to now survive no matter happens just to get the revenge. That was in my mind. 

So that was going for-- going all the way up the river, then working there to November. In November, we heard the shots, and there, I heard that the Russian troops now are very closing in. And they already-- the same day-- I think it was the same day that the Russian troops are in the Auschwitz. I can't believe that, I said to myself. 

I wait for the Russian troops. Much earlier, that's going to happen, you know, they're going to put a push, I thought. When I was home, I was waiting when this push is going to be-- the German army going to collapse. Now it's coming down, I don't believe it. 

Next day, a bunch of girls, young girls, arrived from Auschwitz. They was taking them not to fall in the German hands-- in the Russian hands. They brought them in, and they put them down in the-- we had a basement. They locked them up in the basement. So I was looking if I going to find maybe my sister is maybe alive, maybe somebody, maybe-- now my wife was my wife now. I know her. She was 16 years old. 

I think maybe I could find her, somebody. I couldn't think no more of my mother, but because I know that she was headed-- she not going to make it. But maybe my sister, maybe the little two children, but they was all grown up girls. They all like skeletons. I find that they was beaten from Auschwitz all the way to [INAUDIBLE] each. There was beating on the road and killed just to make sure that they don't going to arrive here. 

Meanwhile, I find that there's another 200 girls just arrived in the same place not too far away from our camp, and they're all from my city, Novi Sad. I said, my god, maybe my sister is now there. So we have one Jewish fellow in the camp who had a right to go in that camp with the girls. He was either [INAUDIBLE] they have that connection. They went to the Germans. They went to the camp. 

And I asked this guy, because he was from my city, please find out. And I give him the name specific. [INAUDIBLE] that was-- she has married to [INAUDIBLE] see if sister Elvera Mira and also for [INAUDIBLE] Juliana because this is what-- my wife now-- if you could look at somebody. 

They come back late at night. He looks for me, and he says, yeah, [INAUDIBLE] Juliana is there, but nobody else. I says at least somebody is there now. Now maybe I'm going to try to contact. 

So this was another group working by the railroad station. I know the camp is there. They told me where is the camp. I ask for the transfer. I want to work in there. So they put me in that transfer. 

I have worked there, and I see that-- across of the riverside, I see barracks. I see girls with their red thing on their heads, but I figured that might not be Jewish, because there are Russian girls. They have all red thing on their head. That must be Russian. Well, let's wait. Let me see. They tell me she is there. It must be something she wrote. So I work another week-- another two weeks. 

And a German commandant-- I asked one of them Jewish guy, because I didn't speak German, how to approach this commander to beg him to let me go cross. And he told me, don't tell him that is your girlfriend or something. You tell him that's your sister. They don't know. Ask him and beg him to let you go to that camp. 

So he told me, you tell him [INAUDIBLE] commandant she was there, and I explain it how. So I approached this commander and doing the working things, and I told him in German how I could explain to him that my sister is right over here in those barracks there. And I would like to see her if possible. They let me to do that. 

He pull out his notice out of his pocket and give me a pencil, so I should write it down, the name of my sister. I put it down, but that time, I didn't even know to write already. I was all that feelings-- no feelings from me no more. 

INTERVIEWER: You say that you did not have-- [INAUDIBLE] you didn't know. 

SUBJECT: With no more-- like, I wasn't even human already, because I didn't ever expect I'm going to live through. But this was something more now. I have something to again come up, that maybe that's going to bring me back to the normal again. So I put it on [INAUDIBLE] Juliana 

He put it in his pocket, and he walk away from me over the railroad tracks. And I watched him. We went in the barracks. And I go back, and we walked. 

And that night, yeah, he comes back, and he comes to me. He tells me, your sister is already here. But I'm going to arrange it for you, because she's working nights. And daytime, they go to sleep. They're working in a group factory. 

Well, that's good, I said to myself. I'm going to arrange for you, and you're going to see her tomorrow. We go back to their camp. They find out that I approach this-- they beat me up for that. [INAUDIBLE] yeah, they Lageralteste they beat me up, but I went out of my line. I should never do that, but I did. 

Next day, we went back to the work. Now that was two days later. He comes to me. He says to me in German, come on with me. 

And I'm going behind him. He's walking in front of me. He has the stick in his hand. We're walking over the railroad tracks. We're going to the barracks. When I go in the barracks, I couldn't believe it. She's there in the barracks. 

And I wanted to jump there to kiss her. And the woman who is in the charge, the commandant woman, she jumped out. Hold it, she says. First of all, you are not brother and sister. You don't even look like it. Why is that? 

And second of all, you're going to have to talk only in German. We want to hear what you're going to talk about. Meanwhile, this commandant was starting to be good with her. 

There was another Jewish girl from my city. She and the German told her, look, they don't speak-- they don't speak German, but they are brother and sisters, I could-- I could assure you. She had to lie. OK, he says. Go ahead, talk. 

And then I find out that she went to Auschwitz. From Subotica they took them to the Baja that was another camp-- all the families yet. And she was with her mother, my sister, and my two little girls-- took those girls-- my mother, they still was in Baja And from Baja they put them in the wagons, and they transport them to Auschwitz. 

When they reached to Auschwitz, they separate them again. And that time, she wasn't my wife. She was my friend. She tried to hold one child by the hand, but my sister said, nobody touch my-- my children. I'm going to hold my children. Nobody could take away from me. 

So my sister went on one side of the [INAUDIBLE] to kids with my mother. She was young 16-year-old. She was from mother's side. Her mother was with my mother. The only they find out that they're all gone. They went to the chamber. That's what she told me. 

When she told me that, I said, oh, that's it. And I asked, what now? Now this is limited too. Now I'm again-- my brother said they didn't hear nothing. [INAUDIBLE] and the Eastern Front in Russia. 

So I was-- by the way, I forget to tell you. I know that I'm going to meet her. So when I get my portion that night, I get a piece of bread and a piece of butter. I saved that to the next day. And when I went to the camp, I give it to her. 

And not only that, I have a friend from my city-- sister was also in that camp, and I told him that his sister is in that camp. He give his portion to me so I should give it to his sister, and I couldn't give it to her, OK. I give my portion to-- now is my wife. I was hungry. My eye was popping out from the hunger. 

I kept that other portion, because he was coming to work for that camp. And I give him back that portion, but I was so hungry, but I couldn't eat that. Because I know that depends, the life-- so after that, December is approaching. It's too long already? 

INTERVIEWER: I was just looking [INAUDIBLE] because I was wondering how much more time [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: You want me to cut it down? 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think? 

SUBJECT: Because now comes the Belsen. We could-- we could, you know-- you want me to jump all that? Is that too much, what I said? 

INTERVIEWER: No, it's not too much. 

SUBJECT: Maybe I went too much in the details, every thing that happened, maybe that's-- 

INTERVIEWER: Just tell us what's important to you, I guess. 

SUBJECT: OK, all right. OK. The Russian troops now are very close, and they're going to empty their camp. They're going take us to a different place. We didn't know where, so we was traveling with the wagons-- in open wagons. 

They are counting the people every 50 people. The one man gets the bread, and he has to divide it. But that one man had the whole thing. Nobody got anything, so you didn't have a chance to see that man. And sure enough, we arrived to the camp. They said this is Bergen-Belsen. 

We arrived there. You don't want me to go in details, no, for here in the Belgium? 

INTERVIEWER: Just images [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Images? They told us over here that this camp has not remotely [INAUDIBLE] in there, no crime-- nobody had to be scared. We're going to work. We're going to live in Belsen. And I looked around. I see dead people everywhere, laying. Laying-- nobody is picking them. They're piled up like a-- like a-- you know, like a merchandise everywhere. 

So I'm in the camp and looking at those dead people. I go there, and maybe I recognize somebody from my family there. No, but there's-- those-- they were so mutilated. [INAUDIBLE] and I see a Red Cross building, and people would go in the Red Cross. And later on, I see them bringing them out dead, [INAUDIBLE], stacking them up. 

So I said to myself, god, but I'm not going in that building. I make sure of that. I'm going to try to hold for myself. And in the camp, because a Yugoslavia guy in the chair. He was a Kapo Serbian. He told me that he's from Yugoslavia anyway. He says, look. He says, one week, and you're going to be right there. He showed us dead people lying there. 

And the part-- second day, everybody sleeping with dead people in the barracks. Everybody is dead. Nobody was taking them out. They told us to line up, and the Germans was checking who was in a good condition. They're going to take him out of the camp and then labor. 

And I stand. I went through that thing. They checked me out, and they took me on their-- on their transport. [INAUDIBLE] my friend, Max, he couldn't make it. He was so-- he was the only skeleton, worse than skeleton. They pushed him and left him there. He couldn't go through. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: And did he die? 

SUBJECT: He died in the Belgium. I went through that, and there they put us again in the wagon. Thats winter time. That's a January-snow... 

INTERVIEWER: It was '45. 

SUBJECT: '45. And they took us down to the station, and I find myself. I said [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] I read the thing on the-- and they said, no, you're not going to Hildesheim You're going to the other side. There's a little town, and we're going every day to work on the railroad station, every day building. And every day was a-- the British would drop the bombs. Every single day an American would pass through, they would drop the bombs. 

This, seems to me, some important place where they would send-- send stuff to the-- to the front. And after that-- after that bombardment, there was nothing there. They took us back to Belgium. Now in the Belgium, when they took us back, that was now beginning of April. 

And they said that they are taking-- they have a family lager next to us from Hungary, Budapest-- taking to the-- I think Sweden or Switzerland. They was talking about those people going to be safe. Then all of a sudden, we find that whoever went out by the gate, they brought him back and they shot him, because they didn't belong to the family. They went through the bars, and they need some people. 

And they went as a family, so I was scared to go underneath the wire to join them, said to say, I'm part of that family. So I wait and wait. Now I know I'm going to die, because inside me-- inside me, tells me something-- you are dead. There is nothing there-- just to collapsed and die and waiting. 

And you know that feeling that you know you're going to know that this is-- I cannot-- I cannot explain that [INAUDIBLE] this is not ordinary. This is something that you know you're going to die. Your brain is telling you're through. You are dead. You're just walking, but you're dead now. Because I was sure I was dead now. 

And next morning, we go in the barracks. In the barracks, every day we went the same thing-- the beating. They start in the barrack. The line was inside in the barracks by five, and I don't know could I show you that, what that did to us. Five people-- in there, it was like that. 

And the first-- who is first, behind is four people. This guy would walk with a stick and hit the first one-- back up and back up. When I was pushing, because he's getting the beating, the last one is coming up high. Now as you're going up, he'd hit you that you're going to go down. You're pushing this up every day. 

Now when you got through that-- now you're going to go through the door, they're yelling, run out of throw out. Everybody on one of those doors, you can't go through them all. As you're running through too, they're standing boats, they're hitting with the-- right there, they you-- they kill you right there through those doors. 

I made it through. I got hit through my eye. They damaged my left eye. And that was now news. Then all of a sudden, there's people talking about, you know-- they're talking around in the camp. They says, you know what's [INAUDIBLE] just said? The time is coming. Never heard that what Tommies. I said, what is Tommies mean? 

He said British. They're just about in the camp. Tomorrow, we're going to be all free. I said to myself this all day, it can't be true. Next morning, like nothing, I don't see the Germans starting to-- I see white flags on the camp and everything, and I see running people running back and forth, especially the Russian people they've been strong there was as a slave laborer. He was not like we. He could hardly walk already. 

And then everybody was yelling, we have not from that. We want food. Food-- everybody was yelling for the food. And sure enough, people start to get milk and everything. They got the dysentery. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel when you saw the British soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Not-- I didn't feel good about it, nothing. I just don't believe it-- that's happening. 

INTERVIEWER: When you-- when you saw them, you didn't believe it? 

SUBJECT: I didn't believe it. I still figured the Germans are going to come back. I heard a rumor that the Germans coming back-- the British were being pushed back. The Germany army's coming back in the camp, and they're' going to revenge. I was waiting for revenge again. 

So they didn't come back. And the camp was now officially free. That's what they're talking about. So I find myself-- there's four of us left to pull those dead people. It was a big tremendous mass grave. Pulling, I hold one leg-- the next guy, the other leg. 

And we would pull-- four people, one body. Those bodies was only a skeletons-- he was pulling them. And we reached through that mass grave, and you're scared to come close. Because you feel you're going to fall in this whole thing, and they're yelling, come on. Let's-- faster, faster. They want to push more those in the grave. 

And they reached there-- we pushed that skeleton. The skeleton will fall, you know, and shake, and you see yourself in that skeleton. That's how you were going to be dumped too. And as you were-- all of we carrying-- all of us went with four. He couldn't take it, and that's when pushed into. Out of four us or all of us, two or three would stay still. Let's go back to the next skeleton. Bring him. Push him in. 

INTERVIEWER: And who is supervising this? Who was yelling at you to do this? 

SUBJECT: The Germans. They still had the Germans inside in the camp. They're trying to cover all that. 

INTERVIEWER: That was before the British came? 

SUBJECT: Before [INAUDIBLE] this is the-- this, all the skeletons, they had them piled up in-- you know, piled up piles and piles. They had to get all in the mass grave, and who would do it? So they used us to pull those skeletons and throw them in the mass graves. So that would be them [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: When did you feel [INAUDIBLE] that it was over? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't feel over anything, because all of a sudden, I was laying there. And every time I would stand up on my feet, somehow I was blind, completely blind. I didn't know what's going on with me. I'm blind, why? There's no reason for it. 

Then I find that I have a typhus from those barracks loaded with lice. So one guy, a doctor from Yugoslavia, he knew that I'm Yugoslavian. He sent me pills to take the pills. I don't what kind of pills that hold me. 

And then when they took me to another after the-- after the-- 

INTERVIEWER: To be burned? 

SUBJECT: After we got free, they give us all kinds of-- the British. I got the medicine. First, they said that it's very scarce with the medicine. They don't have enough medicine, because they're still-- they are at war, but yet, they had some. 

And that was my problem. Every time, I stood up on my feet, I was-- I was blind. I had the typhus. I didn't know I had the typhus. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] you say today there are dreams. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What other ways that saved you? 

SUBJECT: Dreams that they're coming to pick me up to take me to the Auschwitz. This is the only thing that I'm scared from that time, not Belsen. Next time I arrived at-- you're used to that. When that man told me that in one week, you're going to lay dead. I took-- 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] that you remember. 

SUBJECT: Auschwitz was scary. 

INTERVIEWER: Auschwitz was [INAUDIBLE] there are other ways now that the experience stays with you besides the dreams, other ways that you feel it in your life? 

SUBJECT: I feel very hurt the way my balance vanished. I could have done better. I could have gone and fight, even [INAUDIBLE]. I could go and fight just to show that not to giving up so easy to take me like that and not to be even human. I should have fight even if I lost my-- [INAUDIBLE] 

Maybe in that moment, I-- I would feel bad that I left them, and I went to save my life maybe. But I would at least fight before having been taken like this like I was taken like a dog. There, they really treat me as a dog. It was-- even the dog has more rights than I had. That's the feeling I have. 

And every dream, I have one of Auschwitz, because that's what the scariest thing-- that we're going to go to that gas chamber. That was what is-- they put in my head now. And I'm trying to-- during my dream, I'm trying to survive. 

Not me not yet. I still got a chance to save myself, because I always said I should have escaped, and I didn't. I never forget to myself even in after Auschwitz in those camps. I said to myself, how could I do that? I could have escaped somehow, and I didn't even attempt. I let myself to be taken like this. That's the-- that's the-- so I could tell you stories of that. 

You know, there's-- everybody could have a lifetime. You could publish books about it, because each one has a-- we lived through differently. That's what I lived through, the Belgium and Auschwitz. That's-- that's beyond their human thinking that that could be done like that. 

In Auschwitz, they told me, just look at this guy, he's a [INAUDIBLE] he's a politically prisoner there. You're lucky that is a-- yellow is a Jew. It was-- they know exactly who is what. There is a green one. What does that green mean? He says that he's a criminal-- are Germans in the camp. 

When I was in Hanover, he had Germans with them as the Christians. You have any question? 

INTERVIEWER: No, I figure your memories in Switzerland were very, very, very clear. 

SUBJECT: I have them very clear. That's what I'm dreaming about. That's-- that's my problem. I cannot erase out of my head, that Auschwitz and the Belgium. The rest of the camps is a question of survival. Just go, and do your best, and staying alive. Why to stay alive, for what? 

I know by this time I don't have no [INAUDIBLE] I find out that I went through the Auschwitz. I know I went to Auschwitz, that's it. But the revenge, the revenge-- and the day when I had that, I could never fulfill for that revenge. I never did it, and that is eating me now too. Is that enough? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

