[TONE] SUBJECT: And we got-- we came to this Melk, that only lasted a few hours, a two-hour trip or so. We felt that we are human beings because they don't take us in cattle trains anymore. We are traveling in a regular passenger train. We got out there on this station. We marched about three kilometers to this camp. New camp. It was a new started camp in 1944. 

Our head of the camp was a Wehrmacht camp, Kaserne, they called it. From-- Kaserne von Virago, after some kind of a baron, it was named from. And we were put-- my father and my younger brother and I, we were put in a cell above the kitchen, an old building. 

Of course, you were not allowed to work there with hands in your pockets. The jackets did not have pockets. And my father, at his age, he had to go more often to the bathroom. So he was afraid many times at night to go, so he kept from-- a can, a tin can, then used to empty it the next morning. Under his mattress. 

One night, around 3 o'clock in the morning, for some reason or another, he just walked to the bathroom, to the public bathroom, which was next to the washroom. The camp was lit up at night, just the same as in the daytime. And he forgot himself probably, and he stuck his hands into his pockets. 

They beat him up. He came back, blood on his forehead, because it was rubber hoses. They had a technique. They must have been specialists. And they were just hitting with the rubber hose so the end shoot, dent in into your forehead, or to your nose, or to your-- he said, they beat him up. He came back. 

Oh, it was terrible, terrible, terrible. And we pleaded with him. We told him maybe-- maybe that he-- let's-- maybe sew up your pockets if you are so used to walking with your hands in your pockets. 

But after a few weeks, we got a break, and they put us into a very nice building, block four, it was called. Where there weren't too many people who from that block work, because mostly they were-- the Schreibstube was there. And the office management belonged to that block for-- their leader belonged to that block. 

The schuh-kapo, the schneider-- the tailor-kapo. Anybody, you know? Maintenance in camp. So. So-- and we happened to get a very fine kapo. Very nice men from Katowicze. 

This kapo, when-- he was already since 19-- that Polack, he was, since 1938, maybe German he was, spoke Polish and German. He was already-- told us that he was-- I don't know if you want to know about him, because I don't you have any testimony about him. But he told us that he was already demoted many times because he helped out regular prisoners, or I mean, internist. 

And he was our kapo from the Kommando. We worked outside of Melk, and Loosdorf was the town in [Seeham?]. No. In the beginning, I worked on the railroad. We were fixing up railroad tracks. 

And this kapo, he gave us a break many times. And the atmosphere in the barrack itself wasn't bad because of him. He liked to joke around. Even if he beat up someone, but he was sorry afterwards. And you spoke to him, and he used to say, are you-- are you pissed off at me, or are you-- are you mad at me? You know. 

And we worked-- my father yet, my brother and so on. But our guards were Wehrmacht over there, that particular job, not SS. And a man from a neighboring town got acquainted with this Wehrmacht, and this Wehrmacht used to give him every day the Jewish paper. I mean, the-- the newspaper. 

And so this man used to know what's going on outside in the world. But then we were separated. This man was taken away from us. We lost contact. And then where they put us through different-- different type of work to do. 

But while we were working, I remember it was June. We had-- I was just-- so was my father, my brother, skin and bone. And only the big nose, the hooked nose remained in this summer-- I recall summer flakes. How do you call it? If you have the-- summer flaking it's called, in Yiddish. 

INTERVIEWER: Freckles. 

SUBJECT: Freckles, yeah. And Saturday night, we used to stand under this building wall, on the building, and my father used to start to say, you see, children? I don't know why I came here. I should have remained in Auschwitz. 

In Auschwitz, they say all people have it good. They live good, they eat good, they don't have to work. Do you remember at home, shalosh seudos, shalosh seudos is what you call the third meal you have once on Shabbat. And he sings [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

He used to say-- and he used to say, I wonder what Mommy does now. That's all we wanted to know. Of course, were we to tell him what to do and so on-- I mean, it was anyway. It was. 

But this is what he used to tell us. And you remember at home, we used to have shalosh seudos from our own garden. Scallions and salad and-- and horseradish and-- and fresh named. All the good meal-- good food from home and sour cream and cheese and milk. And he started to list all these things. 

But then-- um-- he-- and-- I-- my brother and I, we got acquainted with this block SS. And he was one of ours. And he was a very neat fellow, German fellow. And he used to wash his shirts and his slacks and everything in the washroom. He used to press it. 

I used-- we used to steal in the-- in the mines a piece of hose and smuggle in. Because if they caught you, you got 25 for it. Used to smuggle in. And take out the thread from the rubber hoses. You know, there were layers of rubber. Thread, rubber, thread. 

And we used to make socks for the-- for the workers, is for the kapo. And for that, he used to give us extra food. Zugabe, he used to call it. So one Sunday, we got potato peels. This block assistant boiled for himself pota-- potatoes, and they give us the peels. And they gave us a few spoons of cottage cheese. 

My father and two of us sat down outside in the green, in the front of this cell, this block. And we had a good meal in the morning. Potato peels and this cottage cheese. 

Apparently, he got sick from it, and they took him away. Got the diarrhea. And they took him away to this rewir. Rewir was like a hospital, sort of. But you couldn't go and visit him. 

My-- before that, my father, my father could not take in the beginning-- he couldn't eat the-- the soups which they were serving. So my brother and I used to give him our portions of bread, which we used to get every evening, for the day, and we used to eat up his-- his soup. 

He used to make-- many times, he used to make toast for himself. He couldn't take the bread. Somehow or other he managed. Knives we didn't have. We used to take our spoons with the-- the-- schussel, how should I say now? The plates for the soup. 

INTERVIEWER: The bowls. 

SUBJECT: The bowls. We used to hang up on a wire, you know. The bowl had a hole, and we used to make a wire hook and hang it up on our-- hook it up. And we worked with it, we slept with it. Because if someone stole it, you lost the-- you c-- you were out. You couldn't get a meal. 

As a matter of fact, we used to go-- I hide it into-- into the mattress while we slept. Someone shouldn't come at night when you sleep and pull it out from under your head. So my father-- I wanted to say something about my father. Yes. 

So we used to share. We used to give him our bread, and he used to give us our soup. Because he couldn't-- he couldn't eat for some reason. The soup was burned. It was dried cabbage. So. And he looked very, very bad. Very bad. He had a touch of a hernia from home. He had-- he used to know how to take care of it himself. 

And we were-- after this railroad tracks, when they put us into the sand mine to build tunnels for ammunition factories under the mountains. We started right from the front, and it was very-- from the beginning, it was very low. The first night I worked night shift, my brother and I were working with the air handlers. 

My father was supposed to push a push cart all night like this. He'd bend down, because the ceiling was so very low. And he couldn't straighten himself up next day. We were pleading with the foreman, perhaps we can change. We can do it. No. We couldn't do anything. He wouldn't let us do it. 

So after a week or two weeks, the ceilings got higher and it was easier, a little bit, already. In our group were also some-- three more people, two doctors from Silesia, from Szczecin. And one fellow from Krakow. One had a heart attack, I remember. 

And whatever-- the three of us, we were young boys. My brother, Ari, and another boy from Romania. A 19-year-old boy. We had a norm to produce. They used to put in a pack in-- in the wall. One shift. Then they left to work. And then they used to measure up on that wall in the tunnel, this is how much we had to produce. 

We were still young and so on. I found a way how to do it easy, so we used to, in one time, is to put in that 22-pound hammer into the wall. And I used to break down a big chunk of sand. So I had enough time to go and leave those people distracted with the harder thing. Because whatever we produced with our air hammers, they had to throw it down with shovels, shovel it down into these carts, you know, which you dump. 

And they had to push it out on a band. How do you call-- a conveyor belt. Conveyor belts. And from the conveyor belts, it went outside of the shafts. But they couldn't. And if the foreman came by, and he saw that there is still sand not thrown out, he used to beat them up. 

But at the same time, we were not allowed to help him because these handlers had to work constantly, making noise. So we used to take a string and tie up on the top, where you press the hammer. We used to tie it up. My brother and I, even with the other boy from there used to go quickly and throw on the sand for them. And this was going on, oh, for quite a while. 

And then when my father got sick, they took him away to this rewir. We couldn't go to visit him. We used to go and see him through the window, and he used to just break his hands. We could hear him say "kinder wenn will ich euch schen," children, when will I see you. 

Many times, we were able to smuggle in to him toast we made from our own bread some toast. And as I started to mention, we didn't have knives. We used to sharpen the spoon, the end of the spoon, on a stone and through-- push it through the-- buttonholes. And the sharp end, the other end, we used to hide on the inside. Nobody should know that the other end is sharp, otherwise you got 25 for that, too. 

And one day, I pretend I have a toothache. And I went in to see my father. And they pulled out a healthy tooth for me. And a few more days, we went to see him through the window from the outside. 

He looked very bad. And it was on Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur. He disappeared, and we never saw him again. So we remained alone in-- in this block. 

We slept together. My father was on the bottom, my younger brother was in the middle, and I slept in the bunk on the top. In the morning, 4 o'clock, 4:30, he used to start already to wake us up with-- because on each bed, we used to start to tie up our shoes. And at that time, I still had my shoes from home. So did my father. Until they stole them later. 

And one morning, my brother, my younger brother, was doing the same thing. And my bed boards broke through, and I broke through, and my brother, my younger brother, and his back was injured for a little while, for a few weeks he was suffering. But you never said you are sick or you want to go to this rewir, to this hospital, because you were afraid to go there. So you suffered. 

Later, I did really have, in the wintertime, a toothache. Never went there. Where nobody saw me, I put on something in the cold weather. You know what I mean? Otherwise, I walked around with a swollen cheek. So. And I never volunteered to go or asked for to go there. 

And then we remained, the two of us only, and we still continued doing our work after we came home from working. We worked nights. We were all day up in the washroom. Whenever somebody wanted to find us, we were in the washroom constantly. Never wanting to sleep. Rarely went to sleep. 

And we used to accumulate-- we were every second Sunday off when we worked day shift. So on a Sunday, we were in the washroom. There was a shelf all around, a metal shelf. We used to lay out 12, 13, 14 plates of soup, which we accumulated. We wouldn't eat. We used to get this extra from a few people and hide them into-- in the mattresses for a few days. 

And because of that, we didn't-- you know, when you stood in line-- while telling this, I'm mixing up too many things. You won't get the point. When we stood in line for food, the guy who served, even though he was one of-- among us, from us. From the kitchen department. But he was also one of us. 

If he knew you, he went down into the-- to the bottom and gave you something, thick soup. If he didn't know you, he just went from the top and scooped off this. And the water, you got water. But because we did this for this kapo and for this worker assistant, he used to give us good, heavy soup. A lot of potatoes, a lot of carrots in it, or cucumbers, whatever the soup used to be. 

And we saved this. And from our town, from other blocks, young men used to-- young fellows to come, our age, or their-- and their fathers, too. And we used to give it to them to eat. So every second-- second Sunday, they looked forward to-- to come to visit us because we had the food. And for a while, we were doing all right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How would you hide it? 

SUBJECT: In-- in the mattress. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A plate with soup, or-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. It was gedeckt. How should I say? It was thick. And we covered it up with something, you know. Sure, we used to hide it. We started to really accumulate it Thursday or Friday, you know, till Sunday. We didn't do it in between the Sundays, only every second Sunday. And it wasn't a steady thing. But it was happening. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. Didn't need your plate? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. He used to give us. The kapo, we were already-- he used to bring it to us, and the workers that were there. Oh, we had 12-- we had to give him back the plates later. Yeah. We used to have plastic plates and so on. 

They were bigger than ours. Big schussel, big plates. Not ordinary plates, those. And so we did it for quite-- quite a while. So my brother and I, in the beginning, for a few months, we had enough food. We had enough food. We had enough food even to give away. But then, of course, things changed. We worked very hard. Very hard in this-- in the sand mine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you continue after father's death? I mean, you were so much together. 

SUBJECT: You know, we hoped-- we thought-- they said to us that they took him away to Mauthausen, and there he would be put-- to a hospital, and there, he would-- from there he could be sent back anywhere. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you hoped he was-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we always lived with hope that he's going on. Because from Mauthausen, they were sending people all over. And they said to us, if he doesn't come back here, he will go to another camp. 

And those people, you know, we inquired, like this kapo. But he knew the-- he knew the truth. He wouldn't tell us the truth. You know? They were hardened people already. They didn't-- they had no feelings and so on. 

And it was hard in the beginning, of course, but you know, later in the morning, if someone was in my alley, couldn't get up, he was either sick or dead, you just stepped over and then you ran to appelle. To roll call. You didn't have time to feel sorry for someone. Although we did. We did. We did. I wouldn't say no. 

And this was going on daily. You're working morning shift, afternoon shift, night shift-- 

INTERVIEWER: You said that-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: It started to get harder. There was-- there wasn't as much food available as time went on. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Because they moved us to another block again, to another cell. I didn't have the connection with the block assistant, you understand. I didn't watch any more of his clothes to get extra food and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened after Melk? 

SUBJECT: In Melk, we were to march the 18th. 

INTERVIEWER 2: '45? 

SUBJECT: '45. In Melk also they evacuated a camp in four transports. We were there, about 12,000, 14,000 people in that camp. So they selected the ones who were stronger. They left them for last. And my brother and I were also out of that. We were considered stronger boys. 

And because they figured that they wouldn't have any transportation for us, we would be able to march, to walk, to run away from the-- from the Russians. Turned out to be the opposite. Boys and men who left with the first and second transport, they marched and marched through the Austrian Tyrol and the Alps. Through snow roads, in hunger. 

They were telling-- later they told us in Ebensee, when we arrived to this last camp, that there was a-- one of these SS with one arm only, who came back from a Russian front, who guarded them on the road. He stood on the side, and when they reached a hill, from their transport, he killed about 700 or 800. He just killed them with the Katyusha, or the machine gun. 

And we happened to be fortunate that way again. We had an-- we were the last transport. We-- some people broke in into the kitchen and into the warehouse, where there was bread, stored bread and other stuff. And we had already bread we took along with us and other stuff. And they took us by train again another 80 kilometers to Ebensee, further down to Austria. 

So when we arrived there, we couldn't recognize many of our friends, boys. Just their throats were maybe two inches in diameter. They couldn't-- they were hoarse. The way they talked, their voices changed. 

Many-- we ask, where are they? Oh, they died on the road, they were told. And they had already-- they gathered us, many, many, many camps they gathered there. Were gathered there. Maybe 35,000 of us were there. 

And also in Mauthausen-- in Melk, when they were sort-- separating. We-- we-- we lined up. And because our policy-- I-- I mean, my father's policy, it was, yet. Never separate from Auschwitz on, always to be together. Hold on together. We should be always in the same line, the five. If they count us, we should be together in the same. Whatever will happen. 

For some reason or another, that particular morning, my brother wasn't with me. He was maybe three doors away from me. And what happened, they counted, and they separated us. My brother was supposed to go away with his other transport. 

I was so daring that while the SS turned around, I jumped into my brother's row, and I grabbed him by his neck. I mean-- I mean, he tells me always I nearly choked him at that time. And I pulled him out from there, and I pulled him over to me. And this is how he remained with me. 

And while-- while my father was still alive, walking back from this sand mine, we traveled two or three miles by train every morning and evening or night and morning. And they built a big, big platform outside of the railroad station for us. And many times, we were standing there for an hour and a half waiting for a train, because the military trains in between were going by from all over, and they were evacuating at that time from Hungary. And Hungarians used to call to us, and Czechs. And Czech used to greet us, you know, civilians, who passed by on the same railroad trains. 

And from there we had to get-- get off and walk another two or three kilometers to our camp. And walking to the camp was a big hill. And on the right side of this hill used to be a white house. A big mansion. 

And my father used to say always, kinder, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] I would like to be already-- see myself in the white house. He couldn't walk anymore. Many times, we used to drag him on his knees, under the arm. My brother on one side, I on the other side. 

And here comes this German guard who guarded us. He used to come over with a rubber hose, and he used to beat up my father. He used to say, you can walk. You are want to walk if I flogged you, I would see it. So. So the typical thing to say for them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are very moved throughout by your father's pain. That's all the time. That seems to be one of the worst-- 

SUBJECT: I am moved. He was my father. He was older than I. He couldn't take it as I could. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Maybe that-- you know, there's hunger, there's beatings, but this may have been one of the worst things for you to go through. 

SUBJECT: Sure. Sure. We suffered. We suffered a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To see him. 

SUBJECT: So in a way, maybe, as they took him away, we were relieved, maybe. I don't know. At that time, I couldn't evaluate it. Maybe we were relieved. We were two young boys. We washed. We had food. We-- we lived. We worked. You understand? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: We didn't have to see his suffering. We didn't have to see his skinny face. He was a handsome man. Good man. Like every father. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And in Ebensee, you were liberated? 

SUBJECT: In Ebensee, we were another five weeks, to May the fifth. There, also, we were lucky we came in to our cell where there was a Czech blockalteste. You're Czech, even though he was a murderer, people told us, those who were there for years. However, he had some feeling for us because we were from Czechoslovakia. 

But I also worked there, outside of the camp, in a stone mine. We just-- for the same purposes. For ammunition factories under the mountains. And we worked changing shifts, morning, afternoon, and night shift. 

On Friday afternoon, I worked afternoon shift from 7:00-- from 3:00 to 11:00. We worked from 11:00 till 8 o'clock in the morning. Night shift, we called that. And we had from Schlesien a foreman, a civilian foreman. He was a Polack. A murderer. 

And we stood on those scaffolds, high. We do electric hammers, drilling in the stone mine. And all of a sudden, around-- we didn't have watches, of course. Well, some way, somebody found out it was around 12:30, 1 o'clock at night. Everybody was disappearing. 

All the civilian foremen were disappearing. Everybody disappeared. He left us alone like cattle without a shepherd. Like sheep without a shepherd. Of course, we worked to 7 o'clock. We didn't know from any house. You know, from any-- you know. 

And 7 o'clock, we got out at the entrance of the shaft. There was no one around, so we walked back into the camp. The SS already ran apart. Everybody disappeared. 

Here and there, somebody came back once in a while. Some of these big shots came back just to peek into the camp and then took off again. The next day, on Sunday, they came back, and over the microphone they called out over the horn-- I don't even remember how we heard it sound. I don't think it was a mic. It must have been with horns or something. 

And they called us. They were warning us that the American-- the American Army-- I mean, the American Air Force is going to fly over our camp. They're going to bombard the camp. And we would be safer to enter the shafts, because there were many shafts alongside, to-- to save ourselves, to remain alive. 

A fellow who was in the main schreiberstube from Luxembourg, apparently he must have had some information. And because the Luxembourg were considered, even in camp, German friends. I had also Luxembourg-- Schreiber-- in-- in the-- when I was-- they were, with the SS, very friendly. 

And he called out to us, we should say, all of us, no. We are going to remain here on this Appellplatz. On this square, here, where we are gathered. Well, we didn't go anywhere. And a few hours later, all the entrances to these mines just exploded. They were all mined with dynamite, blasted. 

So then of course these-- like the schreiber kapo and a tischler kapo, carpenter's kapo, the shoemaker kapo, they were also Germans mostly, and they were also very friendly with the SS, and they were not so good to us. Because when we need to choose for something, they wouldn't give it to us. They used to beat us up. 

They stole my shoes, and I cried for a week, because they were comfortable, you know? My-- my-- my boots. My high shoes. So I got-- later, I got wooden shoes, you know, only with leather tops. 

And then we had to march to work and from work. They used to count. Eins, zwei, drei, vier, links, rechts, links, rechts. You had to march, like in the army. So I used to drag my feet instead of walking. So I cried perhaps a week after my shoes. 

So the next day we noticed-- and Yugoslavs did it and some other prisoner survivors. There were many, many nationalities. As a matter of fact, all nationalities from Europe. They dug holes and buried those guys, the few guys alive. Smeared honey on their faces, so the-- the-- the bees and the-- and the flies were just eating them up. They're alive. This is what they did to them. They killed many of them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To the kapos. 

SUBJECT: The kapos, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They buried-- 

SUBJECT: I remember, the Schreiber kapo, he had a hunchback. He was a little guy, a German. He was very, very mean. He was-- he was a prisoner of war, I mean, like us, but yet, he-- he was a big shot there. He was since 1938, '39, who knows? 

INTERVIEWER 2: So that was their revenge? 

SUBJECT: This was the revenge. Many went into town. They went-- they were stealing. Those who were stealing food was all right, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And then how did the Americans arrive? 

SUBJECT: The Americans arrived. Yes. The Americans arrived like an army. And they set up immediately kitchens. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was right away the-- they-- 

SUBJECT: They came only two days later. So this was-- Saturday-- Friday night they disappeared. The Americans arrived only Monday morning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Monday morning. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this revenge happened-- 

SUBJECT: Before the Americans came. And afterwards, too. Nobody cared. Nobody cared in those days. Many ran on to the town. It was a lit-- outside of a little town, ros-- were there. No. Gunskirchen. Gunskirchen. Those there was in Melk. 

And they went in. Many were going looking for-- already for gold and jewelry and such stuff. Some looked only for chickens and for meat and for bread and for that. I didn't go even once into town with my brother. Many of us didn't go. We had no ambition to go, for some reason or other. 

And we were there yet another four weeks. And after four weeks, Czech buses used to come from Budejovice, from Budejovice. There was an organization, they sent over Czech buses, and they came in and took us already to Czechoslovakia. 

And if I don't-- and I will tell you something, what happened to me with American Army after the war. I was working for a very big outfit before I went into business for myself, the lumber business, as a wholesaler. And it was a union shop. Over 100 men. I was in charge of these 100 men. I was a manager, prime manager. 

And there was a Jewish fellow who was the union delegate with the big shots in the New Jersey and New York area. From Local 522. A fellow by the name of Rigor. Always ignored me. Always ignored me. 

And in the first few years, I still felt I am in a concentration camp, even though I was in America, on my jobs. Not on this particular job any more, but on previous jobs there. And so he always ignored me. I didn't know these politics, anything. 

I said good morning, nice day. I used to pick up my hat in the beginning, when I came to this country. I used to be polite and everything. I used to go over these black fellows. In those days, we called them Negro, right? 

So we'd say, how are you, Brother Paul? How is Brother John? He's ignored me completely, and this bothered me endlessly. I felt, what is this? Is this what I came for to America? So. 

And one day, after two or three months, after he ignored me, he came over and asked me something. Of course, in those days, I didn't know he-- he had to do this. It was all a show, because he was very friendly with the boss. When he came out on the platform, he had to be friendly with the workers and the drivers and the truck holders. 

And he asked me something. And I told him-- and he used a dirty word. Something. Cursed. And I said to him, listen, Mr. Rigor. Rigor. If you do this once more, I will take a two by four, and I split your head in half. Because I could have-- 

You see, I didn't do it till now because I'm not the type of person-- I-- if I-- if I could have-- if I wanted to do it, I could have done it to Nazis after the war, to kapos and to Germans, but I didn't do it. Please let me do it to you. 

As I told him that, he was a short, stocky, fellow, and he stood up, like this, and he says to me, tell me, Eugene, you were in a concentration camp? I said, none of your business. Why should I tell you that? So he says to me, he goes, no, no, no, I want to know. Where were you? 

So I told him Ebensee. He said, well, do you know, my unit liberated you? And this is how I made friends with him. Later, whenever I could take care later, for other people, if I could help out through the union, he became my friend. OK. What else would you like to know from me? 

INTERVIEWER: I think we'll stop here. Thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: Oh, did I talk a lot? I talk too much. Too much. Thank you. 