[EXTENDED BEEP] SUBJECT: And the credenza and days and days and days. 

CREW: Rolling. 

SUBJECT: Oh. 

INTERVIEWER: It's a barrack. It's a long barrack. It's empty. You're behind the credenzas, no one around. 

SUBJECT: I was hiding this way-- I was in hiding this way for about nine months or so. The rule that I lived by was not to talk. Because talking automatically would be jeopardizing my life and my parents' lives. 

I do not recall what happens when my parents and the other workers came back to work. But obviously, I had-- obviously, I had to leave being hidden behind the credenza. But I did not-- there were no children in that place. 

And from the moment that the Germans came in, my parents always told me to keep, to be quiet, to keep a low profile. Anyway, when my parents saw that the situation was deteriorating rapidly, we escaped one night. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the escape? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the escape? 

SUBJECT: No. I remember arriving. I remember arriving at a small hamlet to a Pole who was married to a converted Jewess. But since Hitler did not recognize her as a Christian, he had to hide her. Once he hid her, he decided he might as well hide other Jews, too. He already jeopardize his life. 

At this point, I should tell you a human interest story. The man itself the man that saved my parents, myself, total of 8-- 17, 18 Jews, was known in the area to be a Auswurf. What's an Auswurf? A? 

INTERVIEWER 2: I don't know. 

SUBJECT: He was a criminal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: ostracised 

INTERVIEWER 1: Renegade. 

SUBJECT: A renegade-- he was a petty thief, a drunkard, everything else. But somehow, those people that are down and out have more sympathy for the ones that are in trouble than the ones that are well-educated and live comfortably. So anyway, we arrived, and he hid us in a hole. 

The hole was dug out inside a barn. Just visualize a large barn with a huge haystack. One part of the barn was separated with a partition. So there was some cows and horses. There was a ladder you could go up to be above the cows and horses, like a little attic. 

But most of the barn was a huge haystack. In order to get to the bunker, he removed a certain clump of hay. And you entered, more or less, like one third into the haystack. You opened a wood trap door, and you let yourself down about three feet into a big area. 

The area was the size of a modern living room, say 12 by 20. And in it, 18 Jews lived for about a year and a half. My recollection-- my personal remembrances from that hole were that I could barely-- it was so low I could barely-- I couldn't stand up. 

Certainly, no grownups could stand up. In other words, it was maybe three foot 6 inches high, or four feet, or four foot six. But you couldn't stand up. There was some reading matter-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were what? Nine years old then? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Again, there were no children, absolutely no children, all adults. Later on, my mother told me that one woman did live-- one of the people that was saved was a woman with a child, but the child died. My mother speculates that the child cried, and he or she was smothered to death. We lived by-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: There was some reading matter? 

SUBJECT: There was some reading matter, maybe a book. And I think maybe a chess set. But still there were 18 of us. There was just enough room to lie next to each other. That's where we moved our bowels and everything else during the day. 

The Pole lived in the house, farmhouse, maybe 300 feet away. And it would have been very noticeable if he started buying large quantities of food and made trips to the barn. So he used to come down only in the middle of the night. 

And walk-- I remember him walking with two pails. And inside those pails, he had boiled water, occasionally potatoes or bread. We didn't need many calories to survive, since we were doing no exercise. I remember-- this I do remember-- how little we needed, really, to survive. 

Each one of us used one quart of water for all our needs, for washing and drinking purposes. Reason I say quart of water is because we had bottles and we used the bottles for urinating even. And they feel very warm when you hold it in your hands. That was my image at that time. 

Defecating we couldn't do. That we had to hold back until middle of the night, 11, 12 o'clock at night when we could remove that-- go out in the middle of the barn, walk around, quietly, obviously, no question of that. And if we had to do something, we went on top of the attic where the horses and cows were. That's where we did what we had to do. 

At that time, I was also amazed how I managed not to catch cold. Because I had no clothing. I wore a long shirt, summer and winter. In the middle-- this is Carpathian Mountains, middle of the winter, there's plenty of snow. Not in the barn, but cold weather-- I managed to walk barefoot just in-- just in a shirt and never catch a cold. 

Our daily food allowance consisted of one slice of bread and one quart of water for all purposes and oh, occasionally, a potato. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Light during the day? 

SUBJECT: We-- kerosene lamps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Around the clock? 

SUBJECT: Yes, around the clock. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never had daylight there? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Never saw daylight, that's correct. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For a year and a half, no daylight? 

SUBJECT: That's right. That's right. During the day, we could not go out during the day at all, just in case some straggler opened up the barn. We only went out after maybe 9 or 10 o'clock at night for two hours, just to stretch ourselves and do what we had to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw no daylight for a year and a half? 

SUBJECT: That's right. That's right. Yes. The air-- the air that we got was coming to us through a little pipe, like four-- four inch diameter pipe, like a chimney, that was-- that extended right through the haystack to the top of it. I visualize the haystack in my mind to be something, like, 10, 12 feet high and maybe 30 feet in diameter. 

Uh, those kerosene lamps gave up-- gave up soot, which settled in our lungs. And when we were liberated by the Russian army, I had my first checkup in quite a few years. And the doctor said I had tuberculosis because my lungs were black. It turned out it was just deposits in my lungs. 

So my mother was very upset. After-- after being the only survivors from the town, being the only child that survived, and here I am supposed to have tuberculosis. So the black market, this is under Russian occupation, she managed to find a lot of butter. And all I kept doing is eating butter. When we were liberated by the Russian army-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You are in that hole? What was the daily routine? Would people get up, wake up? 

Was there night? Was there day? Were there any activities? 

SUBJECT: We could not move around. There wasn't room to walk around. So maybe there was sufficient room just to slide over past a few people to speak to somebody else. But essentially, we talked in very hushed tones. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So for a year and a half-- 

SUBJECT: Good question. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you were whispering? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm 

SUBJECT: My father was a cigarette smoker. Before the war, he used to smoke two packs a day. When we were hiding, there was no cigarettes. 

But a man grew tobacco leaves. We were stripping the leaves of the tobacco. So what he gave to my father were the stems, the bare stems. My father chopped it up and smoked that. Only at night, which means he was very nervous during daytime. You smoke two packs and you go on a diet like this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any-- do you remember talking to anyone, asking-- you were 10 years old. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember any of the people there? 

SUBJECT: Yes but not-- I-- I see them as blank faces, in other words, I can-- yes, I-- yes, I remember people, but no specific characteristics of all these individuals. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Some story somebody told you or something somebody told you? Were you talking to them? 

SUBJECT: I remember there was one young fellow who was-- by young, it means 18, 20-- who was very optimistic the war would come soon to an end, and the first chance he would have, he would go fight the Germans. And sure enough, when we were liberated by the Red Army, I don't know whether he enlisted or they took him, but the point is he died while he was the Red Army, someplace, while fighting Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sounds as though over a year and a half, nothing happened. No event that you can think of? 

SUBJECT: No event happened. But-- but-- there was reading matter, because I knew how to read and write by the time I left the hole, the bunker. I didn't have any schooling at all, but I knew how to read and write and simple arithmetic. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So someone must have taught you. 

SUBJECT: Someone must have taught me, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What comes to your mind? 

SUBJECT: Someone had-- was teaching me. And I can-- I don't think my father would have done it because he was very nervous. So it had to be my mother or somebody else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A man? A woman? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: A man, a woman teaching you? 

SUBJECT: Don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- what does it mean when you say your father was nervous? 

[RADIO INTERFERENCE] 

MAN ON RADIO: PSU, we don't be on the other side of town, now, man. 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE]. 

MAN ON RADIO: We be on the East side. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not why, but how did it show? 

SUBJECT: Well, by being critical and yelling. Obviously, he couldn't yell in the hole, so he yelled quietly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was he critical of? 

SUBJECT: My father, by nature, is a-- was a perfectionist to a degree. Before the war, he was very self-assured and successful, whatever he attempted to do. He was really a worldly individual. 

Uh, that-- in spite of all the degrees I have, I don't know a fraction of world history or literature that he knew. He did know-- he did not know calculus, but he knew about people. He was extremely well read. 

So that's how he was before the war. But after the war, my father was born 1903? So how old was he, 42, 43? He was afraid of his own shadow, in fact. My sister was born after the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Back to that hole-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You are a child of nine or 10 without formal schooling. At the light of those kerosene lamps, managed to learn to read. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In that hole. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any particular stories that you remember reading, plots? 

SUBJECT: Yes, one-- it was a German newspaper with big black headline about the German losses at Stalingrad of 200,000, 300,000. That I remember, because we were all very excited by it. And we thought, this is the end-- another month, another few weeks, another month. 

I remember that newspaper. I remember all the piece of news. But I don't remember if it came by radio. In other words-- we did-- we did not have a radio. Maybe the Pole told us about it. 

Or it was in the paper that the Allies landed in Sicily. And that was another event, we thought it was only a question of another few weeks, we would be free. And it just didn't happen. 

At this point, my father was getting sick. He became quite ill, starved. The illness was starvation. To the point that, when we were saved-- when we were liberated by the Russians, my father had a very difficult time walking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So every time-- 

SUBJECT: You mentioned about dreaming, dreams. This is the time-- let's see. How old was I-- about 11-years-old, 10, 11-years-old. 

I dreamed, at a time when we were saved by the Russians, that we were the only survivors from all the Jews. I didn't know that there were three million or 6 million Jews, Poland, all of Europe. We were the only Jewish survivors. 

And the whole world would be amazed and sorry that all the Jews got killed. And we would be taken on a plane from country to country around the world and show them, take a look at the terrible things the German did to us, that it did to the Jews. And all the people in the world would sort of embrace each other and live in peace. [HALF LAUGH] 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was the fantasy of a boy of 10 or 11 in-- 

SUBJECT: That's-- that's not a f-- that's what-- I really thought about many times. Yes, that's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not it-- it was a daydream, not a night dream? 

SUBJECT: It was a daydream, no night dream, day dream. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any night dreams you remember? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Now I'll tell you how the dream was shattered. That dream was shattered by the Russian army. The Germans and the Poles-- the Germans and the Russians kept exchanging artillery duels over the hamlet quite a few weeks. 

Sometimes the Russians were there, sometimes the Germans. We knew we'd better not go out, because who knows? The Germans might come back any day. Till finally, we saw that the Russians were firmly entrenched. 

So that young fellow went out and he found the Russian. When the Russian came in, it was a polkovnik. I know what polkovnik means, a lieutenant or colonel. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Colonel? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Colonel. 

SUBJECT: OK. The first words out of his mouth was that I'm Jewish. Keep it quiet. Don't tell anyone about it. 

He took us by-- he, uh, got a hold of a truck. This is right in the middle of the war zone, in fact, and put us on the truck to take us back behind the lines. But he kept repeating several times, don't tell anyone you're Jewish. Don't tell anyone that I'm Jewish. 

There are plenty of Ukrainians around here. And the Russians are fighting a war. They don't care about Jews or not. 

So this was right after I would kept dreaming about being shown as an example to the world that we all be living in utopia. OK, we went by that truck to the next town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the moment of getting into daylight and walking upright and feeling free? 

SUBJECT: Well, no, I don't. The daylight is a problem. I definitely did not see daylight during the entire period I was in hiding. But we did walk upright every night, almost every night. We stretched ourselves. 

But again, we were-- all of us went out. Kept total silence. One or two people were looking out to make sure no one approaches the barn. 

INTERVIEWER 1: During the periods of hiding were there any close calls, raids by Germans or Polish police, or-- 

SUBJECT: No. No. The town was essentially just a little town. It was village. It was out of the way of normal travel. And that Pole-- he had a big farm. He kept buying his supplies very carefully. 

At this point, I should mention to you what might be considered a good Pole or [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] if such individuals exist. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A righteous man? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, a righteous man. 

SUBJECT: A righteous man, yes. This righteous man was a Christian. He was the local mining engineer that worked in the salt mines. They had no children-- husband and wife and adopted daughter. 

He was known throughout the town as being an anti-Semite. He didn't like Jews. He didn't want to associate with them. He was the anti-Semite. 

But still, when-- when we were being decimated by the Germans, it turned out that that man virtually gave everything up that he had personally to save Jews. In other words, his anti-Semitism went only to the point of not wanting to deal with Jews, but not killing. So when my parents run away-- 

CREW: Oh, he want-- he was saving Jews. 

SUBJECT: He was saving Jews. Now he lived with his wife, not in the house. I believe in the apartment. So he could not save anyone himself. 

[SIREN SOUNDING IN BACKGROUND] 

What he did in turn, he let the word out that any Jew needs help, he will help them with anything he can. So several Jews and certainly my parents before they ran away brought to him whatever portable things they had. But-- a few pieces of whatever jewelry they still had, they left it with him. 

And that Pole periodically sent money to that other Pole that saved us. The point is we left very little with that Polish man. By the time the war was over, he had nothing. Because he actually emptied himself out completely. 

I don't have to tell you how we felt about that righteous Pole. My father was in contact with him till at least 1960 or so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel when this Russian polkovnik came in and said, I'm a Jew, and-- 

SUBJECT: I just-- I didn't-- I didn't understand it. I thought something is wrong here. Here I visualized that we would be accepted with open arms. And meantime, he tells us to keep quiet about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he brought you behind the Russian lines? 

SUBJECT: Right. [INAUDIBLE]. Endangering his life, that was completely-- that was a-- a-- an act of treason, in fact. Once we were behind the line, of course, we saw all the fighting that took place. [INAUDIBLE] the battlefield lasted for three or four weeks in a, maybe, 30 mile area. 

And I saw a tremendous amount of trenches, a lot of pillowcases and blankets, the dead horses. We did not see any dead soldiers, not Germans, not Russian. But dead horses and munitions boxes-- virtually boxes almost every 10 feet continues. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I would still like to know what time of the year was it when you got out of the hole? What time of the day? 

Was it night? Or was it day? Was it summer? Was it winter? 

SUBJECT: It was-- good question. [INAUDIBLE] to summer-- when we finally showed ourselves in the open, it was daytime. It must have been about April, May. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You still had only a shirt? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You still had only a shirt? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. The next image-- that was at-- [INAUDIBLE] there were Czechoslovak soldiers fighting with the Russians. And as we kept bombing from one town to the other, one Czechoslovak truck full of white bread picked us up. And we were on top, inside the truck, on top of a mount of white bread. And it was the biggest dream of my life. [LAUGHS] Let's just keep eating the white bread. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. In the hole, you had asked your mother for a promise. 

SUBJECT: Yes. That's right. I don't remember that, except my mother just mentioned it to me, to my wife. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which was? 

SUBJECT: My mother said that I asked her several times to promise that when the war is over, I would always have a piece of bread. And to this day, my favorite food is just bread. 

Once we were liberated by the Russian army, we lived in East Poland. And we went back to that city where we were living as refugees. And some of the people came out to welcome us. 

But it was such a welcome that we wish we were dead. Of course, they were smiling. We stayed there a few weeks, and that was it. 

We could not be living any place in Poland or in Germany. We just kept going westward with the Russian army until we found ourselves in the American zone in Germany in a displaced persons camp. Where, for the first time, I was really enrolled in a school with children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yet you were surrounded by Germans at that time. What was it like for you? 

SUBJECT: In 1946, the town-- the displaced persons camp that we were in was called Bad Salzschlirf It was a relatively famous rest place. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Spa. 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Spa. 

SUBJECT: A spa, yes. As a matter of fact, the local people said that Hitler, on occasions, not often, but on occasions, came down to it. It certainly-- I still have a picture of it. Whatever remember it was almost on the size of Grossinger's Hotel, very large, very sumptuous. The village had beautiful ponds with goldfish in it. 

There was no war there. No destruction due to war took place in it. When we lived in that camp in Germany, I don't know if I spoke to one German. I had nothing to do with them. I didn't want to see their faces. 

I do remember that the Germans at that time appeared very courteous. They smiled. When I went to catch goldfish in their pond, which is in the middle of the town, I felt they didn't-- they didn't like what I was doing, but they did not say a word. Again, this was 1946, '47. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned that your father lived in the shadow of fear afterwards. What did the family carry with it after the war? How did the threat continue? 

SUBJECT: I don't know really where to start. He was extremely nervous in being with any contact with authorities, whether it was a question of taking social-- getting a Social Security number or filling out an income tax form. By the way, my father barely made a living, really barely. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In this country. 

SUBJECT: In this country, yes-- in present day dollars, today's 1980 dollars, the most he ever earned was the equivalent-- what the person earns today is $10,000. In other words, when my father passed away 12 years ago, his maximum salary at that time was $6,000. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After having earned in Germany the equivalent of? 

SUBJECT: The pictures that I saw of my father, we have some photographs, he was really the most meticulous, best-dre-- best-dressed man. He was a worldly individual. After the war, his interests centered on reading only about Nazi books or world events or the whole world continuously collapsing. 

It was at home I heard only pessimistic thoughts, virtually only pessimistic thoughts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like? 

SUBJECT: Like we are hated and disliked by everyone. There is no place we can run away. The United States can turn-- can turn into Germany again-- again into Germany. There's no protection any place. The world never learns a lesson. 

I was criticized of always trying to do my best, say, in schooling. I was above average student, no genius, just above average. But my father never-- very seldom, said anything good. It's you have to try hard and harder. His greatest dream for me was security. I should get a government job, a permanent job, not be like him. 

By this point, I had a little sister. She was born in Germany in 1947. Right now, she's married and lives in Israel. So there was a 13 year difference between my sister and me. Because my 

Father had a difficult time making a living, he worked on the second shift from 4 PM till one o'clock in the morning, two o'clock in the morning. I virtually never saw him. So in fact, I behaved to my sister almost like a father. I acquired some of the habits of being apprehensive of signing papers, any papers, looking at all the fine print. Not-- worrying almost continuously about the future not being able to enjoy today at all. 

[CLICKING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT: I have three children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are they to you? 

SUBJECT: I got married at the age of 32. To-- to a great degree, I waited such a long time, I believe, out of fear of establishing permanent contacts. I dated a lot, but I never went as far as getting married. 

I married a nice, religious American Jewish girl. We have very nice children, healthy, with a healthy attitude in life, not like mine. And it bothers me very much when they are only ages nine, 11, and 12. 

When they see in me things like I'm just mentioning to you, worrying about the future, my 12-year-old daughter says that I shouldn't-- I should have a more healthier, happier attitude on life. I-- they accuse me from not-- not playing with them. I have no patience playing games. For that matter, I know no games except chess. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which was the play-- game that was in that hole? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Right. Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have friends? Do you make friends? Did you make friends? 

SUBJECT: Ah, very few-- let's say I have what I might consider three friends. None of them are in-- none of them on the local community here, to whom I feel that I'm their friend and my friend, even though they live in New Jersey or Long Island. 

One of them is of a European background and two of them are America. It's funny. I wonder what that may mean. 

I quickly look through a book by Helen Epstein, The Children of the Holocaust. And she mentioned that the children of the survivors tend to meet or associate only with other survivors. In my case, it was exactly the opposite. For example, one of her statements was that sur-- children survivors intermarry with other survivors. 

And I went through the trouble of actually cataloging, name by name, every lady I went out in a particular calendar year. And turned out that less than 5% were of parents that came from Europe after the war. I did have some acquaintances that came from Europe after the war, but I'm not in contact with them. I-- I never spoke with them about-- for that matter, I never spoke to my parents either about the experiences during the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And with your family? 

SUBJECT: Only in the past year or year and a half. So for 30 years, nothing, complete blank. My parents-- my parents did meet with their cronies, so to say, and did rehash it. But somehow they became quiet when I passed by. And I didn't-- I didn't push myself to listen to them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you never just talked with them about your years in hiding together? 

SUBJECT: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Never asked questions of what really happened? 

SUBJECT: No. And now when I ask, in the past year, my mother says, you don't ask till now. Why bother? 

My wife is interested. So sometimes my wife manages to squeeze out some information and she tells it to me. Like, the incident I asked my mother to promise me she'll give me bread. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you tell your wife? 

SUBJECT: My wife found it out and told me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But did you tell your wife of your experiences? 

SUBJECT: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT: I do not talk about my war experiences to anyone. The only-- not even at work. The only time it comes out at work sometimes-- it shows up as a question of Israel, of fighting for one's rights, or to use that expression, never again. But I do not-- I don't go over. And [INAUDIBLE] some of the things that you just brought up, I'll start thinking about them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel after having talked for, well, an hour and a half almost about it now? How does that-- 

SUBJECT: OK. It makes me feel a little bit contented. Ah, because until about a year ago, I did not want to discuss those experiences at all. So I feel that maybe I'm opening it up, and it might have a beneficial effect-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: --on my personal life. Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: On your personal life? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Because my wife was a very friendly, outgoing person. And I believe a healthy attitude is to talk it out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any other after thoughts? Just about our-- this minute after having spoken about it. Any second thoughts, after thoughts? A certain surprise about some things? 

SUBJECT: No. I just wish to make a statement that many things don't come out to the surface till a long time afterwards. And the behavior of many of those that survived or even young people like me who did not want to recall too much presently, we may have in us certain qualities of our modes of behavior that affect our lives very deeply. And that will come out in time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to ask you again-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --about some reflections on having spoken. They could be ambiguous, uninformed What was it to you to spend this hour and a half with us? 

SUBJECT: OK. I will give it to you as it is. I believe those that should be watching this are not watching it. And those that are watching it, should not be watching it. 

The world is not changing. I do look at it pessimistically. And the Jews can only protect themselves, and no one will come to their help. I personally feel-- I believe I am a successful professional in my field as a technician. But as a person, as a Jew, I feel I'm sitting on a volcano. 

And I wonder which is the right course for me to do. To transmit such values to my children, so they become uneasy with themselves, or shall they live in a dream world, which I believe it is, and let them enjoy themselves now until something happens. And they survive it, they survive it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have a sense of disappointment about this hour and a half? 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. What I believe this program-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, your talk to us, that's what I'm-- 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm only asking about your conversation with us here. 

SUBJECT: No, I don't feel disappointed. I just feel disappointed, not about the program, but about who will listen-- listen, or learn, or pay attention to this program. I was pleasantly surprised that JCC that there was a large contingent of young people. I specifically was looking to see who would show up, the old ones or the young ones. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have a sense that we have heard you? 

SUBJECT: That you what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That we have heard you? 

SUBJECT: Heard me? No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have a sense that we have heard-- hearing? That we have been able to hear-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That we listened to you? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That we have listened to you. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Yes. No, you're completely in tune. In tune and listen to what I said. I'm saying that I have, for example, three young children-- nine, 11, 12-- they don't want to listen to it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They are very young. They will one day. 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: They are a little young. But they will one day listen. 

SUBJECT: Well, so everything is a question of gradations. Maybe sometimes I have a feeling they already listen too much. Maybe I changed them too much negatively. And they're telling me already, shut up already. We heard enough. 

It can transmit itself in many little ways. Like, I'm positive I mentioned to my children dozens of times about the food that they throw out, and people all over the world are starving. I'm not asking you not to eat. Eat all you want to, but don't throw out. 

Why is it that my mother could feed a whole family, and after one week's feeding there was barely one bag of garbage? And here, in our family, we manage to dispose two 55 gallon drums of garbage every two days? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel this minute? I-- want to bring you back to this situation here. It can be very mixed and very amorphous 

SUBJECT: I have no-- no ill-- I have no negative or ill feelings to you or to the program. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you worried that you have burdened us? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. But if you talked to people, you would burden them? 

SUBJECT: That I'll burden them with it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. With your past, with your recollections? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, I want to thank you for your gift. 

SUBJECT: You're welcome. 

[RUSTLING] 

Phew! It helped in many ways. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] in many ways is right. 

[LAUGHTER] 

CREW: The paper clip back here [INAUDIBLE]. 

