CECILIA: When we got to this place-- to Czechoslovakia-- our conditions, our living conditions were much improved. We were in barracks, about 20 in a room. The work wasn't bad. But again, we're very hungry, there was no food. But I still felt that if I got out of Auschwitz, I am going to make it somehow. The greatest fear that I had in that camp where we stayed from December 1944 until May 8, 1945, was hunger. There was just no food. And we were just trying to grab food from wherever we could. And the factory was about 10 miles from the place where we lived, so we were marching every day to work-- again, a day shift, an eight-hour day shift and night shift. And during that march, if we could get our hands on any food, we were like hungry animals. 

At one time, a truck went by and some potatoes fell off, and we ran after. So when we were running after the potatoes, we run out of our marching, uh, uh, unit. And the lady-- the officer, the woman that were watching us-- put a report in to their boss that we were terribly unruly, that we did terrible things, that instead of marching like human beings, we ran after the potatoes. And the next thing, this Oberscharführer or whatever-- he looked like a butcher-- he took the entire group-- this is already winter, this is already January-- and-- 

INTERVIEWER: January 1945. 

CECILIA: January 1945. And this-- we were-- this-- this part of-- sudetenland was in the mountains was very cold. He took us out on a march and sort of exercise, falling in the snow, and punishing us for grabbing the potatoes that we did, and telling us if this ever will happen again, we will be finished. And although my-- our conditions were better and I felt that we-- The-- the-- the people that worked with us, the-- the-- the Czechs, were telling us quietly that the war is coming to an end. And he occasionally brought us an extra piece of bread because he had pity on us, the Czechs. And we felt it in the air that it's coming to an end, but we were afraid. 

I, particularly, was afraid that this Oberscharführer will finish us in this very small place where we were because we-- since it's the end of the war, he probably wouldn't know what to do with us. And he probably wouldn't have to answer a lot of questions if it is the end of the war. So he'll probably just take us out on a march, and he'll kill us. And it seems that many of us thought that way. When the actual day came, when-- when May 8 came, he disappeared. 

And I remember the last night before we were free, I was so afraid. I don't know what I was afraid of. There were no Germans there watching us. We were all alone. We didn't know who was coming to-- who's going to come-- if it's going to be the Russians or the Americans or the English. We knew it's the last day, and we just couldn't believe it when we walked out and saw that the guy on top of the tower wasn't there. The Germans were not watching us anymore, and we were still afraid. We didn't know really whom to be afraid of. Well, it seems that they just ran away. They ran away. And we were liberated by the Russian army. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your feeling when the Russians came in? What did you feel? 

CECILIA: [SIGH] I didn't care who-- who they were who were liberating us. I felt so happy and so great to be alive, that so many years later, I cry every time I talk about it. I just wanted to live. It seems that-- although during the days, during the years, I felt this is the end, there were so many months that I didn't feel like I wanted to live-- but it seems that deep side-- inside when a person's so young, I wanted to live in spite of everything. I was so happy. I just-- I was just happy to be alive, and to live, and to be able to talk about it, and tell, and not be ashamed for what happened. 

Many people-- later years-- told me why would I-- if I'm ashamed of the number that I have on my left arm, and I said no. 

INTERVIEWER: The number? 

CECILIA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you show it? 

CECILIA: [SNIFFLES] As I mentioned, we were tattooed and every one of us had a number, been given a number. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold out your hand? 

CECILIA: Can you see it? It's 24-- I forgot the number myself. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't remember that number? 

CECILIA: No. 943-- I think I remember 24. This was the group. Can you see? It's kind of faint now. 

INTERVIEWER: 24-4-7-7. You were saying many people asked whether you were ashamed of the number. 

CECILIA: Yeah, I was not. I-- to tell the truth, I was not proud of it, but not ashamed of it. Because some of my friends had taken it off, I had started telling-- uh, every time people ask me, I was telling exactly as it was. Wasn't proud, but not ashamed. I never stopped speaking about it. I started telling my stories to my children when they were very, very young. And I'm still telling them stories. The stories are endless. But I'm glad that they're eager to hear and listen. They're very well-versed and educated in that field, and I can only hope that they will tell their children. I have a seven-year-old grandson. I am already telling him stories on the level of a seven-year-old one. I told him just before my trip to Israel why I am going to Israel. I hope he understood, but I'll continue telling him. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the level for a 7-year-old? 

CECILIA: Well, in my-- I'm afraid to tell him bad things because my son told me not to tell him horror stories because he's too young to understand that, and it might affect him. I have to be very careful. I have to please my son. I wouldn't be afraid to tell him stories, but I have no right. He's not my son. My son told me-- I had a big discussion with my son about it. He told me to be very careful when I tell the stories to my-- my grandson not to brainwash him, not to tell him the things that he can't understand. I should tell him things that he can grasp, that he can understand. And I hope I am the right judge of it. I also bought quite a few books now in Israel that I bought specifically for him, but I'm not going to give it him now. He's too young. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you give a-- an example of what you've told him? 

CECILIA: Well, he told me that they told him in school about Hitler. He told me. Now, I told him that I'm going-- first, I told him a little bit about-- I told him that I-- I-- that this-- this man Hitler was a very bad man, and he didn't like the Jewish people. And he, um, he put us in jail, and I was in jail for so many years. And now, I am going to meet my friends who were with me at the same time, and we are meeting for the purpose of telling everybody who doesn't know about it what we went through. And we want everybody to know. We want people to write about it. We want people to tell. And this is a gathering of all these people. And since I am one of them, I'm going to be there and take part in it and, um, to tell the world and educate those that don't know about it. 

And I told him that I'll-- when you'll be a little older, I'll tell you more about it and in more details. And I am going to. I'm going to tell him personal stories, incidents, so he can understand. When he will be a little older, so he will understand. Because I personally think a 7-year-old cannot grasp stories of this sort. He's too young. I think so, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: You have a son and-- how many children? 

CECILIA: I have two sons. 

INTERVIEWER: Two sons. 

CECILIA: My oldest son is 34. He has two children. He has a seven-year-old boy and a three-year-old girl. And I have a son of 30, and he's not married. He's single. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me, did it change you in any way? Do you feel it's made you different? That's some traces for the better, not for the better? 

CECILIA: As a result of my past, if it changed me and my life and all that, it's changed me in one respect that I probably would have been a much more-- a believing person in God. Coming from a very religious family, I believed in God. I wasn't too religious, but I had more faith in God. And although I believe in God still, I'm not a religious person. And I think that this is one part of my past because I-- I feel that, um, shouldn't have happened. If there is a God and if it is what we say it is, it should have saved-- saved us and prevented things of this sort to happen. 

On the other hand, I am not-- it didn't make me hate. Hold on. My son said the other day, Mom, you keep saying you're not a hateful person. It didn't make you hate, and yet you probably hate the Germans and you hate the Poles. I said, hate is a very strong word. I don't like the Germans, and I don't like the Poles, but I don't really think I hate them. I just don't want to have anything to do with them. I just ignore them. I wouldn't teach anybody hate, but I- I also wouldn't forget it. I w-- I didn't let my son go to Poland. I prevented him from going to Poland. My youngest son at one time wanted to go to Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: Miss Cecilia, are-- are you bitter in life, or not? 

CECILIA: I don't know how to say it if I am bitter. No. No. No. I'm not bitter. No, I've-- I should say to analyze myself, I came out pretty good after an experience like that. No. That's my opinion, of course. I might be wrong. I might be wrong in your opinion. No, I'm not bitter. It was-- it was just a terrible, terrible thing. Shouldn't have happened, and I'll hope it shouldn't happen. You can only hope. Sure, I'm not. 

INTERVIEWER: I think you can go ahead and tell your grandchild whatever you decide. You do it in a very, very thoughtful way. 

CECILIA: Thank you. Are we finished? How long was it? 

INTERVIEWER: Exactly an hour and a half. 

CECILIA: Oh, gosh. I didn't know I could talk so. You know, I was supposed to-- 