INTERVIEWER: OK. I know. I'm just-- I'm asking the question. Mr. Glick, will you tell your full name when you were born really, and then that you changed your birth date for purposes of survival. 

LEON GLICK: Well, I was born in Czestochow, Poland in 1923. In Czestochow. 

INTERVIEWER: And your full name, your family name? 

LEON GLICK: My name is Leon Glick. My father is Shlome Glick. And my mother's name is Gittla Glick. We had nine children. 

We had five brothers and four sisters. We are right now over here three-- two brothers and one sister. We had also two nephews and a grandfather in our house. 

And we remain only three of us from all of them. All of them went. Living in Czestochow, we had a shop from tailoring. My father was a tailor. We all children worked in the shop. in tailoring. 

We had a wonderful time as kids. We are-- we played. We belonged to Zionist organization. We play ping-pong, football. 

Anything what we had was a wonderful time until, I would say, in 1938. We start to get that little bit rough. A [INAUDIBLE] that we had, you know, that Hitler is coming. It was very, very already, you know, with jobs. 

And the Christian people, you know, they said that Hitler is coming. And you're going to-- you're going to die. And that's all what you hear. In-- in Czestochow, Poland was 60-- 60,000 Jewish people-- was 165,000 people in Czestochow. It was a beautiful city. We lived comfortably, very nice. 

INTERVIEWER: One third of the city was Jewish? 

LEON GLICK: Was Jewish. The only thing why-- why was 60,000, I think in 1938, it was 50,000 Jewish people. In 1938, from these small little villages, they all come in to the city. They all was afraid that the small city-- going to-- going to, you know, go. So all they come in in the city over there. 

And we did a wonderful job helping all of them. We, in our house, we took in a family with two children in our house over there. And we also, coming to the end of the day when the Germans and all declared war was in 1939, the hospital in New Haven was liquidated. 

INTERVIEWER: A hospital where? 

LEON GLICK: Was liquidated. Because they-- they-- they needed-- we-- they was afraid was liquidated entirely. The hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: Going back to 1938 and the-- your neighbors or people who were not Jewish were saying you were going to be killed, what did the Jewish people say to this? What others things happened besides the talk? 

LEON GLICK: The Jewish people start to go away as whatever they could go away. And nobody would-- nobody could believe it was something. Like they think when you walked in the street if they looked at you, you know, they said right away, you're still alive. Let's all what you heard from them. And 

You're still alive. They're coming. The Germans are coming, you know. That's only what we heard from 1938 till 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: You said there were no jobs. 

LEON GLICK: We start to get, you know, a little bit, you know, rough, yeah. They started not to buy by the Jewish people, the merchandise, you know. They start to not to come in, not to buy, you know, the merchandise. Was a little bit slower and slower they get over there. 

You know, and the matter of fact, we had the-- uh, uh, was boycott the stores or designs not to buy by the Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in school then? 

LEON GLICK: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in school? 

LEON GLICK: I was out from school already, yeah. I was out. I was youngster. And, uh, I was out at that from school. I was working as a-- you know, with my father. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in school, did you ever experience any unpleasantness from other children who were not Jewish? 

LEON GLICK: Yes. It was not all of them. I would say 50% of them over there, they-- they didn't want to mix with the-- with the-- with the Jewish people. 50%. You know? I-- I personally ask, you know, a kid over there something like that, how come, you know, you don't play, this and that? 

Well, he said, you are Jewish. I said, what's the different? So he said, you kill Christ. I said, what-- how-- I didn't understand. But, you know, he said, you killed Christ. 

I said, I didn't kill him. What do you want from me? He said, you killed him. So that's was-- uh, the religion, you know, was got a lot of thing to do in the school, you know, especially in the private schools and everything like that over there in-- in-- in Poland. 

Where they all was going to school, there was hate, there was a-- a lot-- it was-- it was hate over there. Matter of fact, they helped a lot. When the German come in, they helped a lot. They helped a-- they helped a lot, you know, the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Anything else you remember with your school friends besides that one time when the boy said that to you about killing-- 

LEON GLICK: Well, they fight-- they was fighting us, you know, with stones, with sticks, and everything like that. going home from school. You know, we-- we went together to school. with them together. You know, going home, there was groups. And everybody was fighting, you know. 

There was fighting. We were on the way, you know. We didn't want to have any-- any trouble. Because we didn't have-- we was the majority you know. 

I remember one time in [INAUDIBLE]-- in 1933. In 1933, I remember 'cause I'm never going to forget. There was a pogrom in-- in Czestochow. 

And I-- and I walked out and everybody was hiding in the house. And I walked out in the street. And I wanted to see what's going on. 

They made a mess from the city of Czestochowa. They took the benches from the middle-- from the middle of the park. And they destroyed all the Jewish stores over there. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? 

LEON GLICK: They were Polish people. They come down from the-- from-- from the holy shrine, you know. From that-- they had the holy-- in the city, we had 3 miles away from-- from we lived over there, we had the holy shrine over there. 

And they come down. From there, they had a meeting. And they said, we have to do something. Because the Jew killed the-- the-- you know, the Christian fella. 

And he got-- that time, he got 20 years jail. Whatever it was with him, I don't know. That they made a mess for three days. Even the police, the Polish government in the city, they could not help him. 

They could not do nothing till they come to the low-- I remember, they come to the low class. But I call that low class, working class-- tailors, shoemakers, as we lived in a-- let's call it like over here, the ghetto. You know, they come to the lower class. 

That time over there they were stopped. And they were stopped right there, the Polish people. They couldn't do nothing over there. They couldn't-- they couldn't get a [INAUDIBLE] over there. 

Because we, the people over there, we-- we gave to them back. You know, we-- they went as far as-- so far, you know, till the-- let's see till the till the ghetto-- till the low class, you know. What you call it? Low class or working people. That's what they was over there. 

But I wasn't down town And I wasn't agreeing and everything over there. And they all three days was smashed up, all the stores over there. And the police from-- they couldn't do nothing. 

So anti-Semitic they was in-- in-- in the city from Czestochow that-- that day. This I-- I saw it. My-- I saw it my-- myself. Because I never hide, never. Even between in the-- in the ghetto and all over, I always wanted to see what's going on, you know? 

And that time, you know, I looked like a little bit, you know, like Christian boys I was all over. And I saw it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever talk to your Christian friends or acquaintances about this kind of stoning and hurting? one another? 

LEON GLICK: Well, you can-- you can-- I think the propaganda, the paper, you know, the propaganda from as a child, you know, when you-- you tell him this everything from-- from birth over there. I don't think so. It's very hard to get him back of our side over here, which is, you know, the lie-- the lying, what they tell, you know, about the Jews. 

Uh, I, you know, I hope-- I-- I hope they can do something with that, which is not true, Which, what I-- what I saw over there were the Jewish people, they helped a lot-- a lot with the-- with the children and everything, you know. We didn't mind nothing at all. 

We didn't have nothing to do, you know. We-- we don't hate nobody. I remember when somebody come in to the house. And they ask, what is this and this people live. 

My father went out and he showed them right to the house. I mean, we never-- we never hate anybody over here. except that-- that-- what happened with that Christ, what-- which is goes back so many years. And we did know nothing. And the school was terrible with thing over there. That's [INAUDIBLE] here. 

INTERVIEWER: So 1938, what kinds of things were happening in Czestochow? 

LEON GLICK: In Czestochow and in Poland, you know, when we walked in the street over there in Czestochow, Poland was all-- was an organization was an against the Jewish people. They was boycotting all the store. There was standing right in the front the store with the-- with the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Signs? 

LEON GLICK: It says the sign, don't buy with the Jew. The Jew was so and so. I don't know if I should tell you what it is or what they said. they write all the signs over there. 

They went back and forth, back and forth, and so and so. You know, naturally, know, was no business already. Whoever walked out, I mean, it was not comfortable to go in-- in the store you know, to buy it. 

So where people come in from all over, from small towns, [INAUDIBLE] from the railroad station, from all over, you know, and they come in to buy, in the city. It was a beautiful city. It was nice over there till 19-- you know, it was good till 1938 over there. In 1938, that-- that's it. 

INTERVIEWER: So the most-- 

LEON GLICK: That's it. 

INTERVIEWER: --most-- the-- the thing that you remember most is their marching in front of the stores with the signs? 

LEON GLICK: Marching in from of the store, yeah. Because I took a job, another job. I went home for [INAUDIBLE]. I took a job in a custom tailoring. And, uh, that was, uh-- it happened-- what I want to tell you, that man, the leader from Czestochow, he hate the Jews over there. His name was Mr. Valashik 

You know, that leader, I happened to deliver his suit to the house over there. And he gave me $5, I mean, five zloty over there. This was a lot of money. 

So it was a lot of money. What he did over there, he bought his merchandise by from the Jewish people. Or he-- this was a business. This was only a propaganda. That the Jews merchandise-- he bought it. 

He took the label off. And he put another label on-- on it. His-- his own label put it on over there. See, I happen to know he had stores in-- in-- in Czestochow, he had five big chain store, like [INAUDIBLE] and Macy's and a big one, a bicycle store and everything like that. 

See, the people doesn't realize what kind of a conniver he was. He was a big millionaire, So he had about 200-- uh, whatever you call it, hooligans or you call it, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Hooligans? 

LEON GLICK: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Ruffians? Hooligans? 

LEON GLICK: Hooligans you call it over there. But you give him a bottle of beer or you give him five zloty, whatever you give them. And you keep on giving them the money over there for the-- for the-- drunks, whatever it is what they needed, that bottle whiskey over there. And they are, uh, [INAUDIBLE] and that's it. 

They was really [INAUDIBLE], whatever they call it. That was really not-- uh, not people over there. And that's the people he-- he-- he paid them, you know, for this doing the stores over there, so long he gets his business. 

And the people didn't realize, the citizens didn't realize, this is not true. Because I knew it. It's not true. He himself bought the merchandise and all by the Jewish people. You went away 300, 400 miles, 500 miles you went away, you couldn't buy in other places. You had to buy by the Jewish people, the merchandise. 

INTERVIEWER: What else did you notice in 1938? What other kinds of things were happening besides the stores? 

LEON GLICK: Well, we, uh, in 1938, that's what was, you know. We-- we start to get, uh-- I remember my boss, you know. He went away, you know. They left, a lot left over there, whoever had a family, you know, in-- you know, in America or whatever it is over there. 

We didn't-- we didn't understand too much, you know, what's going on. See, we didn't know. Even they said, you know, Hitler in Palestine-- you're going to go to Palestine. 

You're going to get-- Hitler's coming, because something like that you kill Christ. We didn't-- uh, you know, we didn't know nothing. You know, I didn't know what-- you know, it's going to be so bad. See, we wasn't organized. See, nobody told nothing, you know. 

Even when-- even when you want to go away, the father didn't want it. Actually you didn't want to leave your father and mother. You stood with the family all together, no. 

We wasn't trained to have a gun. We wasn't trained to have a knife. We wasn't trained, you know, for this kind of business over there. 

You know, stay away from him, stay away. Stay away. Stay away. We did-- we wasn't nothing, you know. 

We just worked, you know, went to school. And we went to the Polish school. We went to Hebrew school and go home and work in the house, you know, part time and everything like that. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened in 1939 that September? 

LEON GLICK: When-- in that day when they come that day as I-- as I-- I walked out Saturday morning. As I said before, I wasn't, uh, locked up in house over there. I wanted to see the airplane was flying in and all over. 

But I-- but I saw it right at the-- at the main street. But a soldier had a gun. And he wanted to shot on the airplane, you know? The airplanes was flying very low over there. In the back, he got killed from-- from the German, from a civilian German. 

There were so many Germans civilian in the city already that you couldn't do nothing with all the people. You see, the government didn't realize, you know. They was-- was so many. You know, from Czestochow to the-- to the border, from-- from German border was only 35 miles. 

And we was only not too far away from them over there. That's why they was, in 1939, they started Friday. And Sunday 10 o'clock, they was already in the city. It could be they was there at night. I didn't see it. Because at night, I was sleeping. 

Oh, but that day, Saturday, I walked out. And I see them fighting. And Sunday morning when I walked out over there it was 10 o'clock I took a walk, 3 miles up to the city hall over there. It was 3 miles from my house to the city hall over there. I took a walk over there. 

We see the Germans was all over, occupied the city. But the first thing I walked into that man over there, he said he was, you know, he said to me, Leon, this is not the Germans you know from World War II. 

INTERVIEWER: Who said this? 

LEON GLICK: That Mr. Blitz, his name. He was a tailor. He was a friend of my father. And I walked out, and I went in over there. His son was a friend of mine over there. And I know we-- I know them. Also, a tailor. And his name was Mr. Blitz. 

And he said to me, now is time to kill ourself like men. And I looked at him. I didn't know what he was talking about. And I went up to the city hall, and I went a wave-- I asked the son if he wants to go for a walk. He said, no. So I went myself. 

I went up 3 miles over there. And I saw the Germans in the city hall. I wanted to see. They put the German flag up and everything like that. I see the whole story. 

And after, when I walked back, I walked back. And at the-- in the evening I went again over there. And he was killed already. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was dead? 

LEON GLICK: He told us that. Mr. Blitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Blitz. did what? 

LEON GLICK: He said it's time to kill ourself. You know, it's not the Germans what they used to be, you know, before these Germans, you know. It's time to kill ourself. 

So he went up on the third floor. And he throw himself down. And he killed himself that time over there. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? What did you feel? 

LEON GLICK: Well, what, uh, was a terrible thing over there. It was a terrible, terrible feeling. First of all, you couldn't bury nobody even if was killed. We had in our backyard, a man. when he died on Saturday-- was not buried. 

I remember we put stones on his belly and everything like that. I see it now. I see him at my face. I see him. I see everything that I'm telling you, I'm seeing it. What-- I'm telling you what I saw it. 

Any people died, you couldn't have no value at all. So you hid it in the house. And they-- we-- we only feel the smell. I went in with my father. We put a big pail with a big stone on the belly over there. And that's where he was laying over there. 

And, uh, we had him, uh-- we had him for-- for two weeks we had him laying like that over there. It was a terrible smell. The only thing when they-- when they come in Sunday, they was going around Sunday with a microphone. And he said, you people, all you people, tomorrow, you go back to work. 

You know, nothing going to be happen. We're looking for military-- only for military soldiers, for military purpose over there. And next morning, all the people they tell us went to buy nets over there and everything. We lost-- the Bloody Monday, they call it, Bloody Monday. We lost at the Bloody Monday 300 to 400 people. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened on Bloody Monday? 

LEON GLICK: Was stopped. They-- they-- they stabbed him with their bayonets and everything. They showed the discipline. Because they went from the city of Czestochowa, the trucks went to Warsaw. 

This was the main street over there. And they was going, you know, hundred and hundred trucks over there. We all was laying on the floor over there. 

And next man to me is Mr. Katz. He had a heart attack. I had to take him away. The guy, you know, you know, pushed me with a bayonet over there. And I had to take him, throw him in the-- just throw him in-- in that-- in the grave over there. 

See the amazing me, what I want to tell you, what reminds me all this kind of thing when I go to a funeral, I got-- I got And I see how gentle they take that body. When I see on television how they tip tap everything-- everything, you know, a policemen, everything, so on the shoulder, the way they-- they take that body and they walk with it, and-- and I remind myself in Europe the way we had it over there. A body was nothing, was nothing at all. 

So that's why I say I don't know what-- what was it. Why they-- they-- you couldn't do nothing. I mean, these people was wonderful people. I mean, that Katz over there, he was only at that time, I think, about 50. He was a carpenter. 

It happened that I was laying to him. And I knew him. Because he was from the same synagogue where we are. A lot of people when they walked in, you see, they killed him. They pushed him into churches They pushed him in on the floor. We was from Monday till Wednesday, till-- I was in jail. Because they didn't have where to put him. So they put me in jail. The jail was empty. 

So we put-- we had about 70 people in one room in jail. We couldn't-- you couldn't-- you couldn't go down. You couldn't lay down. You couldn't do nothing. You was just standing, no water, no nothing at all. 

So we had the-- in jail, we had fainted over there, a few people, and everything like that. So when we walked out on Wednesday, on Thursday, we had my father was in the-- you know, in the committee and everything like that over there. We lost over 300 people. 

INTERVIEWER: How did Black Monday start? How did they start the Black Monday? How did it begin? 

LEON GLICK: The Black Monday? They just with the-- they just-- they just roused, roused, out, out, out, out, out, out, with the bayonet and everything. out, out, and out. And then they had that-- they-- they-- they show you the way to go to the [INAUDIBLE] over there. 

All the bayonet was open with the guns and everything like that. Just like that with the bayonet they was going, you know, the thing over there. This was the blood money. They started writing the money. 

And this was our first day. The first, I mean, the first day of the Bloody Monday over there we had-- well, I tell you that we had a name in the city, a wonderful man of Mr Kapinsky He was the leader. 

He was from the Jewish family service over there. Why he knows all the languages. He talked to Mr. Degenhardt You know, he was-- he was the killer, you know. He was the main from-- he was the main, you know, he was in charge of, in Czestochow, [INAUDIBLE]. 

Now, he talked to him. He told about not to go in in the houses, not to grab the people. We going to give you as much people as you needed. We going to give you-- how much you need people, we're going to give it to you. 

And the-- the conniving was-- was not-- was not enough. They-- we-- first of all, we needed bread. So we went to work, you get a piece of bread and everything like that. It's no use to-- to come in in the houses, and to break in into the houses and to grab people. 

First of all, you had to gendarme, they-- they did on their own. The Gestapo, they did it on their own over there. The Luftwaffe, you know, that-- that's the fliers, you know, they-- they need. Each one, whoever need 50 100 people, they breaked into the store, they took them out. Sick-- no, sick and everything like that. 

I had, uh-- what I was fighting-- I was fighting one thing over there what got me later. What I had, I needed surgery. I needed very bad surgery. I had it in my under my arm a big growth over there. I don't how did it happen, where did it come from. I never had it. 

And I couldn't have my hand, you know, straight down. Either I had it in my head, either I had it on my waist. Because that left-- and this, I was fighting for even walking in-- in with the Germans over there. I was very annoying. 

And you couldn't have no doctor. You couldn't go. And you didn't have no-- no place where to go. So when I went up, I start to cry. And I tell him, please, help me maybe have somebody. 

They give me a doctor. They give me, first of all, a pass to go outside. They had a Jewish doctor. And this was his home before. It looks like that Mr.-- you know-- Kapinsky must have let them-- you know, they must have give them there. [INAUDIBLE]. Anyway, there was a hidden place over there. 

I went to his house over there. And he-- and he put me a regular table. And took two seconds. He slash at me with a knife. No-- no, he didn't have nothing to put it on, nothing at all. And out you go. 

The only thing you had was your own handkerchief, you know, you hold it on over there. That's no doctors, no nothing, you know. Was we didn't have nothing at all. 

Even for the hospital when they was cleaned up the hospital over there, we didn't have not. There was afraid themselves. Was no practice, nothing at all. 

So that's why I remember, you know, I, myself, when I was a young boy, whatever this come from, I don't know. You know, was no overcast, no nothing. A lady was there before me. 

She screamed. And I don't know, she fainted or something like that. Because he did it, you know, with no [INAUDIBLE] and everything that. He did himself. 

So we had a tough-- while your talking about this, when we went to work, we went to work, you know, in a group. Eh-- 100, 200, 300, we went to work, you know, in the morning. The-- the Polish people-- the same thing what I told you. You're still alive. You're still alive. 

You know, in Polish they say, [POLISH]. You know, they say, you're still alive, you know. You're still-- you know, something like that. 

So even with-- with this all what we had at the [INAUDIBLE], you still was-- the hate was still there over there. So-- so that's why we was working. And after they had that letter, you know, from the Jewish family service that they need so many, so many people, they need over there 200 for the waterfront. 

And it was-- I believe it was about 15 miles, 12 miles away over there. We had to go work by the waterfront. We had to dig ditches. For, the water didn't go the right way. They want to have it, the water, in a different direction going. You know, they needed a different direction. 

And each family, Jewish family in that little town over there-- they called it [? shtetl-- ?] had to give up a-- a room where to stay. We was two boys, three boys, four boys, inside in this family, you know, to stay inside over there. And we-- every morning, we meet in the [INAUDIBLE]. And we went to work. And at night, we went into bed over there. We was there for two months. 

And I run away that time, you know. I ran away. I went home over there. And the same night when I come home, they broked-- they broked into my house. They broked into my house. And my father said-- you know, the German he told him over there-- my son is sick. Maybe can I go for my son? 

He pushed him away, you know. And I went out. The truck was outside already. See, the broked outside the door. other way they broke the door in pieces. 

And they broked inside in the door. And they-- you know, with their foot, you know, with everything, you know. With their foot and everything, just destroyed the whole thing over there. 

And first of all, there was, I would say-- what can I tell you? What can I say? Not crooks over there. They like to grab something, you know, to take it home over there. 

Because I remember for Mr. Kapinsky they want to have the [INAUDIBLE]. They want to have the silver. They want to have it anything that they wanted to have it. They got it. 

They got it, was organized. Was so organized, was no problem-- you couldn't help it. This was the tactic. This was the killing. 

That's the way they wanted to do it over there. You couldn't help, but, uh, nothing. This was-- uh, the-- this was only to kill. You couldn't stop them. 

Because we had a wonderful cooperation with them together. That through Jewish family service had how many people they wanted that they could-- they could get it. The only thing-- 

INTERVIEWER: You mean the Jewish family service was an organization that cooperated with the Gestapo? 

LEON GLICK: For they want 100 people, they give it to him, you know? They had-- first-- huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they cooperate? 

LEON GLICK: Why? Because they figured, you know, not to grab them from the houses, tell them to kill him, to [INAUDIBLE] it and everything. We wanted to give it to them and freely to show them that we have, you know, people where they want to work. 

It's not such a thing that-- you don't have to grab them over there. See, because people complained, you know. They think What can we do? They're breaking in. They're grabbing people and everything like that. 

It was good, you know, they-- they did it over there. But it didn't help nothing at all. It did not help nothing to all over there. 

At night, you know they needed [INAUDIBLE], they broked in in the house over there. And they, uh, they always did something like this over there with all the people. So for them, when you work over there, with the [INAUDIBLE], you didn't get nothing. 

When you work for the Jewish family service, see, you get a ticket over there. You get a bread. At least you get a bread, and I worked for it. For them, when they grab you, you didn't have nothing at all. You just grab you and, uh-- and they left you like this over there. 

INTERVIEWER: But then what happened? What happened to you? 

LEON GLICK: Well, I was working, you know, for them the whole time. And I was working in all different, uh, different places. I was working over there. 

We worked, uh, in railroad station. We will in the trains. We worked all over. And, uh, till-- in 1941, we organized eight boys and one girl. She knows how to go out and open the big gate. 

And we wait, you know. We wait. We talked. And we talked to there. We wait till New Year's-- New Year's Eve. We figured they're going to get drunk. 

And we figured to go out, you know, through the border, you know, from German-- from the German border to go through there. The stretch was 30 miles. At night, we wait for a dark night. And for this night, finally, we decided, you know, on that night, you know, to go out. 

We went out 70 miles. And after, the girl said, now, each one is on their own. You have to go. 

Each one finds out his own people. Whatever you go, you go first, Leon. And you go here. You go to the left. 

Little dog-- dog barking at night and everything-- the only thing what we took is sheets white sheets over us. Because in case of snow, you know, we had to pass in on the border. We took the sheets on our head over there. They shouldn't recognize, you know, from far away, you know, that, uh-- you know, between snow and this and that. 

So we walked. You know, I come in the-- first when I went in in the city, when I come into this small little town over there, the small little town I come in. The first thing, a Jeep comes towards me over there. Hey, you, come over here. 

And a truck, big truck, is behind him, and up the truck. Was a couple of boys there. We talked, the boys. I talked to the boys and everything like that, what's going on over here and everything. 

They took us on the cemetery. And we-- they gave us-- they give me a hammer. And we was chopping the stones for making little tiny stones. What was the purpose of that? What was it? 

I was there about two hours. And I left. I disappeared again. That's what I was there. I-- run away. Because I was afraid. And I didn't have no pass. I didn't have nothing over there. 

So we chopped. And I talked to the boys. I talk all the boys what happened, what happened, all the time. over there. I come back to the city. 

Another company, uh, grabbed me. Another German, you know, another different over there, another Gestapo grabbed me over there. He took me to the horses. 

The horses-- we took horses. He give me one Belgian horse. One was a Polish horse. One was a skinny one, was a heavy 

That is a-- that's a story. That's a true story what I'm telling you. They-- the skinny-- they pulled me. One-- the skinny [INAUDIBLE] was walking, you know, fast. And the other one I couldn't get him. 

I was-- I thought he was going to pull apart my hands over there altogether, you know. Anyway, we took a walk, I would say, a mile with the horses. And we come back. They give us-- 

INTERVIEWER: This was a punishment? 

LEON GLICK: No, just to grab it, you know. They grabbed over there, too. Just they needed people. You know, they needed. It was, uh-- we took it no punishment. 

It was not the same people what they-- what they-- if they other one grabbed me, I run away. He would kill me. He would pull the trigger. You know, with them you couldn't, you know, do this kind of business. 

I took a chance over there anyway. I figured, you know, what I'm going to do at night? I, uh-- we went in. And after we come back with the horses, they give us, you know, brushes, you know, with a pail, you know. And we cleaned them up and everything. 

And there was a few boys there. I talked again. What happened over there He said the same thing, you know, over here. You know, the men, they went already. You know, they took the man, sent it away. There's only kids over here, young boys. 

And I saw a horse and wagon, you know, going by over there, you know, a farmer. And hop-- I'm go-- I hopped on the back over there. And I went in. 

I told him over there. I'm from Czestochow, Poland. I'm a tailor. Maybe you're going to let me stay over here. I can do your work. I can do anything what they want. What we wanted to bring in-- what I want to bring it into you is maybe we can hide some children. 

Maybe we can-- uh, maybe we can do something to talk them into some kind of a thing over there. Anyway, I was there by this lady two weeks. I slept on the hay. I had a step ladder to go in the hay. 

I took the step ladder with me on the top on the hay. It was a 12-foot high hay over there. So in case somebody comes, you know, you shouldn't see the step ladder. I slept. In the morning, I took the step ladder down, and I walked down. 

Eating-- eh, they had so much to eat. the farmers. They had so much to eat, the Christian. They had so much food. They could have feed millions of people. 

In Poland was a lot of feed-- was a lot of food. We ate 6 o'clock in the morning. We had before breakfast. We had 8 o'clock breakfast. We ate 12 o'clock. We had 3 o'clock over there. 

And they killed the baby cow. They had everything. They had everything over there. Oh, but not to help the Jew. 

Well, anyway, I was there. You know, I worked. The first suit what I made it over there, which was for the burial for that old, old, old grandfather. I did everything for them. 

The only thing-- by the end, I was frightening when she'd come home. but the choice? she said to me, [POLISH], Mr. Leon, you know, I want to talk to you. I said, what happened? 

I just got back from church this morning. We had a meeting. They said if anybody is going to hide anybody, a Jewish family, he's going to get killed. I'm frightened, she said. I tell you the truth. 

So I said, listen, let me finish up the work. I got another two days to work over here. And I'm going to go. I did not know wait. I was afraid. 

When I went on the hay at about 5 o'clock, it's dark, I sneaked out from the back, and I went. I was afraid she was going to pull the trigger on me. Because she was frightening. And I could see right away over there. 

So we-- I went out. I walked. I walked in the dark-- hit me. And I don't where to go. I didn't know where to go. And I knocked at a door. 

And I said the-- the prayer, you know. And I said, you know, [POLISH], you know-- you know, Jesus thing over there. Everything I told her. 

And she said-- I told her I'm from Czestochow. I want to go to Czestochow over here. Could you let me sleep over the night till tomorrow morning? 

So she took a hack-- a hacksaw-- a hacksaw where you chop wood over there-- must be by a yard long over here. She said, if you not going out from this house, I chop you head off. So I said to her, you know, maybe have a little bit water? I wanted to get it, you know, thing over there. 

Maybe have any place where to stay over here? So she told me, go straight down a mile. After all this kind of thing over there, she give me the little bit water, yeah. 

Go straight down a mile. It's-- they call it a selective over here. They call it from my little farm, it's a selective, you know. Like, it takes care. It take care. We have a selective also, where you like-- uh, uh, a- a man what they selected, you know, from the-- to be for the farm over there. Like a-- it's not a mayor 

INTERVIEWER: Like an employment office? 

LEON GLICK: Something. Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Like an employment office for the farms, so people could get work? 

LEON GLICK: No, like a mayor. Smaller than a mayor. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, like a select mayor. 

LEON GLICK: Select man. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I see. 

LEON GLICK: Yeah. Like a-- he was a select mayor. I said, uh-oh, I know them over there. They all you know, German or something like that. So I've figured, you know, no. 

I went in. A door was open at the stable with cows. I lay down over there. And I slept till 4 o'clock in the morning. No dog, no nothing. 

I went away from her, you know, a little while over there. Anyway, 4 o'clock in the morning, I start to go. And I was going about a half a mile or something like that. This lady comes to me and said, are you Jewish? 

I said, yes. She said, come to the house over here. I come into the house, what happened? Where are you going? And You going right to the border? there? 

I said, I don't know where I'm going. I'm going to Czestochow. She said, you going the wrong way. Come into the house. 

I went to the house. And I said, what's going on? Tell me the story. She said, my husband is gone. My son is gone already. I'm only here. 

I said, what are you doing? She said, I'm a housewife. at the border, you know, at the border over there. She's cleaning over there. 

How you going? She told me to go down Cross from her is the wood, the woods. You've follow the woods down till the lake, you know. It's a 2 to 3 feet high, the water. 

You're going to have to go through the water. The only thing you have to go through-- they-- every two hours, they change the-- the soldiers. They-- they every day change, you know. They're coming down, you know, from way-- from the high, they have a-- a-- like a watch place. where they coming down. 

And you have to watch exactly, you know, when they coming down. That time, you sneak through the water. And when I talked to her, [INAUDIBLE], the Germans, they are here. 

She opened up the cellar. I [INAUDIBLE] to the cellar. I went down to the cellar over there. And they was looking. They-- because the lady must have say, well, see, yesterday, somebody was here. You know? 

They never-- they didn't see, because all the mens they was going over here. They saw, you know, a man. Anyway, I went out over there. She told me, go through over there. I talked-- 

INTERVIEWER: She was a Polish woman who protected? 

LEON GLICK: No, she was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: It was a Jewish woman. 

LEON GLICK: Was Jewish lady. Was Jewish lady, yeah. She was a Jewish lady over there. She gave me a coffee. And-- and I don't know how. It was five minutes I was in the house. They was right there. 

They knocked at the door over there. Because they knew the village each one over there. He said, is anybody here? We're looking for somebody over here. 

So anyway, I went out. I didn't know have nothing. But I went home, towards home over there. The same thing-- they were staring at me. You Jew, you're still alive. They're going to get you. 