INTERVIEWER: Checking, Dori Katz. Dori Katz, 96 Kenyon Street, Hartford, Connecticut, 06105. A Cancer. 

CREW: Could you count to 10? 

DORI KATZ: One, two, three, four, five, six-- 

CREW: Thank you. OK. We're on. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, I hope you're picking up. I don't want to-- I want to keep a fairly low level, as Stan suggested. 

CREW: OK, that's fine. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, thank you. 

CREW: And you too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, and I also don't talk usually. So I hope that it's loud enough. OK? 

CREW: All right, that's fine. 

INTERVIEWER: You can roll it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So let's start from the beginning. You were born somewhere. 

DORI KATZ: I was born in Antwerp on July 13, 1939. My mother and father were both immigrants to Belgium. My father was Czech and had come over from Czechoslovakia. My mother was Poland and had come over from Poland. And they met in Antwerp and married and had me there. 

My mother had been smuggled to Belgium. She had a brother who was living in Antwerp. And she had paid a professional smuggler to smuggle her in to Belgium. It was done. People did that. My father had papers. And one of the reasons they got married was that it gave her legal status in Belgium. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So that was already after the war started. 

DORI KATZ: This was before the war started. This was before. I don't remember. I don't know what year they were born in. But they were born-- I mean, they were married. And I don't know what year they were married in. But they had been married for a while when I was born in 1939. They-- they had a little shoe store in Antwerp before the war. 

And they had quite a lot of relatives. My mother had-- in Belgium, my mother had a brother, who was married and had two children. My father had a father and a paternal grandfather, who died before the war actually, a stepmother, I think about three siblings from the first marriage and three from the other marriage. So there were, like, maybe seven children all together, plus various cousins and uncles and so on. They all died in concentration camp, except-- except me and my mother. 

Do you want me to go on? OK. 

My father was deported in 1942. We had been since-- for years, I guess. I don't know for years. I don't know how long. We had been running and hiding, going back and forth between Brussels and Antwerp and other places in Belgium. But what would happen, there would always be somebody left behind. And so I suppose they never quite managed to get everybody safe in one place. 

So I think the women-- this, I, of course-- I-- my mother told me that at one point while we were in someplace, someplace in a small town, hiding in Belgium, my father was very worried about his sisters, who were still in Brussels. And so he went back to try to find them and help them. And he spent more time than he thought he would. So my mother was very worried. So we came back to Brussels. So for a while, we were all living in Brussels. 

My father's younger brother, Manny, was the first one taken. And my father was in contact with people who thought that if he got them a certain sum of money that he might be able to help him. And one day-- one day, my father went and met somebody who told him that he could get his brother out if he had certain papers and could bribe people. So he was told to come back at 1 o'clock, to be at a certain place with a certain sum of money. 

And I was going to go with him. And I was all dressed up. I don't really remember that, but I sort of remember it. I was 3 and 1/2. And my mother decided at the last minute I shouldn't go, one of these classic stories. 

My father went to this place. And when he got there, the Gestapo came and arrested him. He had been set up. And we never saw him again. 

[CRIES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you remember him? 

DORI KATZ: He was such a kind man. 

[CRIES] 

I don't remember him very well. But my mother-- somebody came home and told my mother about it. And she just took me, and we left the apartment immediately. And we hid. We lived about six months together, various places in hiding. We had been living at an address, because her brother was living-- my mother was very close to her brother, her older brother, who was married and had two kids. And she had lived in the street because he was there. But he got arrested too and deported because a neighbor turned them in. 

[CRIES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know why that neighbor turned him in? 

DORI KATZ: I don't know. I don't. There were so many-- there were so many pressures on everybody. There were so many ill feelings. There were so many tensions. I don't know. I don't remember him at all. I don't remember. I don't remember that uncle. 

But my mother-- my mother was helped by a group, by a resistance group at that time. And anyway, I think she said they were called the White Brigade. She's-- she's very vague on this herself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were-- where was she at the time? 

DORI KATZ: She was in Brussels in various places. And anyway, there was an organization who helped and who hid children, who hid Jewish children. And so it was arranged through them that they would hide me somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before that, are there glimpses of memories of your apartment, your father, rent, and hiding? What do you remember? What are the earliest memories? 

DORI KATZ: Well, the earliest-- the earliest, best memory I have is the day that my mother and I were separated at that time. I remember that very well. I-- we got-- I remember getting dressed. It was, like, 4:00 or 5:00 in the morning. And I remember walking, or being carried by my mother. And I remember going to a certain-- that we went to a certain place. 

And there was a woman there. And I remember being handed over to her. And I remember my mother running away and hearing the sound of her high heels on the cobblestones. Brussels has lots of streets, or had lots of streets in those days that still had the cobblestones. And I remember her running. And I remember click, click, click, click. I remember that very well. 

And I remember afterwards being in a train with this woman, who was a stranger, who I'd never seen before. And then we went to this village. And it was a farm. I don't think I knew at that time that it was a farm. But it was. There were people there. And they were waiting for me. They obviously had been expecting me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were how old? 

DORI KATZ: 3 and 1/2. And anyway, the woman left me there, and she went away. And I remember the people. I remember that. I remember not letting anybody near me, screaming and crying the whole time. And I remember being in a corner in a room, and not coming out of the corner and crying. And I remember wetting myself. And I remember-- I just remember that. 

I don't remember how the transition came about, how-- I think later what happened is that about-- a while later, my mother was contacted and told where I was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you afraid when you wet yourself that you would be punished? 

DORI KATZ: Yes, I was punished. I remember. The next day, I wet myself on the bed, and they put my face in it, you know, which is sort of a classic way people toilet train children. 

But I-- I was very bad at first. Although later, it was all right. But it was bad because I only spoke Yiddish. And they were petrified every time I opened my mouth and spoke Yiddish. They told me, shh. They were Flemish-speaking Belgians. And I learned Flemish. And little by little, I adapted and adjusted. 

My mother used to come see me now and then. She knew where I was. She used to send money. They were paid by-- I don't know. By various organizations. My mother had false papers and was working in Brussels. And she sent money. She sent clothes. She sent whatever she could, food, I suppose. And she used to come see me. 

And I always knew that, you know-- I always knew who I was. I always knew that I was not their daughter and that I was a Jewish child. And my mother would be very-- my mother was very worried about this. My mother was very worried that I would forget who I was and that I would forget I was Jewish or would forget her. And so she-- when she came, we used to go to the outhouse. That's where we spent the whole afternoon of the visit, in this damn, stinking outhouse because that's where we could be alone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wasn't your mother fearful that you're remembering that you were Jewish could be dangerous for you? 

DORI KATZ: No. No, I think she-- I think she-- no, she was, I think, more afraid of losing me. She was afraid that I wouldn't remember her. And she was very afraid that the next time she would come to visit me, I think, I wouldn't know who she was. She had lost everything. I was the only thing she had left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the Jewish part of it, wasn't she afraid you would tell someone you were Jewish, and that would be dangerous for you? 

DORI KATZ: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

DORI KATZ: No, she wasn't. And I never told anybody. 

I have very mixed feelings about it. I sometimes hated it when she came to see me because it was very hard for me after she left because the family would be very worried about her. And they always wanted to know everything that she had asked. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they feel threatened by her? 

DORI KATZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

DORI KATZ: I don't know. I think-- I think they really wanted to adopt me. I think they wanted-- they took me to church, and I was raised as a Catholic. And I think they really were very genuine in their concern for me. And they probably thought they wanted to save me, you know, in more ways than one. They wanted me to become one of them. 

And I think they feel-- they felt that-- well, I think they did feel that she shook the boat when she came. And they felt that it wasn't so smart for her to come and see me. I think perhaps-- I don't know how they explained my presence. I'm sure everybody in the village knew. How could they not know? Such a small place. Everybody knew each other. I'm sure they all knew what was happening. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How often did your mother come? Do you remember? 

DORI KATZ: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long were you there? 

DORI KATZ: I was there-- I was there about-- I think about two years. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, you-- what was the family like, and how did you come to feel for them? 

DORI KATZ: They were all right. They were-- they were distant. They seemed a little bit at awe of what to do with me. They-- I never felt like one of them. I never felt like I really belonged there. I always knew that I was there hiding. I think I wanted to be one of them. They were-- 

I don't remember them mistreating me. I don't remember them ever, like, beating me or anything like that. I don't remember that. I think-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember them hugging you, or being affectionate. 

DORI KATZ: No. No, never, except the-- they had a daughter. And she's the one I remember best. And she used to-- I think she kind of made a pet out of me. She was-- I was like her doll. And she used to play with me a lot. She used to play house with me and all that. But I don't-- No, I-- I was always scared of them. I was always somewhat in awe of them. They were-- they always struck me as-- 

I did not-- well, for example, I remember one time we were eating. And I was not eating what everybody else was eating because they said that-- that-- that they didn't have enough. So I mean, they did make distinctions between me and their own children. I felt pretty bad about that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You-- you wanted to be one of them very much? 

DORI KATZ: Yes, I wanted to very much because I-- because I had lived with them. And I wanted to be-- I didn't want to be different. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they teach you anything? Did you go to any-- did you go to kindergarten or-- 

DORI KATZ: They taught me Catechism. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Catechism? 

DORI KATZ: Catechism, yes. I-- no, I don't remember. They had-- everybody-- 

I had little jobs on the farm. I remember that. I remember one job in particular. I remember that in the spring-- they had-- they had a big farm with apple trees and cherry trees. And they were very concerned about the blackbirds or the crows eating-- eating the fruit. So I remember, they sometimes asked me to sit there and bang against a pot to make noise to scare the birds away. I remember sitting there and doing that for hours. And I was always afraid that when I'd come back, they'd be gone. But-- 

I also-- there were also sheep. And sometimes I would sort of tend to sheep. I was-- I was like a shepherdess. I didn't like that very much. I was scared of the animals. 

I was also very anxious that they wouldn't be there when I left. So I wanted to be very much one of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you tell your mother when she came? What did you share with your mother? Or did she mostly talk to you? 

DORI KATZ: She asked me que-- I lied. I lied. I was afraid to tell her the truth. I mean, she asked me if I'd had an egg because she, you know, gave them money for very specific things. And I told her that I did when I didn't, things like that. 

She wanted to know if I remembered her always, if I remembered. She made me recite my name. She wanted to know if I was being treated well. I don't know. 

I don't think I ever asked her about my father or anything. I suppose I asked her when I was coming home. And she would say soon. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened when you left the farm? And why did you leave? 

DORI KATZ: Well, partly because they didn't want to keep me any longer. She began to visit me more often, and they were afraid. I don't know. They seemed kind of nervous about it. And I don't know why they didn't want to keep me any longer. Or, if in fact, if they did, if my mother just took me away. 

But that was, actually, in '44. So that was-- I'd been there two years. And then it was the liberation. So I went home for a brief time. 

But then Belgium was being bombed again. And so I went from there to an orphanage. And I spent two years at this-- it was called Colonie de La Hulpe. And it was an orphanage on the outskirts of Brussels. And I suppose nobody asked any questions there. I was very safe. I just pretended since all the children were orphans, displaced children, I was just one of them. It was not a Jewish orphanage. But they knew, of course, I was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There is more to the farm and to the family, I think, stays with you. 

DORI KATZ: I have-- I would very much like to see them again. I don't know-- I don't know the name. And I have tried to push my mother. My mother is very reluctant to talk about it. She claims that she doesn't remember their name. I don't even know their name. I think-- I used to call the woman Mama Jeanne. But I don't remember the man's name. I don't know. I don't remember the child's name, the children's name. 

They struck me as very old at the time. And so I am not sure they would still be alive. 

DORI KATZ: Your photos. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have pictures of them? 

DORI KATZ: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh. 

DORI KATZ: This is a picture. This is the picture of the family. This is-- the one, the little girl, is me having her hair combed by the oldest child. And this is the father, and the mother, and her son. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you happen to get that picture? 

DORI KATZ: I think my mother snapped it during one of her visits. It's a snapshot. And she has about three or four of them, which she kept in an album. And last time I was home, I just tore them out of the album and told her I wanted them. 

I mean, you can tell-- everybody's got their Sunday best on. The man is wearing a suit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your mother work as? Do you know? 

DORI KATZ: Yes. She did everything. She was a seamstress. She was a-- she worked in factories. She was a cleaning lady. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And she had false papers? 

DORI KATZ: Yes, she had false papers. She spoke Flemish very well. She-- I think she was helped with various groups that-- that gave her the papers. She lived in an apartment that, in fact, we lived in after the war. That was one apartment. 

The people-- it was a house owned by an elderly couple. And they knew she was Jewish. And so in a way, they were hiding her, I suppose. She paid rent. And we had the top floor. And when-- when she and I were reunited, we went back and lived in that apartment and lived in that apartment until we left for America. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you had been in the orphanage in between. 

DORI KATZ: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you relate to the other children in the orphanage? They knew you were Jewish, but you did know the Catechism. 

DORI KATZ: I don't know. I don't know if they knew I was Jewish. I-- I don't remember having any particular friends. I think they were all so unhappy. I mean, they were all-- they were all orphans. They were all displaced. I don't know. That was worse than the family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have any contact with Germans, Gestapo, German soldiers, anything during-- 

DORI KATZ: One time they came when I was in hiding in the farm. And I-- they hid me in the attic for a while. I remember that. And I spent the afternoon there while they visited. And I suppose that the farmer and his wife had given them some tea or something. I don't know. But that's about the closest I came. I don't remember seeing any Germans ever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Though you must have seen Germans until you left Brussels. 

DORI KATZ: Yes, but I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How frightened them, even not seeing them? 

DORI KATZ: That is such a vague time for me. I mean, I have-- I have so-- I almost have no memory of that time before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After the orphanage, when you were re-- 