INTERVIEWER: OK, John, ready? 

JOHN: Ready. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. When we walk-- when they took us out, they tell us to go out in the train You were seeing-- 

INTERVIEWER: In Gross-Rosen? 

SUBJECT: In Gross-Rosen. We seen a big stone mine. The black stones, they was making the-- the cornerstones of the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] how we say the corner. We say here we finished. He finished up here, this, us here. 

OK, he took us in the-- we walk in. In the-- in the camp. One side was the orchestra playing. Was a band, was, you know with a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Trumpet? 

SUBJECT: Trumpet. A few people. And the other side was on the-- the couples, the German couples. They was clean, real German couples. No was Jews. No one Russians. Just Germans. This was a camp, was-- was the-- the verbrechers, the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Criminals. 

SUBJECT: Criminals. Gross-Rosen, raw criminals, life. Right when we walk in, they start us to beating. We no see not once. Just we was one wall, one pile. And this was after, you know, was going down hill. Then we no walk in more. Just we crawl. 

Later, they tell us was coming. They start to count us. Was already a few dead. And they say was coming, the-- the officers. The kapos say everybody who got value things, gold, money, to give up, to give up freely. Who gives up then he later can collect food for this. 

I got up to say, you know, ring, you know, I got a watch, you know. Like in the old country, we was a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] you know, a title. You know. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: You know what-- what I mean. Then I went, and I give this up. I got beat so much in the stomach. I no remember later what-- what happened to me, about a half an hour for this. 

Later, they took everybody, you know, have to take off the clothes. Everything. And we went in a-- in a shower room, and they give us, you know, what's then-- bowls with the brushes, with the stuff what burns. You have to put on on the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Lysol? 

SUBJECT: Lysol? I don't know what's this. On the-- you know, on the whole body to burn up. Maybe you have something, you know, some sickness or something. To burn up the whole-- push me up the whole body. 

And we left the clothes on the Appell Place, Appellplatz. Our clothes. We walk out. They give up-- this was-- took them a few hours. Was already dark when we walk out from the shower rooms. 

And they he give to everybody, you know, the stripes clothes. We put on the stripes. Put on the hat stripe and pants, and a blouse. And a shirt. That's what it was. This was in April, 1944. 

And they took us in one barrack. One barrack. It was so big. It was 500 people almost. Was a couple in the room. He say, I want to hear. I want to listen to the clock, how the beat-- the clock beats. The beating from the clock. 

You know, 500 people, everybody talks a little bit or something. Then there's a big rush, you know. He make it. He heard beating, the beat from the-- from the clock, the alarm clock. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean 500 people were so quiet? 

SUBJECT: Are so quiet. and who was-- who was talking one word, either way, they take him down. He was laying down on the-- on the bridges, on the-- and it was suggest-- no. No was nothing. Just the boards. 

INTERVIEWER: Bunks? 

SUBJECT: Boards. Bretter. 

INTERVIEWER: Boards. 

SUBJECT: Boards. Nothing was to cover. Nothing, just this was on the-- OK, we was over there. [INAUDIBLE] They took us, and they start us to check. And they send out. Send us away in another place to a concentration camp to working. 

This was in Wuestegiersdorf. This was in Niederschlesien. Wuestegiersdorf. You heard from this place? You know, but we was-- was there, but we no got food to eat. It was so bad. We was hungry. We got one meal a day. Small meal when we was coming from work. We was walking, and we was plastering a road. 

INTERVIEWER: Paving a road. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we was. I was over there, like a good worker. Then he tell me, you, you take care in the job. You see sure they make everything. I was working. I now was a foreman. 

And he took me away another place, there to load-- load up, to plan out the stones for to bring in the rollers. You know, small train. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened next? 

SUBJECT: Ne-- next, we was over there in this camp until-- this was January, 1945. 1945 January, they took us to German-- to Flossenburg, Germany. Bayern. In Bayern-- 

INTERVIEWER: They took you? 

SUBJECT: The whole-- the whole-- the whole group, the whole transport. Because they liquidate over there. Because was in Poland was the Russian already close to Warschau. And this was in Niederschlesien. And they were scared. They took us by transport. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know the Russians were coming close? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. Was going one man from camp to clean the rooms, but they-- the Lag-- Lag-- Lagerfuehrer, a German. 

INTERVIEWER: The lager commander. 

Lager-- Lager commander. Commander. And he got-- he was the OT with the rot-- rot bands. OT. And he put on the radio, and he heard the news. And he give us the-- he tell us. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did you think when you heard it? 

SUBJECT: What we can help? Nothing. We was begging to God to live over the war. But we can nothing doing. Another day, they took away, you know, piles. Over there in this camp was bringing every week fresh people in Hungary, in Roumanie, from Czechy. All new people. 

And this camp was about 3,000 people already over there. And when the Russian was in close by Warschau, then he wasn't scared. He took us away from over there to Germany, to Flossenburg. Part by train and part by walking, until they took us away-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go by train? 

SUBJECT: We went by train to our-- you know, by the closed-- and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: They bring us to Germany, to Bayern. This was Flossenburg. It was a concentration camp so high, the coldest place in Germany. And we was over there. They no-- they no took us to work because they no got work over there. Just to keep them in the barracks, and to clean the camp. 

Was hills, was holes. And they bring dead people over there. And they pile up. And they burn piles. Like you remember maybe you know when they pile up woods in the wood. You know, piles. And they burn. 

They put on-- it was about four or five barracks just to transit. They took us. We have to change the clothes, the shoes, everything. And we stand-- This was in January. January, February in snow, out clothes, out shoes, bare naked. We was about two weeks over there. 

And they took us to a-- this was near Weimar. Near Weimar. A-- a working place, a camp. The camp was in the woods. I forgot the name. 

INTERVIEWER: It's all right. 

SUBJECT: And over there we was working. We was plastering a road. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Reznik, this is already 1945. 

SUBJECT: This is 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any change in the way the Germans behaved? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: The war's coming to an end. 

SUBJECT: We no see-- we no see the-- the Russians, the Ukraine anymore. We just see-- see Germans. All Germans. 60s, 65, and older. This was the watchmans. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they different from the? 

SUBJECT: Better. 

INTERVIEWER: Better. 

SUBJECT: Better. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: Because they no-- they no beating us so. 

INTERVIEWER: The old Germans? 

SUBJECT: The old Germans, they no beating us so. I was talking to one, to one watchman. I ask him, why they treating us so bad? We not murderers. We not kill nobody. We no rob nobody. Why they treating us so? They tell us, because your brothers in United States, they-- they have a war against us, and you have to pay the price for this. This was the answer. 

And I was scared to talking too much, because you talk too much to him, he can take the-- the gun and shoot you. But they no beating nobody. No. Just we was walking. We was walking, and we was returning to the place. This was in the woods. 

The-- no was a concentration camp. Just was a place where they was keeping ammunition bunkers. And they-- they took out the ammunition from over there. Then they give us to stay-- we was staying in the bunkers. Just was bridges. You know, not to covering, not to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Boards. 

SUBJECT: Just boards. And this was what we was going, this was what we sleeping. This was. We was over there not a short time. About two weeks, three weeks. There was coming order to send us away in a other place, to Buchenwald. 

Aber they took us in the night. Before night start, they took us out, and they transferred us nights. And the watchmans, they say "Whos runs away, we kill." Not to run away, because you more insured when you're in the transport. We was maybe about 2,000 in this transport, in the group. 

And they tooken us to give everybody, you know, half a bread, and we walk. No was transportation. Just food. We was walking. We was walking a whole night, a whole day. The next night, we was-- we cannot walk anymore. 

Then we were staying in that place. Under-- under the free-- under the freiem Himmel. And you know, no was woods. Just on the land. And it was coming more, more hostages. More-- more-- 

INTERVIEWER: Inmates. 

SUBJECT: Inmates, you know. It was Russian hostages. Was prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Russian prisoners. And they find out when the group, what we was coming, having-- having bread, you know. Somebody hold a-- hide a piece of bread for the next day. The one vent, they sneak in, and they start to ro-- to rauben the bread away from this-- from this group. They cut the arms up. 

And the watchmans, they find out this. They say, "Who stand up get shoot." And the next day, when was light day, daylight, we was walking to Weimar. They bring us to Buchenwald. 

Buchenwald, we was laying in the Appell place, Appellplatz. No was place for us where to go, behind the Hof. This was two days, three days. Later, they took us in a place what was not finished. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see in Buchenwald? 

SUBJECT: Buchenwald. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the picture? 

SUBJECT: The picture I see like this. When I come in, first we was walking. Was a-- a Tor. 

INTERVIEWER: Gate. 

SUBJECT: A gate to go in. In was close. Just-- just this-- this gate you can go in. You walk in, you see crematoriums. Was the Appell place. Appellplatz. In you see barracks way down. 

INTERVIEWER: As far as you can see. 

SUBJECT: As far as you can see, barracks. We see the crematoriums. Ovens. They open up and they're pushing in the people. You know, the dead people. This is what we see. Ovens. Later, they took us in a not finished building. 

And we were staying over there a few days. And over there we was-- they give us one meal a day. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened next? 

SUBJECT: Next, they took us out in a transport. And a lot of people find out. The-- the-- the Britain or the American army, or the Russian-- I don't know. They say. They say they have not time to keep us here. We-- the people who stays here be liberated. A few days. 

Aber they no leave us to stay over there. They took us out in middle of the night. And they sent us away. How much people was over there? Maybe about 2,000 or 3,000 people or this. We was walking. We was walking. Who was older, who no got the power to go, strength to go, then you know, falls, then they shoot him. 

And after this, it was coming trucks. And they tooken the dead, and they throw him on the-- on the truck, and they took him away. 

And we was walking this way maybe about week, a week and a half. And every night, beginning, we was resting in a place. When we was resting, when we got food, they prepare, they give us, you know, a couple potatoes. Bread, not. Just a couple potatoes. 

And we was, after a week, we see the people get less, and less, and less. Who gets behind, they cut off, and they take them away, and they shoot them away. They no got transportation. They no got help. Nothing. 

I went always on the front. I was this time 29 years old. 29 into 30. I was the whole strong. I was strong in this time. I was young. 

Then I push myself always in the front. I was scared to be in the back. The back was danger. We was coming in after a week and a half. We walk on a road. I see far away people walking on the land. 

Then I ask what you? Polish, German? He says Polish. He say to me, oh, when you can hide a few days, then you can be liberated. 

So he say not too far away the American Army is over there. Not too far away. Just two or three days where you can hide. We went over there. We was staying overnight in a place. This was a very big-- no, it was about this time about maybe 500, 600 people in this transport, what was left of it. Because we went in in one place from the Scheune. Scheune. From the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Barn. 

SUBJECT: Barn. Yeah, barn. It was they a lot of food for the cows. And right away, food, they no give us more. They no got. They no got prepared nothing. And I was walking always with a friend. You know, we was together from the same town. And we was planning to run away in night. 

Of course, I tell him we have what the Polish guy say. Then say now is the time to run away, not to be the last should they kill us. I say to him, you know, I go and I be looking where is place to hide in this place. And I say, you wait here. And I come, and I tell you. 

I went in, and I see a lot of food cows'. You know, the [INAUDIBLE] straw, and-- how we can go in? I dig out a hole, and I push myself in. I took in the back, and I close up the front. You know, so no be marks on this place where I-- should no be a hole. Should no show a hole. 

And I went in deep, and deep, and deep, until I went maybe about 200 feet. And I went very down on the floor. And I was hiding over there. I was hiding over there. And later I hear wie the-- wie the friend mines calls me by the name, however, I cannot go back. Because I was hiding more people over there. 

And the that other one, what he was behind me, he say to me, when you going out, I kill you. Because you show people that we hide in here. Then I no went out more. I went deeper. How far I can go to the end, I went. And I was hiding over there. This was Saturday night. Was in the morning, Sunday. 

I was listen everything. I hear wie the-- wie they count the people, and they say is short. They start to looking. They no wait for the rest to find them. They took what they got, and they walk. They walk away. They walk far. 

And I was laying down on the floor over there, in the Scheune. In the barn. I no got way-- way to go out, no. Just I say, I get-- I be dead here. No air. 

Was on the-- on the Scheune, it was, you know, going, was holding the roof, the what cross. The crossing. And I was between the crossing. And from this, the crossing, was coming air. 

I was laying over there. I was listen. It's no good. They start to looking. They looking far, far. Of course, was missing some 30 people. 32, 33. They say something missing. They start to looking. They took the Hitler Jugend. Hitler Jugend. The youngsters. In with the picks. And they digging in, in the straw, in the food, the cow food, and they looking. 

I was thinking, "Oh, mein Gott, where mein head is? When I took a board and I can cover up myself, then they no put in the pick in me." 

Well, it's over. I was between the-- Thank God, was over one day. Was over the second day. The third day, it's already I was-- I was counting the days. It was already Wednesday, Thursday. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. 

Thursday, I got no food. What? What I can doing? I know have no strong. 

INTERVIEWER: No food, no water. 

SUBJECT: No food, no water. Nothing. No, I cannot no strong more. I walk out in the middle day, after the middle day, you know. I walk out. Before I walk out, I was listening. It's quiet. A couple days quiet. I know hear nothing transportation. I know hear nothing moving. 

And this was not too far away from a road, this place. I was looking out. I no see nobody. This was Thursday. Thursday, I walk out. 

A girl, what she was walking in the farm, she see me. And she see me. Then she call the farmer. and the farmer call me, what I'm doing here? I say, I walk, and I stop here. I no say I'm hiding over there. Just I'm walking, and I stop here. Maybe you have a piece of bread to give me. 

INTERVIEWER: In German? 

SUBJECT: In German, yeah. I-- I was ask in German. Und they give me a piece of bread. Small piece of bread. And they say-- they tell me, go! I went. Was not too far away in this place a river, water. And I put in my legs in the water, because I have almost no got strong to-- to go, to walking. 

Then and I stay night. What I make it night here. I was far away from this place. I see the Hitler Jugend, the youngsters. They watching. They waiting. They thinking I come back. 

And they was watching. They wait for me. I was hiding in the woods until it was dark, very dark. 10:00, 11:00. I sneak in in the same place. And I was hiding again on the same place until Saturday noontime. 

Saturday noontime, I hear transportation, people talking. And I no can understand language. I was listening-- the German language I know. I recognize the German language. The Russian language is almost like Polish. 

And this-- this language I cannot understand. I was watching, and I see soldiers. I see the soldiers. It's not Germans. And one to the other one talks. I say, now is the time to go down. 

I went down. And the stairs, I no walk down. I slide down. And they was sitting. And they was leaning, the American soldiers. They stand up, and they see, you know, the-- the clothes, the stripes. They ask me, who you are? I say, I'm from concentration camp. I'm from Poland. I'm Polish Jew. I'm Polish. 

And they bring right away one of the soldiers what can understand Polish. He was speaking Polish. And I was talking to him in Polish. Then I explain him. A week ago, there was a transport here from Buchenwald. We was walking here. We was staying overnight, and I was hiding here. From this time, I'm here. And now I'm coming out. Can you help me? I'm scare, and I want to go with you. 

He say, we are American soldiers. You cannot go with us. I say, I go where you take me. I go on with you. Just, I'm scare. Said he no, kill me. He won't kill me. He say, nobody kills you. You are saved. 

I say-- I was crying. I say, OK. Just help me. I can walk. He took me in to the owner. He say, give him hot water with milk. Don't give him meat. And later, he tell him to take me to the-- from the village, their mayor in the village. 

I was-- in the meantime, I find the other two, but he wasn't hiding in the same place. No, not in the same section, the same-- no, other place. In the same Scheune. In the same. We was already three. 

Then the mayor from the village, he gives us place of a farmer, one, to sleep in and two, food. We no want to stay over there too long. We was staying maybe about a week. 

Then we went into town, a small town, Mitterteich is the town. Then we went over there to the commander. And the commander, he send us to one-- the American commander send us to the mayor, one-- one guy what he takes care on the-- on the people what-- the survivors. 

He tell us, you know, you go in the camp here. Out of town is a camp. And over there is more people. And over there you can have a space to stay. 

OK, we went over there. We was staying over there a few days. I meet American soldier, and I was talking to him. He tell me to write him a letter. He want to send to his father a letter from one survivor. I writed a letter and I give to him. 

INTERVIEWER: In Yiddish, or? 

SUBJECT: In Yiddish, in Yiddish. And I give it to him. And he was coming every day to see us. Aber meantime, I was sick. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- did you tell him? He was a Jew, I understand. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he a Jew. He talk a little Yiddish. He talk Yiddish. And I was sick. I cannot sleep. All night, I no sleep. Once I fall asleep, I wake up. I was scared. Oh, they coming, they going, they-- they kill me. Every second. 

And I was over there a few days. And I ask the American soldier to help me to go out from here and to come into a hospital. He tell me, listen, is in our neighbor town, in our neighbor is already Jewish over there. A few Jew. You-- maybe you can make it to going over there. Then you find Jewish people. 

We took, you know, a small, small two wheels. On-- [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] know, in the army, he give to us. We put on what you got, and all three, we pushed this small. And we went to Tirschenreuth, Bayern. Tirschenreuth, we find over there Jewish people already. Maybe about 10, 12. And they took us. They took care on us to the mayor. And the mayor may give us place, where to stay, to, you know, was ready from the Russian prisoners place. It was over there. 

And everyday, every week, was coming a little more and more. In meantime, I went to the doctor. And I say I can no sleep. In can no stand. I can no walking. Like with needles, he hurt me the-- my soles. You know. 

Well, he took him to hospital. I was in hospital a couple of weeks. And this was already, you know, July, August. Start looking for the family first. So somebody leaves. Where I have to go, how I can go find her? Where I can go find her? 

I was at camp, a Polish camp. Polish. Then I went over there. Because I speak Polish, maybe I find somebody over there. Then what he knows somebody. And he organize a transport to Poland. I was registered to go to Poland. 

I come to Poland, to Krakow. I find there one man from our town. And he say to me, I hear from your cousin, your wife's cousin. Your wife is some-- in some place in Germany she lives. What I doing? 

I come with the other friend from the same town, and we went to Lodz. In a couple days, he come back, and I say to him, Leon, we have to go right away back. I cannot stay here because I have news my wife lives, and she in Germany in a camp. 

We went back. We meet a Russian soldier, and he give us passage to go through to Czechy. Because we cannot go back and forth. We went Czechy. In Czechy, we come to Prague, and we took a train to Tirschenreuth. This was near the border. Tirschenreuth was near the border between Czechy and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you find the camp? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I went in-- in Germany in big camps. I've went to first camp, I didn't find her. I went to the second. I find a man from our town. He say, I see your brother-in-law. And he should be-- he was here a few days ago. I went around and look in the camp. He's not over there. 

I say, where is a bigger camp near this camp? He tell me, not too far. Landsberg. I went to Landsberg. Right away when in walk in, in the big place, you know, where the Grosser Saal, Grosser room-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Right away, I see my brother-in-law. I got my brother-in-law, and I'm happy. Then I have-- I have somebody ready. Later, he say to me, you know, I see your wife. I'm happy. Where's my wife? She is in Bergen-Belsen. 

Bergen-Belsen, how we can go? He say, you have to go with the train. There's no transportation. You have to just to go with the coal trains. It's no passenger trains. We went to the station. We took the first train. We went. Took us a week to go to-- to-- to-- that I mention-- to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: Bergen-Belsen. I come to Bergen-Belsen. I went in the com-- committee. And over, the list, right away, my brother-in-law, he show me where to go. And I meet my wife over there. 

INTERVIEWER: You remet? 

SUBJECT: I meet my wife over there. 

INTERVIEWER: She survived? 

SUBJECT: She survive. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. It's the right moment to stop now. 

SUBJECT: You can imagine-- 

INTERVIEWER: Go on, go on. 

SUBJECT: You can imagine what happened this time. I start looking. Maybe I have somebody. Nobody, nobody live. Everybody killed! Over there-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you found your wife. 

SUBJECT: I found my wife. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, let's stop now. 

SUBJECT: I find my wife. I say, I know like it. It's too big, Bergen-Belsen. And this town where I am, it's more private. Private, so I say we go to Tirschenreuth. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Over there was 250 people. And I took my-- my brother-in-law went with me too. And over there we was until 1948. I make a trip again to Poland. I got my wife. I went again a trip to Poland. 

I say, maybe somebody live over. Maybe I can finding my child. Because I was looking. I no see the child dead. I no recognize the child. I say, maybe he's still alive some place. I was looking and committed in all places where is kids, where survive kids. No. My child is not. He's dead. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 