SUBJECT 1: Mine, the hall [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] how you can say this? The hall captain, you know, from this place where I was working, he went with me, and he introduced me to him. For this, he didn't hit me, he hear me what I am talking to him. And I told him, "Mr. Rumkowski this and this happened to me." He said OK, and he give me right away a prescription that I could take another 39 pounds. 

I had once, you know, that I can meet Mr. Rumkowski, Later, I met him another time. Later, this was till 1944. Yeah, 1944, in January, 1944, they came over and they said, when those old people, what we used to work for those vegetables, we got something to eat. Even, you eat raw potato, but you don't starve for hunger. 

We was eating raw potatoes, raw cabbage, whatever we could, everything raw, because you couldn't cook. And everybody was looking not bad, and I was looking very good in this time too. I still was a young man. And they select a few hundred people to a concentration camp. 

But anyway, who wants to go to a concentration camp? I know you go into a concentration camp, you never will see a free world. You will die over there. And I used to live, and I came to Litzmannstadt, the ghetto. I didn't have my wife with me already, they took away my wife, and everybody. I was living together with my brother, my brother's wife, and with another two person, our cousins. We was living five people in one little room. 

We had only one bed that my brother, my sister-in-law, they sleep in the bed, and we all used to sleep on the ground, you know? On the floor. But we was over there 'til 1944. In January, 1944, they came. There was a committee that we have to go to a doctor, and to search us that we are well to go to a concentration camp. 

I went to the doctor, and I passed the examination. When I passed the examination, I know that is not good, they will send me away. I start to run away from the home. I didn't sleep at home. They came at night and they wanted to take me. I wasn't home already. And I went one night-- I had a sister over there, in Litzmannstadt ghetto too. She came from Zdunska Wola. They took away her whole family, she had three children. They took everybody away. 

And I came over to her, and I said-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was her name, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] She is now in Israel. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] so-and-so, I want to sleep over by you one night. And my brother-in-law said, well, one night, you can sleep over. I slept over one night. 

If my brother-in-law told me already one night, I can sleep over. And I said, I have no place for another night. I went to a friend of mine, they used to live four boys in one little room too. His name was [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] And I said listen, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] I want to sleep over a night by you. He said, why not? Come over and sleep. I went over, and I was sleeping on the floor. 

And all of a sudden, Jewish police were searching for us, for the escapes, you know? I was escape. And they came over, and they saw me laying down, you know, I'm down there on the floor. And they said, what are you doing over here? Why don't you get up and go with us? They thought already I am an escape. 

And they took me. They took me over, this was like a jail, special-made. This was [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] They called this [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] and they took me over there, and another 200 people. And we was waiting over there until they will put us away. What I said to my-- I called up right away, my friend went over there to my brother, and he told him about-- 

And [? Rumkowski ?] came over one night, and he took the name for [? not ?] everybody. That I had another chance to talk to Mr. [? Rumkowski. ?] But he couldn't do anything for us. Maybe he could, but he didn't, because this was like a [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] They have to send away every month, so many, so many hundreds of people to get killed, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever talk to these Jewish policemen who were sending other Jews away? 

SUBJECT 1: Sure, we talk to him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they say about-- 

SUBJECT 1: They say that they have to do their duty. But I tell you, this was just another-- another, another thing. They was murderers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were murderers. You think they were murderers? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. If not, they-- they could, you know, do a lot for us. But they-- everybody wants to, wants to, you know-- is going for his skin, that his skin should be, you know, safe. 

SUBJECT 2: Everybody was afraid for their life. 

SUBJECT 1: Everybody was afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you, Mrs. Majerowicz, did you have experience with Jewish policemen too? 

SUBJECT 2: No, because I didn't have that experience. Because you know, my husband was sent from over there, you know, to the ghetto. And I didn't have this stuff. We escaped from one place to another. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You escaped the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: Not the ghetto. You know, we were hiding. We've didn't sleep in the same place, because they came to search for people, you know? They took people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who searched? 

SUBJECT 1: The Jewish police. 

SUBJECT 2: The Jewish police, because they had orders to bring so many-- so many people, you know, to send away to Chelmno, to Treblinka, you know, to different places. And they had-- they had to bring so many people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What would have happened to them if they couldn't bring the people? 

SUBJECT 2: They-- 

SUBJECT 1: Who knows? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't know. 

SUBJECT 1: Who knows what would happen to them. 

SUBJECT 2: They had orders. 

SUBJECT 1: But they had orders, and they said I am a policeman, and I have to do my-- my best. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, you have to bring so many-- so many people. 

SUBJECT 1: But they didn't help us. With one word, they didn't help us. 

SUBJECT 2: They had to do the things, what they-- they supposed to do. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you managed to hide out for how many years? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, we were in-- I was in Lodz 'til '44. And I was working in a place, in a vegetable place, you know. They used to-- they used to give out for people, you know, this stuff. 

SUBJECT 1: I used to work in one place, and my wife-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, I worked in another place. 

SUBJECT 1: We didn't know each other. 

SUBJECT 2: So we were working every day, and we were there in that place. So we came, the gestapo, and they-- because we were the last people to take it out. And so they send me to Auschwitz, me and my husband. I was married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you together in Auschwitz? Were you with your husband? 

SUBJECT 2: No, we went together on the same-- on the same truck, you know. They came with trucks, and they took us. But, you know, the men went different, and the women went different places. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long did it take you to get to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: About three hours, you know, on the truck. So men went different places, and woman went different places. And so we-- you know, they told us to undress, you know, naked. And whoever was young and able to work, so they sent us to places, you know, demolition places. 

I was there three weeks. No, four weeks, I was in Auschwitz. And we didn't do nothing. And then they sent us away, you know, to Braunschweig. We were working in a factory. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you well? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never were sick? 

SUBJECT 2: I wasn't sick, no, because I was working that place. And this saved us our life, because, you know, we had the potato, we had cabbage, stuff like this. And we ate well, you know. Nobody was sick. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nobody got the-- the cold? 

SUBJECT 1: Nobody was sick. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: People just-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was dying. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, people who didn't work there. But, you know, I was fine, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And do you know what happened to your husband? 

SUBJECT 2: No. Later on, after the war, they told me, you know, he couldn't take it. He died. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT 2: He starved, he was starving, he couldn't take it. He was working, they sent him, you know, to places to work, and he couldn't take it, you know, they didn't give us food. They gave us like, one soup a day. You couldn't live with this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you meet each other? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, after the war, in '45. I was with his-- with my husband's nieces, and we were together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT 2: In Braunschweig. And I got very sick, so they sent me, you know, that was over there a German. He was a nice-- he was a good man, because he helped us a lot. Not everybody was so bitter. So he and his wife was working there, so they bought some medicine, you know, the stuff they stole, you know? And they brought it to the hospital. And I was-- they sent me to the hospital, as I figure, you know. The first thing, they took those people, and they-- and they, they killed them-- 

SUBJECT 1: The sick people. 

SUBJECT 2: The sick people, because they didn't want to give us food, you know? If you were able to work, you could give production, you know? They needed you. And if not, they don't want you. But I got well over there, you know, and then after I got better, they sent me to a kitchen to work. I was with workers-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is after the war? 

SUBJECT 2: No, in the war. Yeah, in the war. So they sent me, and I was working in the kitchen. So when I worked in the kitchen, you know, so we took home-- we stole, you know, like a little bit soup, or a piece of bread. You know, we're having the bread, we work in the kitchen with vegetables and stuff. So every day I brought home something, you know? And we were good friends, because we were living in the same room. I was living with his nieces, you know. 

SUBJECT 1: And she shared with them. 

SUBJECT 2: And we shared with them, and I shared with them. I didn't share, I gave it to them, because I wasn't hungry, I was working in the kitchen. You know, if you work, you had a piece of margarine, you had a piece of this, you know. I had more to somebody else. I bought it home for them. 

Because some people, they used to go in the garbage everyday. You know, we used to throw out the garbage, and they used to take some, you know, like leaves from the cabbage or lettuce, whatever it was, you know? And a potato, you know, like a rotten potato, they cut it out, and they eat. Just, you know, just to have something to eat. But they didn't do it, and I knew they're going to die, because they weren't the type, you know, to run. Because they were afraid, if they caught us, they hit you over there you know? 

SUBJECT 1: They were the type. That's a hard type when children, you know-- that they never, never know in their whole life, you know, having a bad day. They have everything under the sun-- 

SUBJECT 2: Well, somebody else had to do. 

SUBJECT 1: You know, and they-- they was afraid to go out. And they never went out or something. 

SUBJECT 2: They were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was home? Where was home? You would bring the food home. Where was home? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, home-- in concentration camp. This was we are home, I was living a over there, together with those girls. We were like 20 girls, you know? And we shared-- I shared with them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They didn't make them work? Did they work too? 

SUBJECT 2: No because, they make-- they want me to work, because I was sick, you know. And they figured if I work in the kitchen, I have a little more than somebody else. 

SUBJECT 1: Rose, she's asking you where they was working. They went every day to work to the factory. 

SUBJECT 2: No, no, no. We were in Braunschweig, and then we were there like a couple of months, and then they sent us to a factory. You know, we were working. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you meet each other? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, after the war-- 

SUBJECT 1: After the war, you know, I was with a man in concentration camp together. He wasn't far away from my city, he was in Zdunska Wola. And we know each other very good, because in concentration camp, I was like a father to everybody. Everybody came over to me and asked me Aaron, Aaron, what's going to be? Aaron, what's going to be tomorrow, what's going to be today, what is this? 

INTERVIEWER 2: In Dachau? 

SUBJECT 1: No, this was in concentration camp, and I was then changed Dachau later. We went to-- not to Dachau-- we went to Buchenwald. In Buchenwald I was together with him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you say when they said, "What's going to happen?" What was your answer? 

SUBJECT 1: I said-- what my answer was, I know just the same like they know. But we was talking around, maybe God will-- we never-- we always had faith, you know, to God, that God will help us. We always had faith. And he knew me very good. And we was freed together. And we was freed together, and everybody started to look for somebody, to a little family. 

And he went to Braunschweig, all of a sudden. And when he came over there, they ask him "From where are you?" He said, "I am from Zdunska Wola But my niece said, "I am from Warta "From Warta he said. "Maybe you know a name, Aaron Majerowicz." "Aaron Majerowicz This is my uncle! He is still?" "Yeah, he's still alive. He is in Feldafing. 

And they wrote me right away a letter. "Uncle Aaron." Even they was almost as old like I am, you know, but I am their uncle. "You are our father, and our mother, and our brother, in everything you are. You have to come over and take us with you, we will stay together." 

I didn't even answer this letter. I took right away, and this time I had already established a little business in Germany after the war. This was five, six weeks after the war. I started, you know, on the black market, and I started to make business already. And I had already two-- one from my city, one from another city, and was together, you know? We was-- 

SUBJECT 2: Partners. 

SUBJECT 1: Partners together, and we was making business already. All of a sudden, I got a letter from them. And I said to my partners, you know what? I have to go to bring them over here. And I went over there to Braunschweig to meet them. 

And when I came over there, my niece told me, "Listen, Aaron. We have here, you know, this girl Rose. She helped us a lot in concentration camp. Otherwise, we wouldn't be alive if she wouldn't help us. She went and risked her life. She organized and she brought us something to eat. And we are still alive. And nobody came and asked for her. Please take her with you." 

SUBJECT 2: Well, you know, I had-- I didn't have anybody, you know, from my relatives. To everybody, you know, we were a group, you know, like 20 girls. No, not 20-- 18 or 20, whatever it was on the day. To everybody, somebody came, because they made a list, you know? Like, they made in Braunschweig, somebody else was there. All this list. 

SUBJECT 1: They were sending around, in all the conce-- in all the camps where the Jewish were, was after the war. They went, you know, a whole list, that somebody's still alive-- 

SUBJECT 2: Who was alive. 

SUBJECT 1: Looking for somebody. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. To everybody, somebody came. And to me, nobody came. I lost everybody. So they said, you know, his nieces said to me, "Well, my uncle is coming." They found out already he is alive. And I said to myself, "Well, I have nobody, you know. I'm going to stay over here." So, but I'm going to go some place, you know? So they went. 

SUBJECT 1: Then when I came over, they told me, my nieces, we would be appreciate if we would take Rose with us, you know? And I said, "Listen, if I'm going to have to support two, I'll support three. And let her go with us." 

SUBJECT 2: Well, at that time, you know, I didn't need this already, because it was Landsberg already. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, when you came-- when you came to my place, you know, to Munich, was a Landsberg. But you didn't know that it's a Landsberg and I didn't know that it's a Landsberg. 

SUBJECT 2: There was a lot of people, they were all alone, you know. So I would go with them. But, you know. We went together. 

SUBJECT 1: I took her with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You ever talk about these days now? 

SUBJECT 2: No, I get bored. No, never. I don't want to talk about it, because it drives me crazy. He can talk about it. I don't want to talk about it. I can't talk about it. It drives me-- it drives me nuts. 

SUBJECT 1: Even when you see this on television, when you shut off the television. 

SUBJECT 2: No, you know, the minute that something come, I shut it off. I don't want to see it, because I was there, you know? To somebody else, it's a story. To me, I live with this. I don't want to see it, and I don't want to hear it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You live with this now? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT 2: Because you remember this, you can't forget this. 

SUBJECT 1: It's waking you up at night. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, in the beginning, for years, I never could sleep. Like, like, you know, they come after me, and they're chasing me. Now, you know, it's already out of my head. But if I see this again on television, I shut it off. Some people can watch it, you know, they want to watch it. I don't want to watch it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Together? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. We have children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you talk about this with your children? 

SUBJECT 2: No, and my daughter says to me, how come whenever I ask you, you never wanted to answer me? Now she reads, you know, she reads, and she watches. My younger daughter, she doesn't want to watch this, she can't take it. The older daughter, she reads and she watches, you know? Like Holocaust, and stuff like this. 

And I don't think my younger daughter, she shuts off the television. She's very sensitive, she can't take it. And I can't take it either. It's getting boring for me. I don't want to see it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you? 

SUBJECT 2: He can talk about it. 

SUBJECT 1: I have here a book, but I am in this book too, you know? From my city, we made a book, we published a book in Israel. And I have here a book with me, and I have here-- but, you know, I just wrote down some memories. You can down write down everything, just some memories. 

And my older daughter, she lives in Fairfield, and she told me already 100 times-- 100 times-- "Daddy, why don't you read to me this book? Why don't you read to me this book?" And I always say-- 

SUBJECT 2: She's interested this, she wants to know. 

SUBJECT 1: And I always say tomorrow, and I always say after tomorrow. Because she-- she watched Roots, you know? And she said, maybe someday I want to go in and published for my parents, like Roots. You know, why don't you read to me? Why don't you hide for me? But I don't have-- I don't have the-- you know, the guts to tell them everything what we passed. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, it reminds you of everything. 

SUBJECT 1: I didn't even-- I didn't even tell them that I was married, I had a child. Now if this will be published, the first time they will hear it I was married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you ever talk to other people about what happened to you? Other people, and what do they say? 

SUBJECT 2: They don't want to talk, they really don't. Yeah, we talk, and then we start something else. It's-- it's painful. 

SUBJECT 1: I say right away, let's turn to another subject. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, I turn away to a different subject. I don't like it. I don't like it because I dream about it, and I get nervous, and I'm no good. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like to come to America, and build a life here? 

SUBJECT 1: This was just a dream, you know. Well, after the war, you know, I had a nice-- 

SUBJECT 2: We were in Germany. 

SUBJECT 1: I was in Germany, you know, and I established myself very nice already in Germany. But later on, when I had a chance to go to-- you know, to United States. 

SUBJECT 2: We were comfortable over there in Germany. 

SUBJECT 1: This was just a dream. I said, let's go to United States. And we came-- 

SUBJECT 2: Because-- because we saw over there, it's no good for Jews. They don't want us, and we-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: 

SUBJECT 1: Wherever you go, they say, "auslander." 

SUBJECT 2: We saw no future over there. Because, you know, when you're-- you are standing in line, they hate you. They don't want you, you know? Because they knew we are their enemies. 

SUBJECT 1: And another thing-- 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't like us. 

SUBJECT 1: Another thing, we have to look for a future for our children. We had already in Germany two children, you know? And we got to look for a future for them. And I said over there is no future for my children. I have to bring them to a Jewish community, you know, that they can go around with with Jewish boys, you know, and bring them up in a Jewish community. And that's how I came over, over here to United States. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is a dream? You said it was a dream. Can you-- 

SUBJECT 1: A dream when they come, they come, they chasing after me, where they-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said you-- coming to America was a dream. 

SUBJECT 1: To America was a dream, you know, for us. Because if you left-- you know, if you had been in a concentration camp, you came out alive over there, and you were dreaming all the time, the United States. That's a golden land, and we can go to the United States. This was just like a dream. 

SUBJECT 2: We were supposed to go to - 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, when we came over here-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was tough. 

SUBJECT 1: We didn't like it too much. Was very tough, you know. 

SUBJECT 2: We wasn't good, because, you know, we were used to already to Germany with everything. 

SUBJECT 1: Over there-- 

SUBJECT 2: After the war, we had everything we wanted. 

SUBJECT 1: Over there, I didn't do anything. I had my own store, and I was my own boss. Here, I came over, I-- 

SUBJECT 2: We couldn't speak English. 

SUBJECT 1: With two t small children, I couldn't do anything, because I did not know a word of English, you know? What can I do? What could I do? I started to work with somebody, and this was a very, very, very hard life. And in my whole life, I never worked for somebody. 

And all of a sudden, you start to work for somebody, with a boss behind, and a foreman over here, you know, and another boss over there. It is a very hard life. But later on, if you get used to everything, if you get used to-- now, thank God for this. We brought up our children very nicely, they married very nicely. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is so difficult about telling your children, or your daughter, about your previous family and the past? What do you think? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know, maybe that would make them upset-- 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't ask us, they didn't ask us when they were little, you know, stuff like this. But sometimes my older daughter used to ask how it was. So I always brought up to a different subject. I didn't want to talk about it. 

SUBJECT 1: Because the memories, when they come to your head, later on, you're going around for a few days again, it's coming everything to your head. 

SUBJECT 2: It comes back, everything. 

SUBJECT 1: You can't sleep night, you know, you can't eat, you're not comfortable with yourself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But do you have any worry that it will not be good for her? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know, no. 

SUBJECT 2: No, they should know. They should know, you know? They should know about everything. 

SUBJECT 1: Maybe someday if this will come out, you know, we have to tell them the whole story. 

SUBJECT 2: What time is it? 12 o'clock? We have to go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There's one more thing. You brought some pictures which are from that early ghetto. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, from the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you show them? 

SUBJECT 1: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We've seen this already. 

SUBJECT 1: That is already. This is a picture of a concentration camp, what we was dressed, over there, you know. In those-- in those pas, you know? 

SUBJECT 2: The stripes. The 

SUBJECT 1: The stripes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who took the picture? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know who took the picture. After the war, somebody gave it to me. There was over there photographers, where they took the pictures. 

SUBJECT 2: Some people, you know, they-- they got some cameras. 

SUBJECT 1: And here is in our neighborhood, in a small city. The city was calling Dobra. They hanged up over there three Jews. They went out to the synagogue, and they was praying over there. And they catch them middle of the street, and they hang them up. This is three Jews over there who were hanged up. 

This is like, we was working in our city, you know, with those wheelbarrows and everything. Every day you got to go for work, even they didn't pay us, but you got out to work. This was just a picture from few people that there was working over there. And this is a picture-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: We saw it. 

SUBJECT 1: We saw that, this one, the whole committee. And this is those three Jews, they went out, they was praying in the morning. They catch them, you know, and they start to rip off the beards and everything from them. That's the picture from them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Those that were hanged-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, they wasn't hanged. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who took that picture, do you know? 

SUBJECT 1: The picture, our photograph, you know, in our city. They had cameras, you know, and they call them in-- in to make pictures. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We saw that. 

SUBJECT 1: That is-- he's seen this already, OK. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there anything else? 

SUBJECT 2: Can we go? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, just one second. 

CREW: One minute, please. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: We can talk 'til tomorrow morning, and we will not finish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: OK, thank you very much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you very much. 

CREW: While I'm here I can't watch you on TV, right? 