INTERVIEWER 1: How does your father react now when you want to talk about those times? 

SUBJECT: OK. My dad-- I don't see him that much now, but when we get to talking about different things like that, he's very reluctant. And it's like a bad nightmare that he's-- he's lived through, spent a lot of his life, gave the good part of his-- better part of his physical strength and health for no real gain, other than, perhaps, in a way, protect his family, if you can think of it that way. 

And while at times he talked about during the Stuka attacks with the screaming sirens coming down and all that, he prefers not to. He ran through an experience of, at one time, guarding a number of Russian soldiers that-- that the Germans had captured. And they had something like 150, 200 Russians that they were guarding between the three of them. And a bunch of Russians decided to charge at him, and they shot a warning round, and they shot them through a crowd, and he killed two Russians. It stopped the charge. They were sure if they hadn't shot, they would have been killed. 

But for many, many months and some, I think, even years after he came back from the war, he would wake up screaming in the middle of the night with a nightmare. You know. And that's what this whole darn thing-- he got forced into a situation that he didn't want. He never wanted the war in the first place. He didn't want to go into the war. He certainly didn't have any desire to shoot anybody. But you know, that's how you get put in the middle of these things, and I can certainly understand why he doesn't want to talk about it. It's-- it's-- it's done. It's over with, and he doesn't have all that many years left. So why should he go and tear himself open now? Just very tough. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You went back to your town in the mountains, the little town in the mountains. What motivated you to go? What did you feel when you were there? And what has it left you with? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, after we had our short stay in Dachau and went through that, we went away from there and drove into Salzburg and spent a little bit of time there. And my wife and I had seen a picture, The Sound of Music. And if you've seen it, there's the castle and all that kind of stuff there. I'd spent some time there, and so I wanted to show her at least some of that very quickly. But I also wanted to show her where I grew up, the house that we had, the one room, and the two huge lemon trees that were outside of there and a place where I used to go for walks and a swimming pool-- just show her the town where I grew up. 

And so we drove up a stretch of a rather windy serpentine kind of a road into a little town of Wolfsegg. And I showed her around a little bit. We found most of the places. Some of the places that I remembered had been torn down and been replaced by some new buildings. And we stopped, and we got a coffee of espresso and had that and drove away again. Hadn't found anybody particularly friendly, but I hadn't gone out of my way to look for them either, which struck me afterwards. You know, the first thing is you can say that nobody was friendly, but you know, if you weren't friendly either, then you certainly can't blame anybody for that. 

But it was a feeling of, gee, it's nice that part of the world that was part of me when I was growing up is still here, you know. I think as a human being, you get some-- you feel good about some things being somewhat constant, as well the change that you can-- there's some roots that you can go back to, you can touch, and you can feel, and that tree's still there. Gee, that's so nice. But in a way, it was nice to go away from the place. It's-- it was as if by showing a place to my wife like I'd gotten rid of an obligation to share that with somebody, and I was no longer attached to the place. I was free of it. 

There weren't that many-- there were more unpleasant memories associated with that little town from the standpoint of how we'd been treated by the people than pleasant ones. So why would you want to go back again? It was enough to see if it'll stay there. And maybe someday when-- when my boys get a little older, we'll go back on another trip, and I'll probably show it to them. But I doubt that it'll be anything but a fast cruise through town, and maybe show them the castle up on top of the hill, and then leave. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you discuss this often-- last question. Do you discuss this often with your boys? 

SUBJECT: I don't particularly make it a point to discuss this with my boys, other than that things happened around us that cause a conversation, not necessarily specifically with regard to a Second World War. Last year, there was a massacre in Jonestown, where people died, lots of them-- a very gruesome, grisly kind of a circumstance. And we seem to have in this country a propensity for mugging and killing people left and right in ever increasing numbers. And they're part of that environment, and they need to understand, they need to care, and they need to feel that while you can't intrude that somebody isn't going to do you in, if you reach out first, you might have a chance. And I think they need to understand that you can't take things for granted. 

There were a lot of other experiences that we didn't necessarily talk about that a lot of the harm and damage that was done over in Europe in the Second World War was that people took for granted that this little guy with a mustache wasn't going to reach out for another country and another country and another country and another country, and he did. But nobody stopped him. Nobody believed that those kind of things could happen. 

And you know, until some tragedy happens to somebody close to you, you don't believe it's going to happen to your family either. Your house isn't going to get broken into until it does. And you don't-- you can pick up a newspaper, and you can read a headline about somebody getting killed in an automobile crash. And it's not really real until some member of your family, and then-- not that long ago, we had a-- I had a sister-in-law who died that way. 

So realizing that, I think it's very important that kids today and people all around us realize that you simply can't take things for granted and that you got to work at this, and you got to try and understand, and that you've got to fight for your freedoms. And if you don't want to, you don't have any right to complain about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could be the end of a film. Powerful statement. 

OK. Mrs. [INAUDIBLE], if you would go back and tell us about. 