INTERVIEWER: The uh, films that we produce, they are, sort of, the tip of the iceberg. The substance of this whole project is the body of material which we are gathering. Our-- 

--will a subject as complicated as the Holocaust ever even be glimpsed, never mind understood. 

I sat here for one hour last night listening to Professor Goldhagen. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: He's certainly a very knowledgeable gentleman. I mean, this is his life-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And what he studies-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: --his whole life. And yet, I have felt that I knew things he didn't know. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Mm hm. 

INTERVIEWER: Not that I knew them, but I'd heard them. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yeah, you'd had heard about them, sure. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Rabbi, would you start with your name and so forth. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Do I use my title with it too, or no? 

INTERVIEWER: Anything. Just go ahead. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: I'm Meyer J. Strassfeld. I'm rabbi of Temple Sinai in Marblehead at present. I was born November 17th, 1920, in Poland. I lived there for a while with my grandparents, who lived in the city of Stanislaw. Stanislaw was a very large Jewish community, about 90,000 Jewish people. My grandfather, who was a Cantor and a Shochet, was one of the leaders of the community. 

My father was the only one of the seven children who left Poland and migrated to Germany in 1926. My father was given the position, in a small town in Ostfriesland. The village's name was Wittmund. And there we lived for about nine years, until we were expelled by the Germans. 

As I think back to my life in Poland, it was very pleasant within the confines of my grandfather, my uncles, and my cousins. But I experienced anti-Semitism even there. I remember that my Payot, my side curls, were pulled, and I was referred to as [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] which means dirty Jew, or something similar to that. 

When we left Poland, we settled in Germany, as I indicated. And there, my father served as the Shochet, ritual slaughterer, as the Cantor, and as the teacher of the Hebrew school. We became an integrated part of this small village, relating very well to all the people. 

The Jewish community consisted of about 20 families. They were very close, close knit fam-- group, very supportive, one of the other, and participated in the various activities that were the responsibility of the Jewish community. But even the non-Jewish community was a very friendly group, at least those that were our neighbors. We socialized with them. It's also true that we had the largest attic. And so they could bring their clothing and dry it in our attic. So there was always a relationship between them and ourselves. 

I went to school. I enjoyed school. I have two brothers, in addition to myself. We went to school together. We enjoyed our school. We were part of the school, very much accepted. 

When we applied for German citizenship, we were turned down, which was a very sad day to us, because we felt German-- we wanted to be Germans. And we were turned down, because my father had entered Germany illegally. And when he had to justify his-- the crossing of the border illegally, he used the excuse that he was a political refugee, which, of course, was put down in his records. And then the German government just turned down our application. We were very unhappy about it, not realizing that that would ultimately save our lives. 

When Hitler came to power in 1933, one of the first actions were directed against what he called foreign Jews. And so all foreign Jews, including ourselves, were notified that we had six months to leave Germany and to return to our country of origin, which meant Poland. We had no intentions of returning to Poland. Poland was a very anti-Semitic country. We remembered the anti-Semitism. We certainly did not want to go back there. 

We did not know what was going to happen in Germany, because all of us lived with the hope that the Hitler idea would peter out very quickly. We gave him six months, a year was the most. And then we thought that the cultural German society would spit out the Nazi ideology. Of course, it never happened. 

Since we didn't want to go back to Poland, we attempted to get an extension. And we applied to the Zionist organization, who were in charge of emigration to Palestine. And we also had family in America. 

By that time already, the British had introduced a quota system. And so we were given a number somewhere in the four thousands, I recall. And we were waiting to either go there, and at the same time, we contacted family in America-- those were my father's uncles who live in Newark, New Jersey-- and asked them to be helpful in bringing us to America. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the atmosphere in Germany change at all a-- for you, as a young child going to school. Was there any difference for you be-- before 1933 and after 1933? Not necessarily in regard to your for-- alien status. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yes, I was going to come to that. Um, America came first. Because my-- my uncle-- may his soul rest in peace-- brought a contract, a rabbinic contract for my father, a small comm-- congregation in Newark. 

And so, we were able to enter the United States outside of the quota, because the Polish quota had been closed, oversubscribed at that time. We would have never come to this country, except for my uncle's intervention. 

And so we-- my father left earlier, and a few months later, we arrived in the United States, July 4th, 1935, which, of course, is an additional reason for us to celebrate that day. 

The changes that came about, and the relationship between-- with our neighbors and the school were very abrupt and were very destructive to our psyche. The first thing, we, all Jewish students, had to sit in separate benches, segregated benches. 

Instead of the customary prayer that opened the class, in the morning, we began with a salute to Hitler, with heil Hitler, which we had to do. We didn't want to be picked on as being different, but it was not very easy to say it. But that was minor compared to the difficulties that we had, for example, in-- during recess, in the courtyard, the playground, we were usually beaten up. Seldom where we invited to participate with the other students. 

We had one teacher, who was a member of the Stahlhelm, which was the veterans' organization, who was a very sensitive soul. He began to realize that difficulties that we were having. And so he would dismiss all Jewish students five minutes earlier, before the end of class. This gave us enough time to run home before we were caught and beaten. This was reported by one of the students to the Nazi representative in our village. The man was interrogated. After a while, he was fired from his position for showing some kind of sensitivity to Jewish children. 

When Hitler came to power, one of the laws that were promulgated was anti shechita law. You were no longer permitted to slaughter animals according to Jewish law. You could only stun them first, and then slaughter them. We knew-- we knew the law, but we didn't know what was going to happen, until one day, my younger brother was asked various questions by his teacher in school, where my fa-- how many knives my father had, and how he slaughtered them, and where he kept them. And my brother answered these questions very honestly. But when he came home, he repeated the conversation. My father said, they're going to confiscate my knives. And so we-- there was nothing we could do about it. Shortly thereafter, they came. They confiscated the knives. My father very wisely saved just one knife, a very small one, which could be used to slaughter chickens. Because from that time on, we no longer ate any meat, because it was not kosher. We had no slaughtered meat at all. 

And I remember the difficulty. As I think back, some of it was ludicrous. And yet, we would go through this. I would go out to a farm. We lived in a farming area. Go out to a farm. Buy a few chickens. A sack on my bicycle. I was, at that time, about 12 years old, 12, 13. 13, 14 years old. 

And I would bring them home, and late at night, my mother would take pots and pans and bang them together while my father slaughtered the chickens. And after he slaughtered them according to Jewish law, he then chopped off the heads, so then in case there was any investigation, we would have shown, at least, that they had been killed according to the new German law. That was the way in which we were able to have some meat, at least for the holidays and for the Sabbath. 

The additional changes that came about were the coolness of our neighbors. I remember going to one of our neighbors. We had had a very close relationship with them. They used our attic, and there were other things that we exchanged. They were next door neighbors. And their son had beaten up my younger brother, my youngest brother. And I went to complain to them about it. And they just laughed at it. And said, oh that was nothing. It could be worse. That kind of reaction. 

People would not stop to talk to us in the street, even though they had always done it before. They didn't visit our homes the way they used to. And then when, finally, we were ready to go-- and this was after my father had left-- oh, and I think even before that-- we had sold our furniture. We were not going to take it with us. And it was brought by a man who only lived, maybe, five miles away from our village. But he was afraid to send in the moving van and have the moving van take it from our home-- from a Jewish home-- back to his place, to his farm. And so he had hired a moving van from Wilhelmshaven, which is about 40 miles away from us. And they came-- that moving van came, picked up the-- our furniture, and then moved it, took it to Wilhelmshaven. And then he sent another truck to take it from there back to his home. You would go through all this expense, merely to show you are not trading, or you were not helping, any Jewish family, especially those who were, at that time, already leaving. 

My father had left before Passover, and as I was walking home from the synagogue, during Passover, I noticed that two policemen, not from our community, walking down our street. I immediately said to my friend, I says, they're going to our house. I didn't know why. But they did come. I came to the house, they were there. And they searched-- we were already packed at that time. We were leaving shortly thereafter. And they searched. They made us unpack everything that we had packed. 

We finally discovered what they were concerned about. And this was again, you have to remember the early years of Hitler. Hitler was still worried about what the world was going to say about him, about his ideas, and certainly about his treatment of Jews. And so, a rumor had been spread that we had taken photographs of the broken windows in the Hebrew school, which was part of the building in which we lived. We lived upstairs. That was the rabbi's quarters. Our Hebrew school was underneath, and they had smashed many of those windows. They thought we had taken pictures of that. 

They also thought that we had taken pictures of the boycott of Jewish stores. Because I remember living through that all. It was increased later on to a much greater extent. But during the time that I was still there, they had placed SR or SS people in front of the Jewish stores with cameras, taking pictures of anyone who went into those stores to purchase whatever they wanted to purchase. And they thought we had taken pictures of that. 

There had been a desecration of one or two graves on the Jewish cemetery. And again, they suspected we had done that. And so they searched everything. That even cut open some of our mattresses to make sure that there was nothing inside. We had not done any of that. But that was-- these were the things that were happening. 

The interesting thing is that the local policemen, at least we suspect, we don't-- we're not sure. But the local policeman refused to come and search our home. He was a next door neighbor. And we had some relationship with him. 

And so they imported two policemen from a small town not far from us, [INAUDIBLE], and they were the ones who did all the searching. 

INTERVIEWER: Did these people that searched your home show any papers of authority to do what they were doing? How did they identify themselves and prove to your satisfaction that you'd better cooperate? 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yes, they had an authority. They had a search warrant. Germany carried out whatever they did in a very legalistic way. Everything was done legal. 

Now, for example, the knives, my father's knives that were confiscated, we had a slip of paper for it. And when we came to this country, and we applied for some reparations, this was one of the documents we were able to use. And they paid us back for those knives. So that everything was done in a very legal fashion. 

I think this-- this covers, I would say, probably most of our experience. We came to America on a German boat. Actually, we came on the Bremen, because we-- we felt it would be safer for us to go on a German boat, to pay for it with German money, and so on. We were limited to the amount of money that one was allowed to take out. I think it was a 100 mark per person, which amounted to almost nothing. We were searched very thoroughly. But we were not among the wealthy people, or even well-to-do people, in the community. So our search was certainly more perfunctory than some of our other members of our community, who left at a later date. Many of them, I would say most of the community were saved. Most of them-- some of them were thrown into Dachau after the Kristallnacht in 1938. But they were released, and they left. But they left all their property. 

INTERVIEWER: What year did you leave? 

MEYER STRASSFELD: We arrived here in 1935. When we left, we had wanted to go visit, at least, our family in Poland. Go there first, and then leave. However, we were advised-- and apparently, it was correct-- that once you would leave German soil, we would not be permitted to re-enter and leave from Germany. And we already had made arrangements to leave from Hamburg or Bremen, I'm not sure. I think it was Bremen. To leave from there, and so we did not. We called. We spoke to them on the phone. But we never saw our family again. 

And in addition to my father's very large family, my mother's family-- my mother was also born in Poland, and so her family also lived in Poland. I want to, sort of, conclude with what happened to my family in Poland. 

My grandfather, as I indicated, was a very respected individual in this community. He was very well liked. He was a great scholar. The-- we were a rabbinic family, going back generations. Some of my uncles were rabbis, too, in Poland. My cousin, some of my cousins, were leading rabbis in the Polish community. But most of my grandfather's children lived with him. They lived sort of in a compound all around him. And so they were in the city of Stanislaw. 

And then in 1943, it was the holiday of Hoshana Rabbah, which is one of the days of the Sukkot festival, the festival of tabernacle. The Jews of Stanislaw were rounded up. The Germans always rounded up Jews, especially during holidays. So they were all rounded up, about 10,000 of them, and they were brought to the Jewish cemetery, where graves had been dug in front of them. And they were all lined up. 

My grandfather had around him at that time 123 members of his family, his sons, his daughters in law, his daughters, sons in law, his grandchildren, his great grandchild. My grandfather, being one of the spokesmen of his community, stood up front, addressed his community, encouraged them to die proudly, and not to give the Nazis any satisfaction, of weeping and cringing. And then he turned to the Nazi commander, and he said to him, you are vermin. You will die like vermin. And he spat into his face. He was immediately shot. And then the rest of them were shot during that day and the next day. 

We know about this from eyewitnesses who were there, who fell into the pit but had not been killed, who later on crawled out from there and made their way to Israel. They contacted my father, and that is how we knew of my grandfather's last days. 

This itself, of course, is a very difficult moment for me to remember. It is glorifying to know that my grandfather was that kind of person, who stood up to his oppressors. But on the other hand, I lost my family. 

An added point is that we know, through Wiesenthal's search, that's the Ukrainian who was second in command is living today, peacefully in Canada. That hurts. It hurts very much. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, rabbi, I-- I, uh, would just like to ask a couple of questions. You obviously have insight into a cultural milieu in Poland that no longer exists. We would like to, if you could, through your own recollection, through your family stories, reconstruct that culture milieu, a lost group of people, really. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: My family was a Hasidic family. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe, you know, physically-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --their-- you said the compound. The whole-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: I still remember, although I was only six years old, my grandfather had a very large home. At least, it seemed large to me at that time. And I know to go to his home, you had to go up steps. And he had-- one of the things that always intrigued me was the tremendous library that he had. 

There was one room, a very large room, which was covered from ground to the top. I mean, the walls were covered with books. And this was not merely a display library. My grandfather was a great scholar. And so those books were used repeatedly. 

And he had his family around him, which then gave him the opportunity to probably, on the one hand, to control their lives. He was a patriarch, and in that vein, wanted them to live their lives according to the Hasidic tenants that he observed, that he held high. Although, it's interesting, he permitted his sons to select different Hasidic rabbis, to whom they created some kind of adherence. 

My father, for example, was a Belz Hasid, which meant the disciple of Belz. My grandfather was Sadigere, which was a different group altogether. And it was very-- we accepted it, as long as his children still walked in the way he wanted them to. 

It was a religious, very religious community. Many of them struggled to make a living. Rabbinic positions did not pay very well in Poland. You had to struggle to make a living. And they were all blessed with large families. They had a lot of children. And so you had to raise them. 

My grandfather was also interested, when he arranged-- that he arranged most-- most of the marriages, certainly of his daughters. He arranged them. He looked for yihus, which meant someone who came from an important family, not necessarily a rich family, but a family of scholars, who himself was a scholar. One of my aunts married a man who was a scholar, who never made a living for her. He didn't know what it meant to work. He just sat and studied, and she ran a small business, which eked out a living for all of them. 

And I think my grandfather was blessed that some of his grandchildren, not all of them, some of his grandchildren really followed his way. Others did not. Some of them began to drift away and were no longer as religious as they were. And I suspect that it must have hurt my father-- my grandfather very much. 

It was interesting how he accepted my father and our life in Germany, which was not just a Hasidic life. And my grandfather wore a shtreimel, which is the fur hat, certainly on the holidays and the Sabbath. He wore the-- the kaftan and the white socks, certainly on Saturday and on the holidays. 

My grandmother died a long time ago, before I was born. So I never knew her, although my grandfather had remarried twice after that. But I do not really remember grandmothers. And this is why I don't talk about them. And he, uh-- 

The life, as I remember it as a child-- now my own life-- and this was not in Stanislaw. We left Stanislaw, and we moved to a city in Poland, which was Bielitz. We moved there, because my aunt from my mother's side was a wealthy woman, who had real estate, and who made an apartment available to us free of charge, which made it easier for my father, who did not practice the rabbinic when he lived in Poland, but wasn't in business, not a very good businessman, not a very successful businessman. In fact, his first enterprise, my mother had accumulated some money. When my mother was married, she was an orphan. So she had accumulated some money, which was the dowry that she brought to him. I understand, it was always a big dowry. My mother claims it was big. My father said it was not so big. But he ran it into the ground. I mean, he took it, and ran a business, and just-- it failed. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of business? 

MEYER STRASSFELD: A gro-- a store, not grocery, um, dry goods. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of businesses were people running on this compound, in order to keep body and soul together. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: I think there was a grocery store that one of my-- my aunts probably ran. I don't recall some of the other stores. But I remem-- I think she had a grocery store that was available. I th-- I remember somehow, but I don't think it was one of my relatives, there was a shoemaker. I think somebody else who lived in that area was a tailor. That's about the, um, the people that I remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Any farming? 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Not there, no. No, not there. Because this was a city. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you explain for us the wearing of the apparel that your grandfather wore on the holidays? People are perplexed by this garb that we see today, often. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Well, the Hasidic movement, per se, believed that they ought to dress differently from the society around them. So they would-- this was part of the Hasidic approach to Judaism. That was a requirement. To them, it became a very important requirement, to separate themselves not only religiously, not only that they couldn't eat with their neighbors, their non-Jewish neighbors, and they couldn't celebrate many other things with the non-Jewish neighbors, and not that their neighbors encouraged them to do that either. It was a very good arrangement, I think, as far as the society was concerned at that time. Both communities integrated only when they had to and were separate, deliberately, one from the other. 

So the wearing a kaftan, wearing a long gown, was important to look different. They would wear, of course, their payot. They didn't cut their beards. And also, they didn't cut their-- their-- the, uh, corners of-- of their head, again, to let it grow. To the Hasidic movement, this was very basic. To the other Orthodox Jews in the community, this was not as important, as long as they would cut it within Jewish law. No razor was used, but they used-- in those days, they used depilatories. Today, of course, we use electric shavers. 

Also black hats, you didn't wear any other kind of hat. It was a black hat, and you always had your kippah, or yarmulke, as they used to call it, underneath your hat. This was part of it. And so, this was part of the-- the outer garment that was very important. Plus, the, uh, the tallit katan, and the tzitzit, the fringes, that you see in Fiddler on the Roof, which is part of, uh, the-- the uniform, more or less, of the Jew. 

This was fine during the week. For the Sabbath, you had to dress still differently. And although some of the garments that they wore were no doubt taken from the Polish gentry, but as we did with many other things in Jewish life, we absorbed from the society around us certain things that we liked, we sanctified them, and we incorporated them into the structure of Jewish life. And so then, on the Sabbath, you didn't wear the plain kapoteh, which was a very plain cloth. But you wore zeiden kapoteh, which is a satin kind of thing. And the richer you were, the more satin it contained. 

And also, to change the hat gear, you wore the shtreimel, which was a fur hat. And again, there were different, different Hasidic groups, had different kinds of shtreimel. There were some who merely had pieces of fur, like tail. They had-- something I think that was requirements, at least seven of them. Again, your seven days of Sabbath, so you had your seven ones. Others did not had merely a fur hat, and that was more the Russian Hasidic group, had a fur hat, without the tail sticking out. 

So this was, again, it depended upon the Hasidic rabbis. The women, of course, had their hair always covered. They wore what is known as a sheitel, very similar to a-- what do-- what do you call it? 

INTERVIEWER: A wig. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: A wig. A wig. Some of Hasidic rabbis didn't even permit that. And what they called-- what they called a Stan tichel They used to wear a very lovely kind of bandana around their hair. Very often, some of them, the richer ones, would have it with some jewelry that would be attached to it, either fake jewelry or real jewelry. My grandmother-- my father always told me-- she never wore a sheitel. She wore a stan tichel So her hair was completely covered. That was the requirement. And that was part of the way in which they did it. 

You started Hebrew school-- and I did start-- I started Hebrew school at age 3, before public school. We didn't know about public schools. That wasn't required yet. And when, you know-- it was required after. Because when-- when Poland became Poland again, after World War I, they began to introduce compulsory education. But before that, compulsory education was not required. 

And so I started Hebrew school at age three. And I remember yet-- and this is again, was very traditional to be done that way. My father would wear his tallit, his prayer shawl, and carried me on his shoulders to the rabbi, who would teach me. And they would put candy on top of the letters. And every time I learned a letter-- this was the first lesson though. I learned a letter, I would be given a candy. And of course, candy was a rarity, like many other things were rare. 

There was-- staple food was what we ate. We didn't know how to eat other food. My father always tells the story when he came to Germany, and they served him bananas, which he had never seen in his life. And he didn't know how to eat it. And so he didn't peel the banana, he bit right into it. Until he was told-- you know, oranges were-- were strange. You had oranges only when you were sick. Otherwise you didn't serve that. You couldn't afford it. 

And so I started Cheder. And I-- when I was five years old, I went to what already became a yeshiva. I walked. I still remember that. Because this-- these were the incidents when, very often, I was beaten or my payots were-- were pulled. I walked to a city, which was Biala, which was just across a bridge. And they had a yeshiva. And so I studied there. 

At age of six-- I was five and a half, six-- I already studied the Bible, the Chumash. Because you know, in two years, I learned completely how to pray. I mean, prayer was-- it was obvious. You prayed as early as you could. Your parents prayed with you the minute you could recite words. The first thing that we learned was Shema Yisrael and Mode Ani. Uh, you know, and not some-- some rhymes. Because this is the way our society was built. 

That does not mean that there were-- I'm sort of painting a picture of only orthodoxy. There were many Jews who were not orthodox. Socialists. Jews who had rejected much of the teaching of the community, who wanted to become Poles, be very integrated with the Polish community. It didn't go as easily, because I think the anti-Semites didn't give us the opportunity to become involved in it. But there were others who simply said, no, we don't do this. So they didn't go to services every day, and they didn't observe as much. 

Naturally, being brought up in the kind of environment I was, I didn't meet many of them. But I do know that they exist. I know that they were here. I know that there were some Jews who were not Sabbath observers. The only difference is that in those communities, those who were not would hide it. It was not as it is reversed here. Here, the minority are sabbath observers. I mean, there, the minority were not sabbath observers. So those, let's say, you wanted to smoke, would hide somewhere in the bathroom and smoke. And no one saw it. But otherwise, they went along with some of the things. 

The holidays were such beautiful days that we celebrated together. I remember as a child on my way to the yeshiva, I see people running to the railroad station, which was near my house. And I see Jews are running at the railroad station. I says, where are you running? And they said that Belz Rebbe-- he was one of the great luminaries of the Hasidic movement-- was coming to town. And so everybody was going there. Well, I said, if they're going, I'm not going to go to school. So would I. And I went. 

And I still remember proudly telling my father that I shook hands with the Belz Rebbe, which was not easy. But I was so small, I stood between someone's legs, and I just put my hand through. And he was walking down-- people had made an aisle for him to go through, and he was shaking hands with everybody. And so I succeeded in doing that. And I'm sure that for weeks, I refused to wash that hand. 

I'm no-- I'm not a-- a Hassid. I somehow-- that I changed my upbringing, I think in Germany, brought about the change. And then when I came to the United States-- and I always used to tell this to my parents, who accepted it, as long as I was living a-- a Jewish life, a good Jewish life-- except that I told them that you probably saw great Hasidic rabbis. I did not see them. 

And actually, until World War II, the great, outstanding rabbi-- Hasidic rabbis of Europe never thought of coming to America. America was the treyfe medinah. It was not a good place to come to. They were very worried. That was one of the problems, that my grandfather didn't come. We wanted to get him here. And being the great Cantor that he was, we were able to get him to come from Poland. That was ear-- you know, the early years yet. 

My grandfather, first of all, said, I'm not going to go without the children. And you have to take all the children. And that was not possible. We just didn't have enough affidavits to bring them. And as I said, the Polish quota was oversubscribed. It was very, very difficult. But my grandfather, he could have done it. And so he refused to come. 

The other thing that he also worried about, it was come to this country. This country was known to be a non-religious-- jewishly speaking-- a non-religious community. What was going to happen to him? I remember, I was bah mitzvahed yet in Germany. And my grandfather sent me the pair of Tefillin. I didn't buy them in Germany. He bought them-- that was his gift to me. 

INTERVIEWER: He came to your bar mitz-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: No, no, no. He didn't come. No, I guess we didn't have the funds, and he didn't have the funds. And who would have thought? We didn't think in those terms in those days. But he sent me the Tefillin. And with that was a note. He was hoping that I would use them every day. Because again, German Jewry did not have a reputation for being very observant, very religious. I fulfilled my grandfather's wish, because I haven't missed a day. 

INTERVIEWER: Rabbi, in this day and age, when people are conscious of the status of women, I thought you might comment on the role of women in the shtetl, or Polish society, Jewish society, and German society. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: The society was a patriarchal society. The women's role was certainly a minor one, in some respects. It certainly was a minor one community wise. Women were not involved in the community. They had no say in community, what the community was doing. The women's important role was really the home. She shaped the home. She was responsible for creating the kind of life. And she raised her children more than her husband-- husband did. Because the husband was-- really worked very hard. And it didn't matter what profession he was in, or what work he did. What business he was in. There was no such thing as nine to five situations. That didn't exist. You worked, and worked, and worked. And so it was the woman who really created the kind of life that was passed on. 

I know that my mother, may her soul rest in peace, shaped us much more than my dad. Much more. Any empathy, and compassion, and commitment to Judaism that I have, I got from my father theoretically and intellectually, but from my mother, I got it emotionally. And it was an emotional part that certainly has been much more important, and has maintained and inspired me and my two brothers in the same way. 

She created the Sabbath by preparing for the Sabbath meal, by baking her-- the challah, and preparing the meal, and doing all the things to make it as beautiful as she could. She's the one who had absolute faith, tremendous amount of faith, that we would get out. Because we had difficulty. You know, we were trying to leave, and yet none of the two possibilities showed up for a while. And she said, God is going to be with us. 

And she said this when we came to this country. And life was not easy in this country. We came to Hazleton, Pennsylvania, where my father was the Cantor and the Shochet. It was difficult to make a living in those days. There were three sons to be raised. And he wanted us to study in yeshiva. So we went. 

I only lived in Hazleton for less than a year. Uh, then I went to yeshiva in New York. I studied there. And my two brothers followed a little later, after they were bar mitzvahed, they came. And three-- three sons were away. And they couldn't visit us as frequently, because they didn't have the funds for it. 

And so, the women's role, to some extent, was in molding, I think, the overall community in the feeling that they had, the commitment that they had. Yes women, community wise, assumed certain responsibilities. There were certain organizations that were run almost exclusively by women. 

One was the committee for dowring brides. This was a very important, very basic committee. Because marriages usually needed the dowry that the wife-- the bride could bring. And they had to encourage that and make it possible. So this was-- this fund-- fundraising was going on. And that money was made available to the poor brides. They would dress them. They would make sure, at least, that she had a bridal gown and at least a few other things that would go as her trousseau. The fact-- especially if they were orphans-- women were involved in orphanages that existed throughout Poland, much more than men. Men didn't-- these were women functions, to a great extent. We did not have-- at least I do not remember-- anything similar to our ladies auxiliaries and sisterhoods of synagogues. I don't remember that in Poland. But I was too young to remember that, to have noticed it. But the other groups, I know. Those were the things that were very, very important. Because I know my mother was involved in it. 

This was very basic, as an involvement for them, to do what they can in their community. They tried to make the home as beautiful as possible. That doesn't mean that some of the men weren't tyrants. I'm sure that they were. I'm sure that they were very patriarchal, demanding things. You know, one of the things that you find Hasidim, if they walked with their wives, never walked next to them. The man always walked before, and the wife walked behind. That's how they set it up. For whatever reason, I don't know. But that's how they set it up. They never walked next to each other. 

The wife had an inferior role, no doubt about it. But I think she made up for it in the realm of spirit of Jewishness, which was exclusively hers, because the husband had very little input. 

INTERVIEWER: You said the husband worked. There was no such thing as nine to five. But you had also said that many of the men just simply were scholars, or-- so what was this work that kept them-- kept them busy 12, 15 hours a day. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Well, no. Those who were scholars were scholars. And they-- and they just studied constantly. They studied constantly. If they wanted to be scholars, and they wanted to do it, and their whole life, their whole joy was in that. They would go to services early in the morning, probably come home for breakfast, return, and sit in groups, and study together. And the whole day was spent that way. And that went on and on. And the same thing even happened at night. 

My mother always tells me that I had a-- an uncle that was my father's brother, who was an outstanding scholar. And he became a scholar-- he was a young man. He became a scholar, because I was a very poor sleeper. So he would come to our house. At that time, he was not married. He would come to our house, and was so more or less babysitting. My parents went to sleep. But I didn't want to sleep. I was a very bad sleeper. So he would rock me. And he would sit and study. 

And of course, as he studied, he shook. And he had the-- the-- the, uh-- the carriage was tied with the gartl, which again, Hasidim wear out of separation-- to himself. But if he fell asleep, I would start crying. And so that way, he said that he was forced to keep on studying, because I didn't let him go to sleep. 

INTERVIEWER: You're saying then that the woman whose husband was a scholar was not only responsible for the home and the emotional-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --component-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Also for making a living. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did that work, in order to support many children and-- 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Well, apparently, they mana-- they did it. Again, I'm too young to remember the details. But I think they did it. They managed it, because two-- well, one of the things you have to realize, that a woman who was married to a scholar, that was more important than any diamonds and any jewelry that she had. She was known as talmud hakham's wife, you know. The scholar's wife. She wasn't known by her own name. Probably they didn't even know her-- they didn't even know her family name, because that wasn't-- that didn't count. But talmud hakham, who had a seat up front in the synagogue. 

You see, even the synagogue, you had a certain amount of status. So the scholars were up front. They sat at what was known as the eastern wall, the mizrach wall. And then lesser and lesser people sat in the back. You had the-- you must also remember that you had such a separation in some communities, where the-- the artisans had their own synagogues, would not even mix with the business people, because they were less learned. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. In the last five minutes that we have, rabbi-- this is fascinating. Can you describe this community structure that you're just beginning to touch on, division of scholars from artisans, from whatever. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: There were synagogues known as the shoemaker's synagogue or the tailor's synagogue. And people who were in that profession went to that synagogue. It was their synagogue. They were able to handle things easier, because then they were not challenged in any way as to knowledge. They ran the things as they understood it best. 

Such synagogues, for example, would not have a group that studied Talmud. But they would have a group that recited the psalms. Because that, everyone could do, even if you didn't understand what you were doing. Some of them were a little more learned. Then you would study the Chumash, the Bible, with translation, translation into Yiddish. So that each one was fulfilling his own way, in spite of the fact there was not-- that this was a structure that the overall society has established for them. And they were guided by it. 

It was not a happy time, let's say, for a marriage between the son of a shoemaker and the daughter of a scholar. It didn't happen too often. And if it did, you know, Jewish literature writes about this and describes all kinds of problems that arose as a result of it. Because people didn't. 

This was one of the-- the fact was, this was one of the things that the Hasidic movement changed. Before the Hasidic movement, these divisions were very strong and were not bridged too often. When the Hasidic movement began, it said, nothing doing. Every Jew was alike, whether he's scholar or not. As much as we admire scholarship, not everyone can make it. And therefore, you have to build up the other Jew who felt inferior, because he was not the scholar. 

See, scholarship was always admired. And I think we have then transposed Jewish scholarship into general scholarship. That's why Jews have always looked for scholarship as the epitome of life. So this was part of that. The, relationships I don't remember much of that. But mainly from what I've read and I've heard, these separations existed and were very often maintained. Except where the Hasidic groups moved in, and they sort of did away with it already. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: Three and a half million Jews in Poland. Was this the general lifestyle of those three and a half million people, or was this a very special group? 

MEYER STRASSFELD: No. I-- I would think that to some extent, the overall lifestyle of Polish Jewry was admMEYERtion of scholarship. And therefore, scholars were probably put into a special category. Then the businessmen, and you had a lot of very successful business people. You know, all the mills and large textiles, and large-- there were all run by Jews. Then the Warsaw-- overall, the Warsaw community, which I'm sure represented all kinds of Jews. Enlightened Jews, religious Jews, non-religious Jews, socialists. And they all had their own-- their own organizations and their-- their own get togethers. And yet, the overall spirit, however, I always think of Polish Jewry was a religious one. 

I think the religious community was probably the majority in Poland, not the other way around. The religious community was successful in electing representatives to the Polish parliament. So was the non-religious comm-- the Zionists-- now, for example, Zionism was frowned upon by this community completely. Whether religious Zionism or-- or Zionism, per se, that was frowned upon. But I remember, I had a few cousins who are Zionists. And their family was not very happy with that, because that already was a sign that they were not as religious. Which was true, but that's what they looked at. 

INTERVIEWER: In conclusion, about this culture that is no more. 

MEYER STRASSFELD: I don't think we-- we can recapture that culture. We can recapture some of the the themes, the goals of the culture, such as education, such as commitment to Judaism, such as a desire to ensure the continuity of the state of Israel. But none of us-- I, uh, I shouldn't say none. Few of us want to go back into a ghetto kind of set up, with the exception of a few Hasidic groups that you have in-- in-- in New York, who have created their own ghettos and feel most comfortable in that way. Because they feel completely threatened by the outside world. 

I think today, the majority of Jews, including orthodoxy, certainly want to live in the two worlds, the Jewish world and the general world, the culture. Where the cultures do not conflict, we can be together. Where there's a conflict, I think we have to be able to say, this I do not accept. This is not for me. And that's the only way, I think, we can continue building upon the culture that was. But I don't think is fit for the twentieth or twenty-first century anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Rabbi, thank you. Thank you very-- fantastic. And the reason I stopped it was, was the click of the camera, and we have to edit. Yeah, that was quiet. It was. The first time I heard it, it was-- 

