SUBJECT: OK, I find it's hard to, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So two things. 

SUBJECT: So if you ask me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We would like to hear [INAUDIBLE] life now, life with memories. To what extent, what you said about [INAUDIBLE] your father was very important. 

SUBJECT: It is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And also, you have a very particular way of remembering. Can you remember details? Do you remember pictures? I mean, there must be more under the German occupation. 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Well, I really-- I remember the rabbi with the dogs. That's with me all the time. And I remember the-- they-- the screaming, Schreien and the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You can use Yiddish words if you want. 

SUBJECT: Oh, [INAUDIBLE]. But really, it's like I don't even-- I can't even picture my mother sometimes. I mean, if I would see her, it's hard-- no image. 

CREW: Any time you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even in the forest with the partisans there might be incidents, pictures, when you were still under the German occupation-- 

SUBJECT: Occupation [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did those people look, those partisans? 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was 50, 60 people. What was the-- what would they do over a day? How'd you spend your time? What encounters with Germans? 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How should we do it? First-- maybe we should 

SUBJECT: Well, I think ask me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Maybe we should finish first with your life now and then go back. Are you-- OK, you then went with your aunt and uncle from Germany to the United States. Is that correct? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they found somehow-- people kept reading the papers. The Forverts at that time was a big Jewish paper and with a lot of name-- names. And my uncle, my father's brother, who came to America before the First World War, he lives in New Brunswick, New Jersey. And I came with my aunt and uncle Mahnovic And then, my uncle took me. 

And I remember when I got off the ship. And I had-- I didn't know what uncle-- I knew-- I couldn't imagine what America would look like or the people in America looked like. Somehow I had images that they would be wearing black coats and top hats-- I must have seen the old movie somewhere-- and riding carriages with the canes. And I had an image. I thought that's how my uncle looked. 

And then, when we got off the ship in New York, I saw a middle-aged man come over looking-- he was talking to somebody. And then, I guess, he was asking for mine-- for me. And she said, that-- she's there. And he came over. He says, I'm your uncle. 

I couldn't imagine that he was, you know, normal. He was dressed like all other people. I thought he'd be with a black top hat. But he was a wonderful man. And I stayed with him in New Jersey. 

My aunt was very jealous of me. Now, I could understand this. At that time, I couldn't. I came to them, and I stayed for eight years with them. 

And they were plain, working people. He was a painter. And he wasn't making that much to start with. But whatever they had, they shared-- he shared with me. 

And my aunt resented it. Because she had two children who were married. But they weren't doing so well. They were struggling. And she was also very jealous. She used to say that this is the "Gerinne Maedel." Or she would get in a fuss and say, "Gerinne isst zu viel." 

Because I would eat a lot. I never-- I hadn't seen all of the food in years. I would have two ice creams a day and a bunch of bananas and a bottle of milk. I gained 20 pounds no time. Or she would go around or she would take me to her organization. She would say, this is the "Gerinne Maedel" And people would look at me, and I was normal. They thought I would have horns, because I was a "Gerinne." 

And I wasn't so green for too long. I went to school. School was interesting. My uncle took me to school. And I mentioned before, I had no schooling all this time, and I was 14 years old. And I couldn't speak a word of English. 

And the teacher wanted to talk to me. And I didn't know what she was saying. And she showed me ceiling, floor, radiator. And I just-- you know, I wasn't [INAUDIBLE] I couldn't-- so I stayed in a class with-- they had all-- they had all the children who couldn't keep up. They were a little-- a little slow-- to get in the class for a while. 

But then, I graduated high school. And when I graduated high school, I made the highest honors for highest achievements. And my picture was the front page with big headlines, because they couldn't get over how well I adjusted in such a short time. 

And the teachers want me to get a scholarship to go to Institute of Merchandising in New York at that time. But those days, you know, it wasn't-- the girls had to look for careers, I thought why not get married. Why bother with school? My uncle was happy that I finished high school. 

But the teachers were very nice. They got me a job in a drugstore, so I could work. So go to school in the morning. And all my classes were arranged by-- I'd get all my classes from 8:00, 9:00 to 1:00 to get my credits. And then, from 1:00 to 9:00, I would work every day. And I work Sundays and Saturdays and holidays. 

And then, I came to New Britain I had [INAUDIBLE] oh, I was going to go to New York. But my relatives from-- the ones that came, they lived in Colchester. And they said, you're going to go to New York, single girl, Das passt nicht. Why don't you come to Connecticut? 

So I came to Connecticut, and I stayed with some relatives. And then, I met my husband, got married. And I became very involved in Jewish organizations. 

And Israel is very big-- I still feel guilty that I didn't go to Israel. So because of that, and I know how important it is for us to have Israel for survival of all Jews, that I've been very devoted-- dedicated, spent a lot of time working for all causes. And I've been very active in a lot of organizations, especially in Israel bonds. 

And last year, I was honored. I was Woman of the Year by State of Israel for doing all the work. And as much as I do, I always felt guilt that I didn't do enough. Because it's much easier for me to sit here and do or give than for the people that live in Israel. 

And I feel badly for them. Because it's already 34 years that Israel became a state. And most of the people are survivors. And they still didn't have a day of peace. And the children and the grandchildren don't know what peace is. And it's a big injustice. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you have, I understand, two living children. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I have a son who's 25. I have a daughter. She's 21. And she's in college. And my son finished college. And I'm trying to get them to be involved in Judaism and help all the Jews who are in-- who needs help and support in whatever way they can. And I hope they could carry on helping others, like I was helped by a lot of people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you lost one daughter you told me. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I lost two children. I had a son who was born, and he died right at birth. And then, I had a daughter. She was wonderful. And she had cancer. She died. And that was a great loss. 

Maybe a little bitter at the world or whatever. Because I lived through a Hitler, and I didn't have all the privileges that she could have had. And I survived. And she was born in this wonderful country with all these things going for her, the best doctors, and everything else. And she couldn't make it. So it's very sad. [CRYING] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you name any of the children after your mother? 

SUBJECT: Yes. My son is named after my father. And my daughter was named after my mother and my grandmother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you are with your children-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you are with your children that bear those names, do you think of your parents more? 

SUBJECT: I think of my parents all the time. It seems the older I get, the more I miss them. And I missed my parents when I was growing up, the-- as a teenager. And I missed my mother very much when I was getting married. After I was married, I needed her. 

And when I look at my daughter, she looks something like my mother, I think. I mean, maybe I like her to look like her. And in my eyes, she looks like my mother. 

I met some friends from shtetl And their son, who would have been my brother's age. And that was a very trying experience for me. Because when I think of my brother, I only think of him as a two-year-old child. But now, he would have been a grown man. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were talking about the war years, you said you kind of went through them quickly, because you didn't know whether we had-- you had time. But maybe we can just [INAUDIBLE] suggest that we go back to some images. 

SUBJECT: When we're hiding on the farm-- let's go back there. There were times we couldn't be seen by other farmers, because it was very dangerous. During harvest time, we couldn't go to the swamps. We had to stay in the-- and they would just put-- and we were hiding on the-- in the attic. 

And we had to be very quiet. We couldn't move. And if you had to urinate, there was no way of going. So I see it all the time. The men made pipe from the white birch. And whenever I see a white birch tree now, I think of it. I see it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they use the pipes for? 

SUBJECT: Well, I guess, the pipes get rid of the water. Because there was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No drainage. 

SUBJECT: --no way to-- we had no facilities. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said you remember the scene when the rabbi was killed. This was the very first day the Germans came, or? 

SUBJECT: There was little of...like they had a plan. And every week, they had something else. And this was they came to-- they killed gypsies one day. 

They found lots of gypsies. And they had them line up and dig their own graves. And then, they shot them. And when they get through-- got through the gypsies, they started on the rabbi. When they get through-- they got through with the rabbi, they started on somebody else. 

So whenever I hear a gypsy song, I always see the gypsies being shot. They called the Jews also gypsies. Our people were just wild. 

No nobody in our town-- everybody had a hiding places. But people wouldn't tell each other, because they were afraid if somebody would get caught, then they would torture them. Perhaps, they would squeal. So we didn't know what our next neighbor, what their hiding place was. And they didn't know where-- well, ours they knew. But my uncle had a hiding place, and we didn't know-- even my mother didn't know where it was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You did tell us what you thought regarding your daughter who had cancer. You think about what did a little girl think during the time that things were happening to Jews in the town and to gypsies, after that when you were fleeing with father, and after that when you were alone, sort of being shifted around-- 

SUBJECT: What do I think? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think to yourself? How did you think about the world? What-- 

SUBJECT: Well, every day was like a lifetime. The whole thing was like five years. But it was an eternity. Really, I don't know. It was a matter of survival. It was like a game people play. They're not going to get me. I'm going to make it. And every day was, you know, I made it another day. Unfortunately, a lot of people didn't make it. But I guess it keeps you going. 

I remember my grandmother. She was sick. And she couldn't go. And then they burned the house with her in it. So whenever I hear people talk about their grandparents, I see my grandmother's house burning with her in it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean she couldn't go? 

SUBJECT: She couldn't-- they told her to get out of the house. And she couldn't get out. She was sick in bed. So they just burned the house with her in it. I had a cat when I was little-- at home. And the cat was sitting on the windowsill. And the German went by, and he shot her, because she was in the Jewish home. So it was a Jewish cat. It's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A lot of images. 

SUBJECT: And even now, when I see fires and screaming. And I wake up in a sweat. I have nightmares. And I'm afraid to go to sleep at times. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is your most frequent nightmare? 

SUBJECT: The Germans-- we are hiding. I'm hiding. And the Germans are passing me by. And I am not breathing. And fires and flames. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember these pictures also during the day sometimes? 

SUBJECT: I try not to. I try to keep busy and involved, so I don't. But I do get depressed very easily. I remember my cousins. I had an aunt, and she had three children that were my age. And we used to play together. 

And they didn't survive, none of them, the entire family. And I see them. I see them the way they were dressed, the dress of white collar. 

I see my other aunt, my mother's sister. She was a schoolteacher. She was very pretty. And we had the same name. So her name was [INAUDIBLE] And I had a picture of her. But I see her all the time smiling. And her whole family, husband and children, lived in a different village. And he was a lawyer, her husband. I see them, for some reason, all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You also said that many daily events remind you of what's happened, like fires, birches. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah, when people talk about their parents. And definitely, I always think about mine or how wonderful it would be to have it, how much I miss them. Sometimes, people-- here, I get very angry. Some my friends are very annoyed, because they have a mother they have to take care of. Their mother is bothering them too much. I get-- inside, I get very upset. How lucky they are to have a mother. 

Matter of fact, I'll tell you what happened. One of my friends-- I won't mention any names-- called me up one day. Her parents died within a short period, both her parents. And this lady's, she's been married for many years, has grown children. 

She calls me up one day. She says, now I know how it feels to be an orphaned. I said, what do you mean? She's says, now my parents are both gone. I know how feel. 

I got so angry. I says, you have a lot of nerve to tell me that you know how it feels to be an orphan. I mean, she has no idea how it feels to be an orphan. But now she can relate to me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can anyone understand you? 

SUBJECT: I don't think so. Because the two-- it's like there are two of. There's one that wants to have a zest for life, want to live and enjoy. And there's another part of me that I have guilt feelings. I have guilt that I didn't go to Israel when I should have helped them build-- do whatever I could to contribute. But now that I'm so involved with other things for Israel, I feel a lot less-- I do my part here. Maybe I do more by being here than if I was there. 

And there's a sad part of me. And sometimes, I look at my children. And I feel badly that I don't think they know the real me, the one with the zest for life that I want to live and enjoy and have everybody be happy around me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever told them the story? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, it's very hard to tell. Because some people, something like this, they think you're imagining or exaggerating. And I really didn't tell them too much. 

But one day, my son has-- had a friend when he was young. And his friend's mother came from Germany. She was German, but she married a Jewish man after the war. And she converted to Judaism. And she was telling her children how rough she had during the war. 

I mean, everything is relative. She didn't have the butter or the sugar. So she really had a hard time. So then my son came, he says, mom, why didn't you ever tell me your experience in the war? So I had to laugh. And I told him something. 

And then, he was gone to a Hebrew school. And there, he was studying the Holocaust. So I told him. And little by little, I always tell him something. But it's really very difficult to tell. Or even, it's difficult for myself to realize what I went through, what people could go through. 

I mean, here are little things that people get upset, that my son would get upset. But here, that I went through all that, and I'm here able to talk about it. It's unthinkable. Sometimes I tell my husband. And I wonder if he really believes me or he thinks I'm exaggerating or imagining, because it's unbelievable. 

When I was in Siberia, I couldn't walk. I couldn't talk. My mouth was-- I had cankers in my mouth. They didn't think I would eve be able to walk again. I have marks all over my legs and my thighs. It was frozen. 

So when I came here, my uncle took me to the beach. And he said I should see that beach with my legs spread so that the sun would bleach out, because it was all black from the frostbite. And I would go tell people why you have those marks. It's unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is it possible that they might be able to know or not now-- that they will be able to now and that you could share whatever with friends-- 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is it possible that you might be able to tell-- 

SUBJECT: The children? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Children, friends, neighbors. 

SUBJECT: Well, you know, it's a funny story. People don't like to hear sad things. They only like to hear-- I find people like to hear good things. You ask someone, how are you? So wonderful. They don't ever hear you that you're hurting. Plenty of times, I'm hurting. But I just can't tell people that I'm hurting. And you put on a smile, and you go. You just become an actress, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: You learn to act. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So how do you feel in this new world and this new country and this new place? 

SUBJECT: Well, life-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Wonderful place. 

SUBJECT: Well, life goes on. The ones that survived, and I'm one of them, and we did the best we can. And we try to tell our children what happened as much as we can tell them. And I hope they learn as much as they can and know that everything is possible. 

It could happen here or anyplace else. And we hope it just doesn't happen. And that's why we have to support Israel. Because if Israel is strong independent for a year, Israel needs us. And we need Israel. 