INTERVIEWER 1: Just keep talking the way you want to. Maybe the question is-- 

SUBJECT 1: My language isn't so-- my lan-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, your language is very good. I just-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, it's not. 

SUBJECT 1: It's not perfect, but I'll try the best. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We spoke on the phone, you were very [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: I know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And if there's a part missing, you say it in Yiddish now. 

OK. OK. 

CREW: OK, they would like another mic check, please? Right, one at a time. 

SUBJECT 1: Should I count? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10. 

CREW: See, I don't know which mic goes to who, by the wires. Yes. OK, yeah. OK, sir, I'm sorry, could you start again? 

SUBJECT 1: One, two, three, four-- here in own place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You want us to just begin, or you want us-- 

CREW: Uh, we're just recording right now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, OK. What are you-- you're holding the pictures, Mr. Mayerowicz? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Dr. Laub told me, you know, there's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let me know whenever you're ready. We're ready. 

CREW: OK, we're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Mayerowicz where were you born? And can you tell us a little bit about your childhood? 

SUBJECT 1: I was born in Warta. This was this little town, we was 6,000 Jewish population. This was near Litzmannstadt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT 1: Near Litzmannstadt, this was-- 

SUBJECT 2: Lodz. 

SUBJECT 1: Lodz. This was by in between-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Poland. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, in Poland. This was between Posen and Litzmannstadt, this was in the middle. A little state-- a little city, was about 6,000, 7,000 Jewish population. The whole population was about 15,000, you know, Christian and Jewish together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And Mrs. Mayerowicz where were you born? 

SUBJECT 2: I was born in Lodz. 

SUBJECT 1: Litzmannstadt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So not far away. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't know each other. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell me a bit about your childhood, your family? 

SUBJECT 1: My childhood, we was four brothers and four sisters. My father-- let him stay in peace-- he was married, and his wife died. And later on, he remarried. And I am the youngest child from eight children-- the youngest one, the baby-- from the second marriage. My father was about 65 years when I was born. 

And so we lived together, and we worked together. He had a very comfortable business, he had a big farm. We was working, all children together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You worked on the farm? 

SUBJECT 1: No, I didn't work on the farm, we had people working for us. We was in wholesale cattle business with my brother, and with his children. His children all was older than I am. He was one, and the youngest child is-- my brother's-- was so old like I was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you had nephews. 

SUBJECT 1: I have nephews, and my brother, we was all working together for one business, you know? My father start in this business, and we make this bigger and bigger, until the war breaked out, and this was the end of it. They took everything away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you when the war broke out? 

SUBJECT 1: I was-- when the war broke out, I was 24 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember of your life at that particular point? When you realized that things were very bad. 

SUBJECT 1: In 1933, my nephew-- let him stay in peace-- but he was hanged up with another nine people-- the rabbi from the city, and the rabbi's son. I have even, you know, here written down-- not written down, but here, they all in the pictures, and I can mention their names, even, where they are over here. From the committee, they was-- six people was hanged up, six or seven, I don't remember now exactly, because this is so many years already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was in 1932? 

SUBJECT 1: This was in 19-- they hanged them up in 1941. This is-- this is about 37, 38 years already, and I don't-- I don't even remember all of-- it was a small city. And I, we all must know each other by name. But this is so many years, I don't even, you know, the whole picture over here, what I have here from everybody, I don't even recall the names already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You don't remember anything bad happening until 1939? Up till 1939 life was normal? 

SUBJECT 1: Life was normal, everything was normal. But I remember one thing. In 1933, when Hitler came to power, and he said what he is going to do with us Jews, my oldest nephew, what he was hanged up, his name was Fawisz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you mean by, "He was hanged up?" 

SUBJECT 1: He was hanged. In 1941, they hanged up 10 Jews. And my nephew, he was in the committee, and for this they hanged up, they hanged up six people from the committee, and he was one from them. I have him here in the picture. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tell us how it developed? The Germans came in, and-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us. 

SUBJECT 1: In '33, my brother-- my nephew said to his father, to my brother-- we was all together-- "Let's sell the whole business and let everybody go to Israel." And let's take with us, you know, we could have afforded to take 50 or 100 people with us. 'Cause this was very easy in this time, to go to Israel. 

My brother, my father-- let them stay in peace-- they said, "I have here Israel. I am not going over there. Nobody will chase me out from my house, and will take away my business, because I work in this my whole life, and I am not giving up." Well, we got to mind of what the father say, the father was the boss of the house. And then, later on, you know, in 1939 when the war breaked out, I was in the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the Polish army? 

SUBJECT 1: In the Polish army. I was a corporal in the Polish army, and they took me in four weeks before the war started. At this time, I had a child from three months already. I was married, and I had a child from three months. They took me into the war, and I was in the war. 

Well, the-- the Germans, they were so strong, they come with such an army that the Polish army couldn't do anything against. In the first day, we saw that we are lost already. But anyway, I was for 11 weeks, I wasn't home. And I was giving up my weapons-- this was in Chelmno in Poland. The Russian came from one side, and the German come from the other side, and the Russian took away my weapons from us. 

And later on, they took us in a camp, and they want us, everybody to go to Russia with them. But they was going with us in the night time, and in the night time, I thought, I can escape from them. This was a big, big, huge-- how you can call this? A wald you know, a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Forest. 

SUBJECT 1: A forest. And I just ran into the forest, because we had one tank in the back, and one tank in the front. We was a few thousand people. And I just escaped, I went into the forest very deep, and I climb up a big tree. And I was sitting over there, and they passed me. And I was sitting over there till the morning. 

This was on account because I know that I have a family, and I have a wife, and I have a child from three months. When I went to the war, my child was three months old. And I don't have to tell your parents lived, you know, like children, and I want to go home to see my child. 

And I was sitting over there till the morning. In the morning, I started to go by myself, home. Wasn't so easy to go home, because we so far away, you know, that the Germans are coming on horses, you know? We was-- I was running away. But anyway, I came home. In 1939, I came home. 

And the hunger was right away, but we didn't have any hunger, because in this time, when he came home, we start till to make business. Not openly, like before, because we know that we are under pressure. But anyway, we make a little business. Later on, they came over, you know, the Gestapo came over, and they ask us, "What do you earn?" 

My father didn't live in this time already, he died. My brother was the president, my oldest brother, his name was Riven. And he was president from the company. And he told him, we have 50 acres of land, we have so much and so much cattles, we have so much and so much horses, and we had our truck, our own, and we had wagons and everything. 

We show them everything, and they took everything over. Later on, everybody start to work for them. And I started to work for them, and they took me into the farm to work. They took over all the Jewish land-- was a lot of Jews, you know, in my city, where they had a lot of land. 

They took over all the land, and we got to start to work for them. Even they didn't pay us a penny, not even a penny. They didn't ask you even for where you live. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you eat? How did you live if they didn't pay? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, you eat, you know. We had-- we had supply, because I started to work for them, and I was working in the field. I was a foreman right away, you know. I had about 100 girls under me, and I was working. And every night, before I came home, I took home a few potatoes with me, whatever we could just to survive. 

And this was until 1941. They started to send away all the Judes. We was hiding. I was at this time a young man, too. But my brother was in the committee-- not my brother, my nephew was in the committee. You know, and he give me a sign, when we will have an alarm to send everybody away, the whole Judes. 

And I just was very family all around over there. And I had a bicycle, and I took my bicycle, and I took off my yellow lot what I have in my hands. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your star. 

SUBJECT 1: My star. And I run away, with my bicycle in the country. And I was sitting over there a day, or two days, until I sent home a message that I can home-- I can come home early. Then my wife sent me a message-- stay another day, or stay another day. And later on, two, three days later, I came home. 

When I come home, was-- was just a pity. I was ashamed even to go out in, you know, on the street. Everybody was looking at me. "From where are you coming? How in the world you are here? Didn't you send you away?" But you couldn't answer him. This was going on till 1941. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why were you ashamed? 

SUBJECT 1: I was ashamed because I was a young man. Every-- every young man was sending away, you know. And I was just the only one at home. Maybe was another few, you know. This was-- I was ashamed. You know, you couldn't even say that, you know, that my brother told me to run away. But anyway, I escaped from this, everything. 

And later on, when all the young people was already in concentration camp, they were starving over there. I don't have to tell you, because that's no secret, everybody know about this. And we start to send them out packages. 

I had a brother-in-law over there in concentration camp already. Who didn't? Everybody had somebody. We started to send those packages, but we couldn't send out the packages from our city, because they would catch us right away. Then we hired a Polish guy with two horses, and we give him about 100 packages. And he took those packages to a little town not far away from our city. 

We paid him good. We paid him good, and he took over to this station, and he sent this away. That's was going maybe about three, four months. Until one, when from our citizen, he was-- when the Polish was over there, he was a Polak. 

Later on, when the German came, his name was Miller, he was a German. And he find us out, and he went to the police. And he told the police, "You know what? The Jewish send the go away packages to the conc-- in concentration camps. We have to do something about." All of a sudden, about 2 o'clock or 3 o'clock in the morning, one morning, we send out packages at night, about 2 o'clock. They was waiting for the wagon, until the wagon came up. And in the way, they know where he is going. 

They catch the wagon. When they catch the wagon, they said that the-- that the Jewish committee knew about. That this was organized from the Jewish committee. But this was the biggest lie. The Jewish committee, they know that we send the go away packages. But everybody could do whatever he wants, you know. But the committee didn't put their hands in this. 

Way on, they came, and they want to arrest the whole committee, the Jewish committee. Who will run away-- he hide for himself, was good. But my brother, he didn't run away. He didn't believe in this, to run away-- my nephew. And he didn't run away, and they took him-- not just him, they took another six or seven from the committtee to the police, and they arrest him, they put him to jail. 

When they put him to jail, we know what's going to happen. All of a sudden, we see one morning that they make-- how you call this? A gallow to hang people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Gallows. 

SUBJECT 1: A A They make a gallows, and we saw already what's going on. They arrest-- not just from the committee-- the nicest people from the whole city. The rabbi with his son, a nice man, the rabbi, what can I tell you? The big black beard, a nice looking good man. And his son. 

And another people, they over there 10 people already. All of a sudden, we know a policemen very good. He came over to my house every Friday to eat fish. My wife, let her stay in peace, she was a very good cook. He came over, and he knew the whole family very good. 

And we begged him to let out my brother. All We will give him money, we will give him gold, whatever we could. And we give him everything. And he let him out. And the other police, they knew my brother very well. All of a sudden, one policeman from the other police, he saw my brother is going out, and he know that he is in jail. 

And he called him up, "Hey, Fawisz where are you going?" He said, "Well, they let me out." He said, "No, they didn't let you out. Come back." And he took him back. He took him back to jail. 

And I had a neighbor of mine, he was the richest man in the city. His name was Layzer Munter He was in there too, because they took all of the nicest people, the richest people in the city, in jail. And he came home, he had run away in another street where they didn't see him. And I used to live with him together like in one house. 

And when he came home, I asked him, "How in the world could you escape?" He said, "Well, your nephew went in another street, and I went to another street, and I just escaped." What can I tell you, he was shaking-- not like a leaf. I never in my life saw such a thing, when he came home. 

And we had a hiding place in my house. I had, in the attic, I have a little hiding place. And he was hiding over there. He didn't went out, you know, until the execution was made. 

All of a sudden, they came over, one day when the gallow was made, and we will hang up those people. And you should see how they hang them up. They took the hands, and tied the hands up in the back. They ripped off your shirts, you know? In the hair, they splashed the hair, that they look-- when they came over there-- they look like really, bandits, every one of them. 

But anyway, the first one was the rabbi-- to go up. And when he started to go up, was over there a lieutenant from our city, and he begged him. "Please, let my child go. Hang me up, let my child go." And he took the gun, and he started to hit him over the head, that the blood started to run already. Well, he's hurt, there is nothing to do. 

They brought them all up, and they select 10 Jews-- one was even my best friend, he is now in Israel. And everybody have to hang up one, one-by-one. My best friend hanged up my brother-- my, my nephew. But anyway, if they would ask me to do it, I have to do it too. Everybody got to do it. Otherwise, they would hanged up them. 

And this was the execution. Later, they was hanging over there about two hours. And we came over with wagons, and they just told throw them in from the gallow. They cut off the ropes, they throw them in, like you'd throw in-- what can I tell you-- not pigs, pigs is a livestock, you know. You don't throw in pigs like this. Just in one wagon, 10 people, one-by-one. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did everyone have to watch? 

SUBJECT 1: Everybody have to watch, the whole city have to watch it. Even my, my-- my nephew, he had our daughter, only one daughter. She got to come out and to watch this. Everybody from the city. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your nephew's child had to watch? 

SUBJECT 1: My nephew's child, and his wife, and my brother, and everybody from the family-- especially from the families, you know-- everybody got to go out. And the whole city Jews-- wasn't many Jews already in this time-- maybe was left about 1,000 Jews, or 1,500 Jews from the whole city, because everybody was in concentration camp already. 

And the SS was around. And they called out that nobody should even move, and nobody should cry. Whoever is going to cry, we will kill them right away. You've got to obey the law, because if somebody have a gun in the hand, he have the law. You can't do anything about it. 

And we buried them in one grave, all ten. Not with any caskets, not even a board. We throw them just in like they came. But before when they went up to get executed, the rabbi said a prayer with everybody. And he said, everybody is going on Kiddush Hashem and God will punish you for. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have pictures of your nephew? Is that what you're holding? Can you show that to the camera? 

SUBJECT 1: Here I have a picture of my nephew. But this was the whole committee. What I have here, a picture, this is the whole committee. Here was six from them was hanged up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Six of those-- 

SUBJECT 1: Six of them from here. But this is my nephew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they were hung because they sent packages? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. They said so, they accused them. But this was not true. 

SUBJECT 2: Whatever they wanted to say, they said, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: And another thing. 

SUBJECT 2: It was lies. They made up lies. 

SUBJECT 1: Two weeks before, they hanged up 10 people in our neighboring city for no excuse, for no nothing. The city used to call-- Zdunska Wola this was Purim. They hanged up on Purim, and this was two weeks before-- two weeks later. This was two weeks before Pesach, they hanged up our ten people from our city. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who took that picture, and why was it taken? 

SUBJECT 1: This picture was taken before-- before everything was happened. They just make, you know, the committee make that picture. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The committee was who? Committee of-- 

SUBJECT 1: Committee of the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like a council? Like a federation? 

SUBJECT 1: Like a council, like a federation. Like everybody's city, you know, have the White House, they have over there, you know, a representative. And this was the representative in our city. This was the Jewish committee. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have some other pictures from that time? 

SUBJECT 1: Sure. I have other pictures from this time. Here is few weeks before, we was by minyan in the morning davening Everybody had the taleysim on. And a policeman, Gestapo, came over. And somebody told him that they are making the prayers over there, the Jews. And he took out everybody, he tried to kill them. But he said no, I'm going to let you alive, I'm going to just take a picture. And this is the picture from this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get that picture? 

SUBJECT 1: This picture-- my sister, she was freed-- I was freed in 1945, she was freed in 1944, because she lived-- she lived over in Litzmannstadt, in the ghetto. She was in the ghetto. I was, I tell you later, I was in the ghetto too, with my sister together. But she lived over, and later on, she went to our city after the war, right away, and she find those pictures over there, by the photograph. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She found them where? 

SUBJECT 1: She found it in my city, in Poland, in Warta. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were they? 

SUBJECT 1: In Warta. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No no, in where were they, in the city? 

SUBJECT 1: They was by the photograph, you know, what he took the pictures. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She went into the house of the German that took them? 

SUBJECT 1: No, not the house of the German. This was a special man, what he-- they took him over, you know, to make those pictures. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, he was a local person. 

SUBJECT 1: He was a local person. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A local photographer. 

SUBJECT 1: A local photographer. And he took those pictures, and he took-- she took them out from there, this picture. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mrs. Mayerowicz where were you doing during this time, 1930-- 1930's? 

SUBJECT 2: I was in Lodz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your family doing? What were they doing? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, my father died, he was very young. And-- and I was left, you know, I had another sister and a brother. I was the oldest. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you in the '30s? 

SUBJECT 2: About 15. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 15. 

SUBJECT 2: 16. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember of your life before, and what was it like for you? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, before, it was normal. And then, when the German came, it was no good anymore. We had a store, you know, and my mother and father, they were working in the store. And I went to school. And then, when my father died, I had to go to support. There were smaller children than me, I was the oldest. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what happened? Why did things change? How did things change? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, when the German came-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Everything was fine until the Germans came? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing-- 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was normal. Well, we were afraid, you know. But everything was normal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why didn't you leave, if you were afraid? 

SUBJECT 2: There was no place where to go. We had no place where to go. Some people had family, you know, in Israel, or in America. Some people escaped. We couldn't escape, because we have no place where to go. We didn't have any relatives, so we couldn't go nowhere. And I start working, you know, to support-- 

SUBJECT 1: Family. 

SUBJECT 2: The family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened? 

SUBJECT 1: And then they send away, when the German came, you know? They send away my mother. They send her-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Send away-- 

SUBJECT 2: The German. They send-- 

SUBJECT 1: Concentra-- not the concentration camp. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: To, to burn them, to Chelmno. 

SUBJECT 2: To Chelmno, to Chelmno, they sent away-- and my brother, they sent away my brother. My mother was that time like, 40 years old. They sent away my brother-- 

SUBJECT 1: To concentration camp. 

SUBJECT 2: And my sister was young. They sent her, you know, with my mother. They sent them together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was in Chelmno? 

SUBJECT 1: Chelmno was a crematorium. This was the crematorium, in Chelmno. But our whole-- like here, Connecticut, you know? The whole Connecticut belonged to this crematorium Chelmno. In they sent everybody from our towns, all around. From Litzmannstadt, and from Pabianice, and from Zdunska Wola And all those cities, from Wielun and sieradz from all those cities. 

SUBJECT 2: From the small cities, they sent away. 

SUBJECT 1: They send away everybody, you know, to Chelmno, and over there. They just told him over there to get undressed, and they give everybody a piece of soap, and told them to go in, and to-- and to wash themselves. And over there, they close the doors, and they let in the gas, and they gas them over there. That was Chelmno. 

SUBJECT 2: Well, it wasn't like that, you know. They sent away my brother, because there was no food, you know. 

SUBJECT 1: They send away your brother to the concentration camp. 

SUBJECT 2: They didn't send him-- they didn't send away him to the concentration camp. They sent to Poznan you know? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, that was a concentration camp, Posen. 

SUBJECT 2: They sent-- they sent him for work over there. And he didn't have any food, my mother used to give away. You know, we, we got so much bread a day, you know. They gave us like, a quarter of a bread. And they said, you know, this is for two days. So, you know, he was a young boy, he was like, 14 years old, and he was hungry always. 

So she gave away. My mother got thinner and thinner, and he saw this, and it bothered him. So he-- he went away to Posen, you know, to Poznan. And he went away to Poznan because he figures every day, if he's going to work, he is going to have no food to eat. 

But we never-- yes, he wrote once a letter to us. You know, he is in camp, and if we can, we should send him something-- a pair of shoes. So we send him a pair of shoes, and this was the end. One letter he sent to us, to my mother. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you in a ghetto-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, this was a ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were in ghetto Lodz. 

SUBJECT 2: Ghetto Lodz, yes. We couldn't go no place, just in the ghetto. We were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the beginning of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? 

SUBJECT 2: In the beginning, well, you know, we were working, you know? We were working-- no in the ghetto. But then, but then, you know, we were working for German, you know? We worked-- we had a shop. I was-- then I got older, I was going with a boy, and we got married, you know? And we were working-- we took over there, you know, he sent us some work over there. We took-- vie heist vas mit ... vist du 

SUBJECT 1: vas? 

SUBJECT 2: mit der arbeyt ... We were working in trikot you know what trikot is-- underwear, you know, this-- 

SUBJECT 1: Shirts and-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, and we-- and we had a shop. And we took over there from, you know, we were working for them. He gave us stuff. The Germans, [? Diesel. ?] So We were working for them, and then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Diesel ?] was his name? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, [? Diesel ?] was the company. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Diesel ?] was the company. 

SUBJECT 2: [? Diesel, ?] yeah, was the company, and we were working for them. And then, when we couldn't go over there, in their shop, so we home the machines, everything, and we were working home. So they used to send us stuff, you know, to make-- they used to send us this-- 

SUBJECT 1: Production. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why couldn't you go to the factory? 

SUBJECT 2: Because it was out of-- it wasn't the ghetto over there. We were-- we were living in a ghetto. They give us so much space, here you live. We couldn't go there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was your home in the ghetto before, or did you have to move-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, our home was in the ghetto, but we didn't work in the ghetto. We worked not in the ghetto, you know, we were out-- yeah, we worked in the town. But then we couldn't go anymore there, so they send us, they send us over here, the work. But then, you know, they couldn't do this anymore, they were afraid for themselves, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did working help you in any way? Food, or not being taken-- 

SUBJECT 2: He paid us, yes. He paid us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, not being taken away on transport, did this give you a security? 

SUBJECT 2: No. Well, no. He paid us, you know, you work for somebody, they pay you. You know, whatever you make, they pay you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: In the ghetto, yeah. But then he couldn't do this anymore, he was afraid for himself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was he? 

SUBJECT 2: The [? Diesel, ?] you know. 

SUBJECT 1: German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: His name was [? Diesel? ?] 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, the company's name was [? Diesel. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was his first name, the name of the man that owned it? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't know, I think-- I don't remember. I wouldn't remember. His, the company was [? Diesel. ?] I don't remember this street. Because it's a long time. I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mrs. Mayerowicz you worked for them, not officially? Is that-- 

SUBJECT 2: We worked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Officially? 

SUBJECT 2: For years, we worked for them We took out, you know, there was a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Officially or not? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, it was a company. 

SUBJECT 1: It was a big company. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was a German company with-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was a German, yes. It was a German company, and we worked for them. And we-- we did very well over there. It was a nice company. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Until-- 

SUBJECT 2: Until, you know-- 

SUBJECT 1: Until Hitler came. 

SUBJECT 2: They send us out, they said the Jews can't work over there anymore, you know? You're not suppo-- only German. So we went in the ghetto. And he knew us, you know, he liked the work, what we did for him. So he send us the work to the house. But then he couldn't do it anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So until when could you work in your house for him? What year? 

SUBJECT 2: I think-- I think '42, '41. 

SUBJECT 1: No, this was in '40, it was the ghetto already made in Litzmannstadt. 

SUBJECT 2: Until '40. 

SUBJECT 1: Until the ghetto was made. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes, and then, you know-- 

SUBJECT 1: 'Cause they started the ghetto, this was the first ghetto, in Litzmannstadt. This was the first ghetto in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, you were not yet in the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 1: No, was in my ghetto in-- in Warta. 

SUBJECT 2: He wasn't-- he wasn't where I was. 

SUBJECT 1: Neighboring city. 

SUBJECT 2: This is-- he lived-- he lived in a small city, we lived in Lodz. It's a different, we-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let me come back in. I'm very struck by what you said before. Jews continued praying daily, knowing that if they were caught, you are going to be executed? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, we was praying anyway. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And they knew that they were-- if they were caught, they would be hanged? 

SUBJECT 1: They knew everything, but they-- they went. And yeah, like you say in Yiddish, kiddush hashem They have to make the prayers, and they came together every morning. You know, we made this in a difference-- in a different way. We prayed, let me say, today in my house, and tomorrow in your house. And after tomorrow, somebody else's house. And they shouldn't-- 

SUBJECT 2: Shouldn't be the same, you know, the same place. 

SUBJECT 1: That they shouldn't catch up with us. This was the thing, what we organized ourselves to do it. And that's what we was doing. But all of a sudden, they came to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] and they catched us anyway. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And did the prayers continue after that? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Nevertheless. 

SUBJECT 1: Never, never-- we never stopped this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what went on later. 

SUBJECT 1: I tell you, in 1941, I had a-- we used to live in a big house-- this wasn't our house. I used to live by-- this was a six family house. And my neighbor, his name was Abraham Nayman And he had a mother in Litzmannstadt ghetto, and he had a call, or she had wrote him a letter with somebody, because he used to make with a Christian business. He used to bring in letters, you know, from the ghetto, from Litzmannstadt ghetto. 

And he was in contact with his brother-- with his mother. And all of a sudden, his mother died over there. And we used to make the prayers every day in his house. And I used to live upstairs. Once a morning-- and I used to do the same thing, I used to-- somebody brought me all letters, you know, and [INAUDIBLE]. And I used to do the same thing what he used to do. 

But anyway, this was at night. In the morning, somebody came over to me and told me, "Mr. Mayerowicz we need you to minyan." You know what minyan is? 10 Jews come together, you have to make a minyan. And I came together downstairs, and we start to pray. 

All of a sudden, another Jew, a very rich Jew, came around. And he said, "You better take off your taleysim un tefilin Because we are-- around the whole city is around from Gestapo, and they searching every Jewish house. And whatever they catch, they-- they took away from you, and they-- they will kill you. 

What can I tell you? I took off my talis un tefilin and I went upstairs to my wife. And all of a sudden, I see my brother is over there. I have here a picture from my brother, too. But anyway, he was a very, a very healthy man. And I told him-- Hersch was his name-- Hersch I said, "We are in trouble. You see, I have over here so much letters and everything. If they will see this, they catch me, they'll hang me up right away." 

And I was-- I had a very nice house with a balcony outside. And I said to my brother, "You know what? You go down, go to the balcony, and I'm going to throw you down-- I'll put this everything in a sack-- and I'll throw you everything down, and you will run away with this." He wants to go down, the Gestapo is there already, and they didn't let him down. 

But all over-- but he was so-- he didn't, he wasn't afraid for nothing. And he just passed them, and he run away, and he escaped from them. And he came to over there, and I was waiting for him, and I throw this down to him, and he run away from there. 

In a neighboring, a Polish girl, what his father-- her father used to work for us, and make the living for us. She saw this, and she wants to come in, and to tell the Gestapo what she saw over there. And I was downstairs, and I saw that she was-- she was knocking at the door. That's was a big door, we didn't let her in. That's what-- if we would let her in, they would hang me up right away. 

But we didn't let her in, and this passed. Later on, we got to move out from there anyway, because this wasn't belonged to the ghetto already. This was in 1941, we got to move out, and we move somewhere else. They give me a little room. This was until 1942. We used to live in the little room over there. Leader 

Later, they give me another room, because they want somebody else over there. And in 1942, I was-- I get up all the time, you know, about 5 o'clock in the morning. I wasn't a long sleeper. I couldn't sleep long, because every day was a history. 

I'm going out, and I see a neighbor of mine-- he was a tailor. They make a shop in our city, and we used to make those uniforms for the Gestapo, and for the military. We used to make-- and they took a whole block, and they just knocked out the-- the walls. And they make one block-- this was about 200, you know, tailors who was working over there. 

They was working day and night, 24 hours a day. In the mornings, about 5 o'clock, I see that the man is coming around. His name was Manashe Colton. And I ask him, "Manashe, what's the matter? You are running so wildly. He said, Aron it's not good. Do whatever you can, because the whole city is around with Gestapo, and they want to send us out, and I believe that's the end of us." 

But a day or two before, they make-- we had two huge synagogues around where I used to live. This was maybe about-- by 50 feet from my house, where I used to live. We had two big synagogues. And they burned up those two synagogues. And this was a huge place, maybe about two acres of land, or three acres of land. 

And they organized us over there, all the time when they need something. Because in the last minute before they start to evacuate us, they count us every night. Before this, when they hanged up those ten peoples, two weeks later-- this was everything in this period, in 1942. Two weeks later was in our city-- she came from a neighboring city-- a lady with her last little son, he was 12 years, or 13 years old. 

And we hear a rumour that they will send out all children, from 10 years old, they will send them out. And she had six children what they was cremated already, and she came to our city to escape from this with her last little son, he was about 12 years old. And the little son with her start to run away from our city. They took off, you know, the yellow pass. 

And they catch them. When they catch them, they came back, and they make right away-- how you call it, a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Gallow. 

SUBJECT 1: A gallow. And they hanged up this little boy, from 12 years. What, what can I tell you? That little boy was yelling! I never in my life hear such thing. The sound is still in my ears. It's so many years. But they hanged him up anyway. 

A week or two weeks later, they make a big grave. We didn't know what this grave should be, in this place where the synagogue was. And later on, we find out what the grave was. In this moment, when that's Manashe Colton told me that we are surrounded, the whole city is surrounded with the Gestapo, and with SA-- SA. 

And I went in quietly to my wife-- not in a rush-- and I told her very quiet. Golda was her name. "Golda please get out from bed." She said, "What's the matter? 5 o'clock in the morning," I told her the story, and get dressed our little child, because I believe that's the last minutes, ours. 

She got dressed, and she dressed up my little child. And about 10 minutes later, they was already in my house, the Gestapo. And he said, "All the Jews have to go out in the concentrate, here, in this place, where-- where we had the synagogue. And whatever was left, you know, everybody got to go out. 

And we came out over there, and my little girl-- she was three years, or three and a half years at this time already. They're old, sick people, what there was in the town, and all the elderly people, what they couldn't work, they was around in this hole. And over there, was my mother-in-law, too. 

And all of a sudden, my little child, from three years old, I have my little girl. She started to cry, "Daddy, over there is the mother-in-law, why don't you call her in over here?" 

SUBJECT 2: The grandma, no? 

SUBJECT 1: The grandma, here is your grandma. Why-- why don't you call her in over here. I said, "She cannot walk." She was paralyzed, she couldn't walk. And all the sick people, they was around over there. 

Then all of a sudden, they come to a segregation. They come to a segregation, they start to segregate. In the right, and in the left. We know in the right, you will go for work, to concentration camp. In the left, we know you're going to the crematorium, to Chelmno. 

But anyway, they came over to me, and they told me to go in the right. I said, I want to take my child and my wife with me, otherwise I am not going. The Gestapo took right away something and hit me over my head. And they both started to run, and my child started to cry. 

But anyway, I went in the left side, and I went with all the dead people, you know. They sent us over, was a very big church. We was over there, about 1,200 people in one house, in one church. We came over there to this church. In another church was those people what that later went to Litzmannstadt together. 

We was over there, and we saw over there that we are dead people. Couldn't do anything about it. We was waiting every minute, you know, that those cars should come over and take to Chelmno. But I saw over there a policeman, what he was-- a Polish, by the Polish government, he was a Polish policeman. 

Later on, he turned over, and he was a German policeman. His name was-- I don't-- right now I don't recall his name. But anyway. And he saw me over there, and he said to me, "Mr. Mayerowicz you are here too?" He was wondering. I said yeah, and I told him the whole story. 

And I told him, yeah-- [INAUDIBLE]. I told him, "Listen, if you will take me out with my wife, and with my child," I had lots of gold, and diamonds with me, you know? My wife-- let her stay in peace-- she had a whole bag, you know, with diamonds, and with gold, and with everything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did she get them? 

SUBJECT 1: We-- we had this. We was rich people at home, you know. We got it. In the old country. This was our whole security, you know, that the Jew always, you know, is with his wanderstock in the hand, you know, [INAUDIBLE] everybody got jewels. 

And I told him, "I'll give you everything if you let out me with my wife." He promised me he will. And behind us was a Polak standing, and he heard the whole conversation what I have with him. Maybe a half an hour later, somebody came to him, to the door-- you couldn't even go to the door, even if you want to, were so many thousands of people. 

Couldn't go into the door. But somebody called, "Aron Mayerowicz Aron Mayerowicz." That they got to let me go to the door. I came to the door, and this Polak is telling me, "Mr. Mayerowicz you know that the policeman told me that you should give me the gold and the diamonds what you have. I'll give it to him, and later on he will take you out." 

I was, you know, you've been in a time like this, you just want to do everything you can. I went to my wife, and I told her, and she give me-- not everything, she was smarter than I was. She said if you give them everything, maybe that's just a fake. Maybe that's a fake, I'm not going to give him everything. Anyway, I'll give him enough. 

And he run away with this. And I see it's evening, nobody is calling me. I went to the door again, and I saw him over there. And Nice said to him, "Did you would see everything what I give?" His name was Shevcik he was a Polak. "Do you recieve everything what Shevcik came over, and he told me that you would send him over to me, that I would give him the gold, with the diamonds and everything." 

He said, "No, I didn't send him to you." I said, "He took from me everything, and he should give it to you." He said, "He did? I'll fix him." But anyway, at night, he remembered this, and he called me out. He called me out, and my neighbor, a lady, she heard us everything too, I was talking with him. 

And she came out with me, and she said, "I am your wife." I said, "No, you are not my wife." And the policeman told me to escape, I said, "No, I am not escaping. I am going back to my wife and child." She escaped, and I went back to the church. 

And I told this my wife. She said, "I tell you. You cannot do anything for me anyway. If you could save your life, why didn't you? Why didn't you? You could save your life." I said, "No, I cannot do this." 

But anyway, we make a committee over there, from five people in this church. Because they didn't give us nothing to eat, and we expect that the Red Cross will come in, and they will bring us something to eat. And they make me to go into the committee, I said no. My nephew was hanged up already from the committee, and I don't want to join this. 

But anyway, everybody started to yell, "Aron you have to go, you have to go." I went into the committee. And in the morning, the Red Cross came in. They brought us coffee and a piece of bread to eat. And I went out, and the lieutenant was over there too. And he said to me, "Where are you going?" I said, "Lieutenant, I am melde gehorsam, you know, that we are a committee from five people, and I am in the committee-- I am the president from the committee. And I have to go--" 

