CREW: Ready and rolling. Yes. Start by just giving your name, Prague, and your life, your family there. 

SUBJECT: My name is Heda Kovaly. I was born in Prague. My father's name was Irving Block, my mother was Marta, and I had a brother, George. My grandparents-- both my grandparents were farmers, which was quite unusual for a Jewish family to be. Both of my grandparents had farms and my parents grew up there. 

My father was-- my mother had two dates in her wedding ring because the day she was supposed to get married, my father went to the First World War. And she always told me how she went, every day, to the Red Cross Center in Prague, to inquire whether he's still alive. And he was very wounded in Yugoslavia. At that time, it was the Austro-Hungarian empire. And he came back. He's always lame on his left arm. He had a shot through his back. 

And he came with just a pan to eat from and a pair of red slippers he got for my mother. And after the war, they got married and my brother was born. My grandmother was still alive and living in the farm, which belonged to my father's sister-- when I can remember. Of course, I remember my grandmother very well. She was very decorative. She was a beautiful lady, like Ira Kaminska. She looked so gorgeous. 

Did you see the movie, The Shop on Main Street. So my grandmother looked like her. She was gorgeous-- white hair, very lovely. She loved animals. And everything the good Earth gave her. And she was killed when she was 86 years old by the Germans. She was deported to Auschwitz. And actually, all my family-- my father had five sisters, and my mother had a brother, and a sister, and there were a lot of children. 

And as far as I know, I am the only survivor. I think the most tragic thing for my father was that he never actually understood what happened. He was a very devoted Democrat in Czechoslovakia. Czechoslovakia used to be occupied by Austro-Hungary. Then there was this national revival of the language. And then, after the First World War, it was-- became a republic. And one of the best because our president was a philosopher. 

It was like Plato's Republic, the philosopher king. A great man. And he made people really believe in progress in the sense of morality, not only in the technical sense. But that things in this world and changing for the better. That there are some-- some things that can't happen anymore. And when they started happening, my father never understood it, really. 

We left Prague. And he was busy telling people what to do when he's going to be away, because we will come back soon. It's only temporary and we'll be back soon. Before we left, actually, I must say that the Czechs behaved beautifully. I would like to state that I don't believe that-- that Hitler and the Second World War was just a private business of the Jews. 

In Czechoslovakia, people were killed, tortured to death, executed, persecuted in all possible ways. And to we felt very close to them, not as close as other countries, like in Norway or Holland. There were-- it was even-- but in Czechoslovakia, I must say, people behaved very well. The first time we have-- we had to go out with the-- with the-- with the stars, people gave us the seats in the streetcars, they tried to be polite and nice to us. 

And the whole atmosphere was-- when we went to the-- to the place where we worked together, before we were transported, people stood on the-- the sidewalks and took the hats off. So we-- the idea of humanity and of progress, in the moral sense, was so deeply rooted in everybody's minds that we really believed that we are going to come back, that nothing so terrible can ever happen. 

And even when-- the moment when we were to be evacuated from Lodz-- we went first to Lodz. It was a ghetto. As you-- it's quite well known now. And then the front came closer-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they take you to Lodz? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. It was probably only the most convenient place in-- we left Prague in '41, which was very-- we were the second transport from Prague. And there were no concentration camps ready for us. But Lodz had this part-- the slummy part of the town, which was easy to-- to make-- they made this wall around it. And it was probably the easiest way to do it, to-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get there? Did you have to march there? Walk there? 

SUBJECT: No. We-- we went by train. We stayed for a few days. It was a-- we stayed in Prague in a-- with 5,000 people. It was the first taste we had of these incredible thing of, all of a sudden, not being free, not being able to move around, not even being able to lay down, because there was no room. 

And some of the people went crazy. There was a woman who was a woman I knew-- an older women-- who went completely crazy. There were babies. There were people, very sick, who died there-- right there. But we were very young and we thought, well, we have to face it and we have to be brave. I think that form of courage-- of the passive courage, sort of-- was the only thing that helped us to survive. 

Right from the first moment, we knew that we have to face things and not give in. I think this was the element that made people survive, who really-- so it was an accident if you survived or not, but the only thing you could contribute was the will to-- not to give-- not to be sorry for yourself, not to give in, not to let them hypnotize into believing that you are something inferior, that there's something wrong with you. 

On the contrary, I thought, well, I might be a slave, a prisoner, I'm still a person, and what are you, who kick ass, and beat us up, and-- and abuse us? Somehow, this was the beginning. I-- I remember most this man who was a professor from Vienna. He was a classical philologist. And I notice him because he sat there, perfectly dressed, in a beautiful-- in a beautiful suit, and coat, and in a hat. 

And I started talking to him. And he said, oh, listen, sit down here, I'll tell you something about ancient Rome. Let's discuss the culture of Rome. And so we did. In the middle of all this horrible-- in this bedlam, in this hell, he talked to me about Roman literature. And late-- and only a few months later, actually-- I found him in Lodz, dead, in front of these places where we lived. 

And he was laying in his-- on his-- it was a cot. And there was a book open on his chest with a picture of Venus de Milo. And he was covered with lice, because the body was there for several days. And there was this book, and this gorgeous picture, and it was all crawling. So that was how his life ended. And it took us several days to get to Lodz, to Litzmannstadt, they called it then. 

I don't remember how long. I remember these horrible screams, because they always-- they used to come from outside, into the wagon, and they slammed the doors. And sometimes they hurt people's fingers or people were started-- they took someone out of the train and they beat them up. And this was the first time I heard people screaming with pain. 

So the whole-- I remember everybody was dreadfully thirsty. And they let us get out of the train to bring some water-- the young people. So they said, out and get the water. And I remember how we got out of the train and there was some-- a pile of gravel and some soil or whatever. And there was this beautiful flower growing out of this mess. And it was a purple beautiful, gorgeous flower. 

And I remember how I thought, this is the last flower I'm going to see, because the whole atmosphere in the train was so absolutely dreadful people died, you know, on the way there. So we came to Lodz. It was October. I think October 22, 21. And it snowed. It was a snowstorm. And we walked from the station. 

And then, for the first time, we saw the people-- the Polish people-- the Polish Jews already there, barefooted in the snow, looking dreadfully undernourished and sick. And so everybody was sort of more upset by this snowstorm that looked like a bad sign, bad omen for us. And we stayed there for three dreadful years. Because I think Lodz was actually much worse than Warsaw. 

There's not so much known about Lodz, but there was very little food, there work was dreadfully hard, and they-- it was completely closed. From Warsaw, you could go out for work. From Lodz, you couldn't move. There was one person who managed to get out and that was a mentally retarded child. This poor girl somehow got out into the town of Lodz and was brought back. 

Everybody tried to get out. They plotted the most complicated ways of escape, they didn't manage. But this retarded child did it. I don't know how. And even the scale, in that it was so claustrophobic and there was absolutely not enough food for the people. The doctor said we should have been dead a long time, after a few months, because it really did-- didn't receive enough nourishment. 

And also, the worst part was that, from time to time, the Germans came and they took people away. And we didn't know there was Auschwitz. We didn't know it. We only knew that it was-- it meant something dreadful. It's going to-- it was death, but we didn't know what kind of death. And sometimes they only took old people, and sometimes they took children. And the worst was-- I think it was '43-- in the spring of '43, I think. 

The Germans said we should all go-- we lived in the places. It was a part of a slum. You know, there were houses. Most of them were cracked and partly destroyed or broken down. And there was one room or two rooms, still, where you could actually stay. So there-- that was what we had. And we were crammed together. And they said, nobody goes out. And then it took several days. 

Many people died because they couldn't get anything to eat. Most-- our main nourishment was the soup we received in the place where we worked. It was usually turnip. And when we couldn't go to work, we didn't get anything to eat, so many people died, at that time. And the Germans went from one place to the other. And then they let us go in the street. And there was this-- always this officer-- a German officer-- who said this person go this way, and this person goes back. 

And they took all the old people, and the children, and took them away. I remember how-- I was standing there. It was like a small square. And I felt like a part of a-- of some matter not quite human. When I looked around, everybody was so pale and dressed in all horrible rags. 

And there was this young man-- so healthy, and good looking, and strong, in his boot. Polish and with a whip, which he always used to-- you know, I think he enjoyed himself. And this was one of the worst experiences I had, because, all of a sudden, I felt there is a difference. People can be so different. This man was like a-- like a tiger. 

And I was very worried about my parents, but they somehow managed to-- we were lucky, in this way. They survived even this. And it was very hard because after it was over, the Germans said, now everybody can go out. You can leave your homes and go out. And so of course, people were starved to death. 

And they went out and tried to get something to eat. Some-- we even ate grass and things like that. And when so many people were on the streets, they came back and started shooting. And I thought, my, god, father, mother. And I ran home. And the shots just were, you know, all over me. I don't know how I made it home, but my parents did it, too. They'd made it home, too. So we survived even that. And so many people died. 

And got-- died because they were sick and because they had heart attacks. And my best friend's father died because the Germans took her mother, and he got a heart attack, and died on the spot. So she was quite alone after that. And-- and then something really funny happened to me, because, the next day, I got some stuff to-- that we had-- we could eat. 

And there were such places where you could cook something, because you didn't have any heat at home. And so I took this-- yes. And at Lodz, whenever there were Germans walking through the streets, all the Jews were supposed to clear away and go into the driveway-- not be on the sidewalk. Men I had to take of their hats, if they had one. Women should bow and to leave them with the sidewalk. 

And I was walking with this pan in my both hands for water, and some-- some grass, or turnip, or whatever I got-- I don't remember. And there were these three Germans who came to me, walking first. And the street was empty. And there was nobody. I just saw the faces in the windows, waving at me. And I thought, well, if I do it, I really am-- I am really a schweinehund. I am really less than human. I won't do it. 

And so I walked with the pot in my hands. And they were so surprised that they let me go. They gave-- gave way to me. They stood, looked after me, and I walked like a machine, like an automatic. And then they let me go. Usually, they shoot you. I don't know what happened then, but, somehow, they let me. This was one of the worst experiences in Lodz. And they have also-- they executed-- I don't know how many people, because I never had the courage to go and look. 

They let them hang on the square for several days. And my mother went there, because she said someone has to pray for them. But I never go there, so I don't really know how that was. And you have, perhaps, heard about Rumkowski, who was the head of-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. I was going to ask you two questions-- one, about the infants, which are I've heard they-- and the other about Rumkowski. 

SUBJECT: Most of the child-- children were taken away at this one, big transportation of the Jews to Auschwitz. The rest was taken-- there were always these transports. It went on and on. Miraculously, some survived, especially the children of the Polish parents, because they knew the place. And the mother always took the child and crawled in some kind of a cellar. And there was a number of children who survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see infants thrown? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I've seen them. Yes, I have. But there were children who did survive until Auschwitz. My mother used to-- to take them in our place. She was always surrounded by little children. And she said, I have to teach them something. What's going to happen to them when they-- later? They-- they will be so ignorant. I have to teach them. What will happen to them? The same thing that happened to her, of course. 

There was some children left when we left, when we were transported to Auschwitz. It was a miracle, but that was it. And Rumkowski. Of course, Rumkowski. You know, the thing is that everybody was crazy. You have to know that the people who were on the top, who had authority, who had power-- in all camps-- were crazy. 

This kind of function, this kind of power, you couldn't exercise with your mind, sane. And he was crazy, and he was a tyrant, and we hated him. I didn't. Because what happened once to me-- he did something very good to me. There was another transportation from Lodz to, probably, Auschwitz or I don't know. Maybe it was Majdanek or one of the other places. 

And that was done in a different way. People received notes to be ready this and this day and to go. And there was nothing anybody could do about it, because this was sort of in a bureaucratical way. It wasn't haphazard. They didn't ditch you on the street or somewhere. They wanted you to come with this identity card, which we all had. And there was no way out of it. There was 30,000 people. And my father was one of them. 

And when he received this note, I remember that, actually, my father had a friend who was a VIP there-- a Polish Jew. A nice man, but he somehow got into a position where he had some authority. It was everybody said, it's hopeless, it's hopeless. Nothing can be done. But I went there, to see him. And he was in an office, where they registered people. 

And I sat there and, all of a sudden, Rumkowski came in. And he looked at me and he said, in Yiddish-- I don't speak Yiddish. He said something like-- vas tustu da It means, what are you doing here? And I showed him this notice from my father. And he looked at me, and he looked at the note, and wrote zwolnic, which means-- in Polish, it means let him go. My father was the only person out of the 30,000 people. 

I came home. I said, father, listen, you are going to survive. A miracle has happened. You must-- it's obvious. This is a miracle. You are the only one. It was, I think, about a year later, when he was killed in Auschwitz. But that moment, I thought-- it was a whim, I think, on the part of Rumkowski, but he did me good there. 

And the second thing I remember about him was when we went from Lodz to Auschwitz. And we were-- we marched to the station again. And there he was, standing in a carriage with horses. And he had this gorgeous white hair. He was a very-- a very old man. And his face was green. And he looked at us and sort of kept his hand like in a blessing, you know? 

And everybody sneered and people called at him. Everyone hated him, but I thought, wow, this man knows something we don't know. He knows what's going to happen to us. And I think he really suffered, this man. He suffered for all his sins. I have heard-- I don't know whether it's true-- that they showed him the-- everything in Auschwitz before they gassed him. That's punishment enough. Let's forget about him. 

INTERVIEWER: The larger ghetto, you said, no one could get out. Why was it more secure than the Warsaw ghetto? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. It was-- it was a like a concentration camp. There were-- it was not there-- there was not electrical wires, but there were German soldiers guarding it day and night. And there was this wall. It's just a wooden part, a wooden part, brick walls. They used what they had. But nobody could leave. It was not like in Warsaw, where you could walk to the work. And that made an enormous difference, because you got in touch with people. 

I know it because, in the last concentration camp where I was, we also used to work outside the camp. And it was-- it's moral support. Somehow you don't feel so isolated. Also, people help you a little. They can give you a piece of bread or something, you know? It's a big difference. And the for me, Lodz was especially horrible because of the children. I still-- you know, when I hear the Cambodian children cry-- this is how they cried. They cried, and cried, and then they stopped crying one day. 

INTERVIEWER: They cried from hunger mostly? 

SUBJECT: Hunger. The worst thing was hunger. It's-- people were shot, people were executed. There was some-- a torture place there. The Germans had this green carriage with the horses. And sometimes, they just drove it through the town and they caught people. Or they had some reason to believe that these people are plotting or something. I don't know. They just filled the carriage and threw the people back there. 

And nobody ever returned, except, sometimes, they returned to die. And there was no way you could get out of there. I don't know why it was so. 

INTERVIEWER: They tortured people in the wagon? 

SUBJECT: No, they took them in a-- in the middle of the ghetto, there was sort of an enclosure, where the Germans were. And where only some of the Jews, like Rumkowski could come. I don't know what the procedure was. I have never been there. But there, they had also this house where they took the people and tortured them. 

INTERVIEWER: The hunger. 

SUBJECT: The hunger was the worst. At first, people got these edemas, the swollen feet, and then they got tuberculosis, then it was meningitis. And people died. And the funny thing is the first to die-- are rather strong, young man, because they needed more nourishment than the thin girls. 

INTERVIEWER: You mentioned whips. 

SUBJECT: Oh, that wasn't part of the life. They-- it was just-- they-- I think thew Germans sort of felt better. They whipped around their whips, but I don't know. They used, probably, the whips in the place of torture, but I don't remember anybody being whipped in the street. Shot-- shot, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Dogs? 

SUBJECT: At the end, when we were evacuated to go to Auschwitz, they used dogs to find people who were in hiding, but not in the Lodz, just later, in the other concentration camps. We didn't see many dogs in Lodz. No. 

INTERVIEWER: When they took you to Auschwitz, do you remember the trip and what-- why did you finally have to go? 

SUBJECT: Now that's precisely-- I think that the Germans had to face a problem. The front-- the Russians-- were actually very close at that time. And they didn't want any trouble in Lodz. So they sent the generals to talk to us. And there was this-- or maybe he wasn't a general, he was a colonel. I don't know. But he had a beautiful uniform, full of gold, and all that. 

And he-- we were gathered at the main square. And he talked to us. And he said, "Ich gebe euch mein Ehrenwort eines deutschen Offizieres." I give you my word of honor, of a German officer, that nothing is going to happen to you. You are going to be moved to a safer, better place. You will stay together. And there is no reason to panic or to start anything. You'll be better off than you are now. And that was the moment when my father said, OK, it's-- they give us. 

You don't know what it means-- a word of honor for a German officer. They can't break a word of honor. So we were transported to Auschwitz. I remember, first, they took us, again, in a place where we are all assembled. And someone-- and we slept, of course, on the floor. And someone brought a piece of old mattress for my mother. She wasn't feeling so good anymore. 

But we were one of the very few families who survive-- my brother was not with us. My father sent him to a small village before the transport started. And he survived until '43, and then he was sent to Minsk, in Russia, and shot. But the three of us, we were there. And my mother laid on this mattress. And I remember, at night, crawling to her and sleeping-- staying with her. 

I didn't do it ever since I was a baby, but, somehow, I knew. The-- the clever man didn't know, but I think my mother and I, we understood what's going to happen. And the-- the trip to Auschwitz was just the most horrible thing. It was hot. They didn't let people out. People were dying. They didn't let anybody out to go to the bathroom. Of course, they didn't. It was a nightmare. 

And at the end of the nightmare, we were in Auschwitz. And there was Dr. Mengele. And when I saw where we were, I-- I kept two files of barbiturates. And I gave one to my father and one to my mother. And there was nothing left except a small bottle of ether. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get them? 

SUBJECT: I-- this was-- I brought them from Prague. It was my-- you know, I thought, when things come to the worse, at least everybody should have something. I only hope they took it. So I gave my father one and my mother one. And we went out of the-- out of the train. And they-- right there, they started dividing women from men. And I only could see my father's face. And he said, take care of mother. And that was all. 

And I was-- you know, I didn't see him walking away. It was just such a crowd, you see? And we walked, hand in hand, with my mother. And there was Mengele. And he showed my mother the right side. And I wanted to go with her. And there was a soldier, and he threw me to the ground, and said, you stay here. Where are these people going? What's going to happen to them? 

And he said, don't be hysterical. And if you ask, you are going to see them again. And I saw my mother and she hold her arms to me, you see? And I saw these people walking abreast in this direction. And I drank this thing in the bottle. And-- and I don't remember anything anymore. I just-- the next thing I remember was that we stood attention in a very hot place. And then they took us to the sauna to have our heads shaved. 

And then I remember this gorgeous girl-- this blond hair. This-- that long. And how she stood there with her head to one said. And her hair sort of fell off. My whole-- I don't know how long I was in Auschwitz. It's all like a nightmare. I only see-- very vividly, I can-- I can see pictures, like in a movie. I can see details, but I have a-- there is no connection. 

I remember one night, I crawled out of the barracks. Everybody was asleep. And there were these gorgeous nights. You know, it was summertime. It was hot. But at night, it was cool. And these stars-- these beautiful stars. And, actually, the wires made this sound. It was like-- it was like music, you know? And it was lying there, in the dirt. 

And there were the stars. And there was this music. And I remember this girl who was ordered to sing. And she did. In the evening, we were-- we were so packed, so tight, that we could hardly stand. And in the evening, they wanted us to lay down. And we-- when we couldn't, they threw water on us. And the nights were very cold, so everybody was complaining of kidney trouble. 

But they didn't let us go to the bathroom, they didn't let us wash. You see this scar here? It's funny now. This was a big wound. And I had nothing to-- even to wipe the blood of. And it was just plain filth. And it healed. Even that healed. 

INTERVIEWER: You said they sang a song. She sang a song. 

SUBJECT: She sang songs. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind? Do you remember what? 

SUBJECT: I remember. My Yiddish isn't so good and I don't sing well. But I remember part of it. It was something like, 

(SINGING) Lazil mit dem fidel, der Haike mit dem bass, spiel mir a pai yidem miten in der gass. 

And we all called this the song of oppressed people, but, also, she sang great songs-- Polish, and Yiddish songs, and German songs-- whatever she could think of. I think it was the most dreadful thing for her, to stand there, in this horror. Probably, her mother, father, everybody killed, and she had to sing. This lady would have to sing. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did she have to sing? Why did they-- 

SUBJECT: Because the kapo said she wanted us to be happy. She want the barrack to be happy. And there was a girl-- in evenings, there was always a sort of review-- you had to stand up and the Germans came to-- to count, five abreast. And this girl ran out and says-- said she saw a black bird, and the bird is coming, and it's going to kill us all, and let's run away. And he shot her-- the German. He shot her on the spot. 

That was something I remember. And then I remember the last day. They said if-- if a train comes, during the night or the next morning, we will go in another concentration camp. If the train doesn't come, we'll go to the-- to the gas chambers. 

And listen, I really didn't care much because-- no. I didn't care at all, because we stood there for days on end-- days and nights-- and saw all these people, five abreast, walking to the crematoriums, and this dreadful black smoke. And it went on, and on, and-- this is something nobody can-- I-- listen, I don't remember anymore myself. I can't believe I really saw all of this. It was so well organized. 

If you kill the-- you should kill in-- in passion. But the worst thing about Auschwitz was that you were killed-- you were-- you were like-- like something-- like some trash. You were not even given the satisfaction of being hated. Because you can't hate a piece of trash. And that was how it was in Auschwitz. And the last night-- I don't think I spoke to anybody the whole time I was in Auschwitz. I just lost all capability of communicating with people. 

And I sort of crawled aside. And I thought of my mother. And I couldn't think about anything except my mother. Moja mama. Because I wasn't sure that my father was dead. I saw only his face, but I saw my mother go in there. And it was, again, such a beautiful night. And I remember sitting on the ground. And it was-- I never imagined a purely emotional pain-- something mental-- can hurt so much that it can be such a physical pain. 

And I remember how I hold up my hand and there was this big-- you know the dandelions? And it came to me and it landed on my hand. And I thought, my mother, she's here. I thought maybe she just died that moment. This was, I think, the bottom. You know, we have one good thing-- we, survivors-- we know where-- who we know. We where we reach from-- from the bottom, from the real bottom. That this, you know-- this is all I can take and then my mind blows. 

And this was the moment. And it was very strange how I got out of Auschwitz, if you want to hear that, because it's quite funny. It was the next day. The train came. And also we had to strip all the time, you know? We had to strip. This is why I don't understand why people want to walk around naked-- all these people in the '60s. 

For me, to be dressed means to be protected. Any animal can be naked, but the dress and to be covered means I'm different from a wild beast and I'm a person. Because we had to walk around naked. And all these German soldiers looking at us and appraising us. And so then we walked, again, five abreast, to the-- to the train. 

And the most important thing in the-- in the concentration camps was to be-- to keep five together. Always. Because if you didn't, they sent you back into-- nobody knew what-- what's going to happen to you. Always be five. It was the rule. Everybody-- all old timers told us, stay five together. Always. So meet marched. And all of a sudden, I saw we were not five, but six. 

A girl who was in front sort of got panicked, and ran, and stood in my row, so that we were-- instead of five, we were six. And since I was so apathetic, completely, someone gave me a shove from-- from the back. And I started running. And all of a sudden, someone took my hand and drove me into the row from which this girl ran away, because there were only four there. And they were also frightened what's going to happen. 

So there was I-- the fifth. They took me in. And they counted the girls who are going to be in the-- go into the train. And they stopped in front of me. I was the first. I was the first row to stay behind. And they always-- already started shouting, turn around, and so on. And from the train, a girl fainted. And the German soldier said, another-- another piece. They always-- stuck. Another piece. 

So since I was the first, I went. And that's how I got out of Auschwitz. I didn't write about these things because nobody will believe it. No one. So from there, we went to another concentration camp, which was in Ober Silesian. It's farther-- far north. Gross-Rosen-- also a bad camp, but not that bad. Auschwitz was, of course-- 

INTERVIEWER: The word piece in German was what? 

SUBJECT: Stuck. Ein stuck. One piece. Another piece. They would just it for a person or a girl-- one piece. Ein stuck. 

INTERVIEWER: The name, Mengele-- it seems to be the only name that anyone ever knows. Did you know the name of anyone else? And why did you know his? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. This was-- he was the most-- the best known because he did the selection. And at this time when I came there, I think he was the only one who did it. I don't really know. In Auschwitz, you were so enclosed, you didn't see anything. You only saw your own, little place, where you have a barrack. I only saw him. And I only knew his name. There are many people who can tell you more. I tell you. 

There are people who have been there longer, who were more around. I was-- I just don't remember much about Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: The experimentation. We hear a lot about Mengele and-- and medical experiments. Did you know about any of that? 

SUBJECT: Later, not there. When we came there, we didn't even know what's going to happen. We didn't know Auschwitz existed. We didn't know there were crematoriums. We didn't know anything. 

Only later, we found out. We couldn't understand why was that no twins were ever killed-- because he experimented on twins. They were not killed right away. Children were killed-- little children-- with their mothers. But if there were twins, they were not. They were taken in another place. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see or hear of twins disappearing? I mean, did you know about that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I-- in our own-- where I was, in the transport, there were twins. And I knew that they were not taken away. I didn't notice, at that time, but I found out later, on that next concentration camp, when I recovered a little. We talked about it a lot and I heard that these twins were taken in another place. Who knew? Nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: The-- was the-- the next camp that you went to, was that the last camp or-- 

SUBJECT: For me, it was. I escaped from the camp. I ran away. I went-- I got to Prague in February, '45. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you escape? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was-- you know, you can escape from this kind of camp. But I didn't escape from the camp. They evacuated the camp, again, when the-- when the front-- the Russian front-- came closer. We were-- listen, it's so late. We were-- for several days, we couldn't get away from-- from the camp. And we heard the canons. We heard the-- the sounds of the battle. And we thought, wow, this is the end. 

Now they are going to come and we will be liberated. But we thought that we were-- we were taken to a march from there to-- it went to Bergen-Belsen. We didn't know where we go. But they said, everybody who doesn't-- who has no shoes-- nobody had shoes-- or who doesn't feel well, goes into the barracks. And the others, go out. 

So we actually dragged everybody out, because we knew-- at that time, we already knew what it meant. They shot all the sick girls, those who could really not stand. And we started marching through Germany to Bergen-Belsen. And the march was-- they didn't know what to do with us, because it was already chaotic and, also, these men who-- the guards-- wanted to-- they didn't want to go to fight. They wanted to keep their jobs. It was a night job. 

INTERVIEWER: When you got back to Czechoslovakia, the Slansky trial you witnessed-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. That's-- that's another story. It was 1952. But that's a long story. The thing is that after we came home, I was young, and stupid, and we are all very deeply-- you can't-- there are certain things you can't survive without being sort of thrown out of balance. And after the war, especially since we saw how the Germans were afraid of the Russians, we thought, well, the Russians-- that's exactly the opposite to the Germans. 

They are-- they are the-- the salvation. They liberated Czechoslovakia. They promised that everybody's going to be equal. Everything looked promising. Not to me, so much, but, for my husband, who was a very idealistic person and who felt so deeply about the concentration camps, about being not able to do anything-- he was-- he was an officer in the Czechoslovakia army when he was taken to the camps-- before he was taken. 

And he felt horrible that he, a soldier, couldn't defend his country, that he had to be dragged around like an animal. That he was so-- the passivity. And so he entered the communist party. And that was the-- the end of everything, as far as he was concerned. Because in '52, he was accused of being a British spy and he was executed. 

And he was no spy, but, of course, when he realized what was going on, he was against the Russian communists. That's-- that's true. But he was not a spy and he was not a traitor, as he was accused to be. And I had a child at this time. And things were pretty bad. And my husband, only too late, realized how wrong he was. And he was a wonderful person. He really didn't want anything for himself. He wanted to change things. 

This was what we all wanted-- to change the world, to do something, to do something that this kind of disaster could never happen again. But he didn't realize that the only opposite of fascism is democracy. Democracy is the only solution to everything. It was not our fault that we became part of the Russian block, but it was our fault that we-- for a certain time, we were fooled into believing into the Russian doctrine. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you meet him in the concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: I-- I had known him since I was 12. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you find him again? 

SUBJECT: Oh, in Prague. We met. It was wonderful. After the war. He was in Dachau. He became-- the American army made him a commander of a camp where all the displaced persons was gathered. And he-- he provide-- he took care of them, to transport them back home, and to feed, and all that. He was a wonderful man. He was a wonderful man. 

INTERVIEWER: One last question-- you were very young when you went to the camp, now why did they not-- why did they let you survive? I thought that they took the children away. 

SUBJECT: No, I wasn't a child. I was a teenager. And I was somehow-- listen, it was all-- it was chance. Some people died, some people were killed, some people survived. There is no way to say I survived because. You can't kid yourself into believing that you are more tough, or more stronger, or there was something special about you. No. You were luckier than the other ones. And I think I have been, in this way, lucky. But it wasn't so easy to have lost everybody, to come in alone. 

INTERVIEWER: You lost everyone? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Was that liberation for you losing everyone? 

SUBJECT: No, it wasn't. And it isn't. And this is why we still-- I think everybody who survived the way I did, we sort of don't feel at home in this world anymore, because this experience-- you cannot live with it. It's like a constant pain. You never forget. You never get rid of it. But you learn to live with it. And that sets you apart from other people. 

Not that you can't enjoy yourself. On the contrary. When I am happy, I am so happy because I know how horribly unhappy I can be. I know the horribleness. But there is a certain-- it's like a music in the background. It's just something that just-- it's different. 

INTERVIEWER: You're obviously a writer. 

SUBJECT: Listen, I didn't write all of these things in the book, because I don't think people believe this. 

INTERVIEWER: No, but you speak like a writer. 

SUBJECT: My English is rotten. 

INTERVIEWER: That's enough, everybody. Thank you. 