SUBJECT: I don't remember what they play. I don't know too much by music. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's the mu-- song that you used to sing with your father? 

SUBJECT: No. I think this we have from this, um-- 

CREW: OK, we're rolling. 

SUBJECT: Maybe from Strauss. I don't know what they play, but-- waltz. 

CREW: We're rolling. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Now what I-- I have to continue from the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were stealing ammunition. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So I used to steal ammunition. And the group promised me if I give them enough ammunition guns, they go-- take me, my brother, and my father. And I did. I risked my life. 

I did this. How I steal this-- I cleaned the-- the-- the room they call wachzimmer. And I used to, everyday, take a little bit, a little bit, a little bit. And there's been-- and I built it up, lots ammunition and pads for the guns and-- hand grenade. 

And they say to me, Wednesday, I-- I believe this year '43-- no. I don't remember. '43, 1 February or '44. I cannot remember. I think, if I've been correct, February of '44. They say to me, Wednesday, we are-- we are on our way. 

And I now said nothing to my father, to my brother. I afraid. But I-- I go-- I figure, I go, say, Wednesday, I go tell my father and my brother. We have to hiding. And we go. Wednesday night, we go out. 

They have their clicks, the pliers to cut the-- the-- the wires this yeah, not from [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] From the-- from the [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] from the-- from the manufacturer. And we run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know where you would run? 

SUBJECT: Where we will go? 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's-- 

SUBJECT: To the woods. Run away into the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Germany? 

SUBJECT: No, the same Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. I think Lublin in Poland. 

SUBJECT: Poland [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] Krasnik, in the area from Krasnik. And there been run away. They really did-- seven people, six boys, one woman, brother, sister, Tuesday. The next day, I come. They told me they been run away. It's missing lots of ammunition, lots of guns, and from Krasnik they come, the-- from Gestapo. 

And they call me. And he said to me, you know something? Are you still-- you-- you give them guns? I said, I not so stupid. If I still on the-- that I run away with them-- I've been-- I've not been here. I say, you're lucky you're here because they're all dead. I say, I believe you. 

He give me, really, a candy before. And after again and repeat, repeat-- I say, I don't know nothing. If I know, I tell you. I don't know. They never told me nothing. I don't know nothing. I know nothing. And I have to-- that's here the only way I could survive. 

And big help here, I mentioned before, you had the chief from the Gestapo and the local in the-- in the werkschutz. Back, and so he had the colonel from the SA. They used to wear brown uniforms, you are SA. AS-- this is English, but SA. 

So SS, they used to wear brown uniforms, so brown, yellow the-- on em-- the emblem on ev-- collar. And he had the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] And his girlfriend and friends that talked to me, the time-- the time we got out, they called me again. And again they question on off. 

And then believe me, I have enough to give out. I think the-- the-- the-- the Gestapo, the chief, went back, the colonel-- his girlfriend, she must talk with him every-- she saved me, I think, because she said, I tried everything for you. I know you know f-- about and everything. 

In fact, they put a quarter inch wire in the oven, they make red, they would threaten to go-- stick it in my-- in my body, you know, punish me. But I been stay cold and I said, no, I no did, I no did, I don't know nothing about it. And they believed me. 

After we went from Budzyn the-- they started close to Budzyn, and used to send it to all the-- any parts that need from people from Budzyn. My-- I went with my father and my brother to Majdanek, Lublin, in June. We stayed about-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: June 1943? 

SUBJECT: '44. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '44? 

SUBJECT: '44. We-- we went '44, we stayed-- they really wanted destroy us, but before they'd been thinking destroy the one in from the garage building a [? mobiles. ?] And we started painting and doing jobs for them. I used to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Built a movie house from a garage? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, garage for the SS. And I used to work in the-- with Russia prisoners. They are crippled from the war. We separated potatoes, the rotten potatoes and the good potatoes. I remember, I couldn't do too much work because I used to be too young. So I have to do so much. 

The-- the-- the Nazis used to beat me up, the SS. They used to-- with a stick, used to beat me up. And they-- the Russian soldiers, they used to make up for me a month how much I was supposed to do in the day. They are very good. 

And, um, in fact, we never finished the movies painting. Meantime, they used to have a meeting that SS, what color? One that wanted blue, one wanted red. I don't know what color-- and the Russia front started coming close to Lublin. 

So before we left Lublin, I'd been working in the Section 4. And Majdanek-- yeah, this way. Section 1, they have a place where they put the gas, they gas the people after they put off the wagon the bodies, and they put them to Section 6 they have their own-- the brand. 

So I got very close. I see coming about noon times, maybe 11:30, 12:00, in July-- I don't know what day this year, but the July '44-- blue boss, and come out, I say, about 35, 40 people. I saw priests. Didn't know they had Jews, they are Christian. And he had one woman, blond, beautiful, maybe late 20s, 25, 26. 

And they told them, they don't have time to guess them. On they have a place, the pool, [INAUDIBLE]. And they had one guy with a machine gun, and first he told him, take the clothes, be naked, all the clothes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To undress? 

SUBJECT: Undress, they have to undress. And-- and they started kill them. So one be running away, and he got a shot in the back. I saw how he fall down. 

And the woman, she says, she not going to take the clothes. So that-- one from the Gestapo come, and once ripped up the dress. So she grabbed his face and she scratch him. And the possible blood been go-- I could see the blood. But I saw what she did. 

So I saw the couple SS soldiers that tied her up at the hand and at the foot, and opened the oven and I s-- I I heard few seconds screaming, terrible screaming. They throw her alive in the fire and destroyed her. And they killed them all. They shot them to death. 

In afternoon, they let us go. So what happened? The front coming close, so the-- they call us. We have to-- we go further. So we march from Majdanek. And I-- I saw the German Tigers tanks with many hundreds of thousands of soldiers, German. They couldn't move. 

And I saw a few minutes later come Russia airplanes. And the Germans they started dogfight. And I'd been looking. And I-- I've been-- I've been-- smell, I said, maybe now I go get freedom. Maybe it's the day now. And I saw two airplanes Russia come, close to us, and they started shooting of the guards. But I never saw that-- they had been say-- the-- the [INAUDIBLE] are dead. 

And we've been-- we've been marching, marching, sidestreet. And we went out from Lublin. And behind the uh, guards, Sonderkommando, they're called, when they destroy the-- they have them with dogs. Anybody could walk, you're awake, the dogs used to eat them up. 

And they used to-- so my father said to us, stay in the middle in the transport. No go in the back. My brother got awake. So I used-- I carry him under the arm, if possible, to help him, not let him go to the end, because anybody got to the end, they've been-- they shoot them, and they feed the dogs with the human being bodies. 

And we've been marching, marching, marching, to the time there is some-- to place-- yeah, brick manufactory. And the one that blew us up, and the SS, and the fighter soldiers-- they're called Wehrmacht-- they have some argument. The Wehrmacht soldiers, they now allowed us to do. And so they-- they continue with us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The German regular soldiers-- 

SUBJECT: --from the front-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --saved your life. 

SUBJECT: Yes, saved the life. The SS weren't destroyed. And so we march again. And we reach someplace-- I don't remember what-- the train had been waiting. And we come to Auschwitz Birkenau, some time in August. And we-- we've been staying in the line. There are younger boys-- in Birkenau, before we saw the crematorium. And one corporal, old man, over 65 years old, SS man-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: SS corporal? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, SS corporal, he's ranked at corporal. He said to us in German, hide, hide, hide, because the doctor-- Doctor Engel coming here. He said that you're all to crematorium. And we've been hiding wi-- with him. 

And they were really supposed to destroy us. But come all the-- for us, they need manpower, work in Zieleniewski company, where they make for the Navy-- where they make miners-- the-- the miners-- I mean, we no fill up the powder on the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The shell? 

SUBJECT: The shell, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, this corporal told you to hide where? 

SUBJECT: Hide in the-- let me repeat this. Maybe about 10 or 12 young boys of my age, we were staying the first line. So he saying, stay in the middle. So the doctor, the murderer, could see us. So this way, we can-- better chance to survive. He say, in the front, young kids, he send right away to crematorium. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the doctor come after that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he come-- because the other come, and they're supposed to-- they need people-- manpower. And they send us to take a shower, and they took our clothes. We have a [? striped ?] clothes from Majdanek, but they changed the clothes. And they changed our clothes. 

First when we take it, that's said that's the end. We're going to crematorium if they give us piece of soap-- the soap, you have on you been make not regular soap we have now-- that's human being fat. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you know that? How did you know that? 

SUBJECT: Well, I know this. I found-- I didn't know that time. I found this after the war. In fact, I have this. I used to have this piece of soap, and we figured out we have to do something. Ask a rabbi on [INAUDIBLE] this because-- and I don't know what happened, and I lost this. I don't know how. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The soap was-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The soap was examined. And chemically, it was found? 

SUBJECT: Possible. Not my piece of soap, but in general, that's-- yeah, written many places. And that is no secret it-- that's yeah-- They used to make the soap from human being fat, yes. And after a few days, they give us the number. My number is A18419. That's the other second million. 

How they're used to doing it in Auschwitz from one to a million-- the million number finished, they started A, number one, to a million. They finished the second million, they started B from one to a million, but they never finish. We went to Gleiwitz three-- Gleiwitz one, right-- three because one, two-- they have it. [INAUDIBLE] work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was work in? 

SUBJECT: We work in the set up the machines-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And work in a factory for mine shells. 

SUBJECT: Yes, for Zieleniewskki but we belong to division from Auschwitz. We are under the guard, SS, and we stayed too from end of August being in September of '44 to January 18, 1945. And '45, January 18, '45. The Russia front started moving, because Gleiwitz, from Auschwitz, it's not too far-- and the same day, they took of Auschwitz with Russian. 

So going to Auschwitz, they found out Auschwitz is no more in the German's hands, so they push us back. In fact, we have old soldiers. They put in old people-- 65-- that could work so-- so here from the-- I saw it from the concentration camp, people, they used to hold them by the arm, because they could walk them-- because they'd go miles and miles. One used to carry for the gun from them because they are close to 70, 65, 67. You know, they are old people. And they used to be angry. Look, they put us in SS. What do we have to do with SS? 

Yeah. Yeah, well, that's year '45. What Hitler did, the all young people, he still been dreaming he go win the war. He took-- he took from the-- the end, he started taking from the old power. Young people mobilized and sent them off to front. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why didn't people try to overpower these old people? 

SUBJECT: Well, the guy in-- we got in deep in German, and we knew-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Gleiwitz? 

SUBJECT: Gleiwitz, yeah. Well, we went-- we went to Blechhammer. And this is far away. This is deep. And we knew if we run away, it's not-- it's winter times. There's no food-- no warm clothes. I've been working. I have a problem. I have a small foot. I used to have rags-- my feet. I no have shoes. 

Or if I have shoes, I have two left shoes, because they couldn't find two right, one left, one right-- because I have a small foot. I are young boy. And nobody run away, because it's impossible. Sooner or later, they find us. The Germans have been-- no go help us. They go-- they got a way to go report to the gestapo to go come and take us through, so nobody run away. We been go. We been go. We come to Blechhammer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before you were in Gleiwitz, you were marching it from the tune of music? 

SUBJECT: Yes, one time before this year-- I said December-- we come to Gleiwitz. I think Gleiwitz one or the two. I can't remember exactly. But one from there. We are only three. 

And we coming to the gauge, and they stop us. They let us in, I think, to take a shower or something. So we wait and we wait, and maybe about a half hour, I saw the orchestra come. And they open the gate, and they started to play. I don't remember. It could be they played something from Strauss, Johann Strauss. I don't know. But Johann Strauss, I don't know he are Jew. 

One, he are not Jew. I think pro Nazi. I think something, because the owner could explain why are they with Hitler and not erlaubt something else. But I don't understood that time what-- my father, possible. If he lived, he know what they played, because he are profession was a musician-- conservatory to he finished in Vienna. But I don't know. I am too young kind to understood. 

And we took a-- we went to the Gleiwitz one or with Gleiwitz two. I said one of the two, because I don't know what here. And we took a shower, and again we have to wait. Again they have to-- they called the musician, and again they played, I think maybe the same thing or it was something else. I don't remember exactly. 

And we went back to Gleiwitz three, and now I go back to [? general ?] 18. And we-- they wanted to bring us to Auschwitz. And Birkenau destroyed, but the Russian went fast, and we could with a foot make it. So we come to Blechhammer. We come to Blechhammer, and we stayed a couple days. And they took us again. We've been walking to Plauen. 

And Plauen, we've been working. And in 1945 come the First Division American army and to give us freedom. But they told us, everybody wants to go with us can go. Because in two days, this territory-- we have to give it to Russia. This still is Russian territory now. 

So we got away. We went with America. And we will stay in America territory in Germany. 

And after I went to school-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Eh, was there any religious observations or [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I used to talk with many people. And they used to say to me, it's not possible-- somebody will survive. Anybody will survive, we wanted revenge. Well, then don't tell us. And just say we wanted everybody to go to Eretz Israel or something called Palestine. And that's the wish. They all wanted-- if them live, they possible all go to Eretz Israel, because that's the other wish. 

And yeah, wonderful-- I have experience of rabbi, where they used to give a piece of baloney you no are not kosher. You throw this in the toilet. You don't want to give it nobody. And they used to beat them up, because he looks a rabbi. They used to terrible go after the rabbis. And what the Germans used to do, they used to destroy intelligent people and Jewish, you know. 

Now I go-- if I've got my freedom, the America's soldiers-- they don't know how to help us. They used to give people food, and they used to eat, and then the stomach used to busted, and they die, because you are so narrow. 

My father wa-- in the-- in-- was a prisoner First War. So he not allow me and my brother to eat, only little by little, soup. Took maybe 10 days or less two weeks. And we study normal after. 

So after-- after four-- after four-- 45, I went back to school. I finished my high school. And they asked me if you want to go to Geneva in Switzerland. High to university, Do you want to be engineer? Tell them what you want to be. 

I said, being honest, I want to go to Israel, fight for the freedom. I want to fight for the future generation. That's the other wish for the 6 million Jews. 

When I speak the words-- [CRYING] we have to go to Eretz Israel, so never again building crematorium for us and destroy it, women and children. In Poland, you got three million Jews, only in Poland. 1,000 years they live in Poland, the Jews. 

Left today, couple hundred-- almost zero survived, the Polish Jews. For my family, there died between 80, 85 for my father's side, for my mother's side. And I [INAUDIBLE] wish on [INAUDIBLE]. 

And I pick up, go to Israel. And I know that before me and Magda went to Israel, 300 boys, many are from concentration camp, they went to Latrun. They come from the ship, they went straight to Israel fight. 

They don't know-- they-- they give the orders for Hebrew. They don't know Hebrew and the yeah, wipe out. This-- And I supposed to go, but my father-- I don't know why-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: 'Cause we're survivors? 

SUBJECT: From-- many survivors from-- from-- from-- from Holocaust-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were sent right away into the battle? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they want to go volunteering. And they got many deserters from the Russian army that want to help them. Then, yeah, profession soldiers, officer from the Polish army. 

And they know how to fight, but they don't know Hebrew. And that's the other mistake. They give in the orders Hebrew, and they don't know what to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they were-- 

SUBJECT: And and Latrun here the same as Stalingrad. They wiped them up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Latrun was a police station near Jerusalem? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that's [INAUDIBLE] city, of the-- this is a famous history. This year, in '48, in May or be June. That time I know you are not-- not in Israel. So [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] I asked my father. I said-- I said, Daddy, you know how I feel towards Israel. I want to go to Israel because they need me. And he said, not now. 

They say stay out of it. I said why? Well, we have respect that's in Europe here. We have a respect for the parents. My father said, no. When they called me from the headquarter for the Haganah, what I never know his face but I know his voice. 

And he said, Natan, that's here really my-- you have to go. I said, look, I go. But you know what my father told me? If I go, he go die. He not survive. 

So I have one father and I have to listen to him. He let me go if he's ready. It's OK. 

Is-- we had a cease fire about the Secretary for the United Nations-- Bernadotte did [INAUDIBLE] most three months. And he said to me, you know, Nathan, you want to go? You can go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your father said? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I said fine. I've been-- I've been ready to go now. So I went to the doctor. They give me all examination, they check the blood, everything. 

And they send me make to Marseilles, to France. And I stayed-- I stayed Marseilles. I wait a couple weeks on the ship [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] They used to go back and forth. 

And I saw many arriving in in the ship. Many times the ship used to go down because [INAUDIBLE], terrible condition. But we arrived after from Marseilles the September 13, 1948 in Haifa. The flag Israeli went up. And we were singing Hatikvah, very touching feeling here. 

The bus had been waiting. They took us to camp, you know. They feed 

We come Thursday, or I say Friday, Saturday, Sunday. They come buses. And the two guys only young, most we are young people, in their 18-20s, my friends, many are from concentration camp. One here from Budzyn, here a tailor, who I mentioned wasn't 13, yet. Three brothers-- only he survived, and two that died, the oldest. 

And I met him. I don't know he live. And we are so happy we have each other. We kiss each other. In Europe, our men kiss each other. It is not a [INAUDIBLE]. Because this is feeling we express. 

And we come to the place, and they ask us where everybody wants to go. They say, if somebody wants to go to Palmach. I don't know nothing Palmach. So they explain to us what this Palmach. 

I said, oh, already. So already I don't know. My friends liked me, so they follow me. And they went with me to Palmach. Palmach. 

And we we will have a tough training-- 18 hours in day, six hours. I have a one uniform, I remember. I used to wash the uniform and dry off the grass and put in, because you're hot. You know, I'm saying, you know, hot, sticky nights here. 

After 24 weeks, I remember Rosh Rosh Hashanah we got a vacation, 48. And we went to vacation. And we come back and they move our camp from the Palmach [INAUDIBLE] beautiful [INAUDIBLE] I love him. [INAUDIBLE] in the '60s. 

And we are ready to go to fight. And he said, this way, Jewish-- is same company is that everybody is afraid. We fear he not coming back. 

[INAUDIBLE] out, and now won't fight. You know what, nobody stay up. Everybody stay in the group. We all went with airplane. 

And we landed in the night, October 12, 1948. We attack. The war started. I don't know who attack, we, Egypt, I don't know. 

And I've been in the-- in the-- what they call this? In the-- in the bunker, you know? But honest, I got scared to-- to jump. You know? I said, now I face, again, death. 

You know everything here fine. But you know, I only 18 years. That's all I am. A little bit more, 18. 

But come, Sergeant, he said, look. I no afraid to-- to-- to stay. Nothing happen to you. And I jump, and I feel wonderful. And I gathered the courage. When I went and I went and somebody scream, Nathan! Nathan! 

We used-- We got six foot old, the boy. He born [INAUDIBLE] in Poland, but ever-- the Germans took half Poland and half the Russian took, half Poland. So he must live in with the Russia. 

And he went to Russia. And after the war, Stalin give the order-- every Amer-- Polish citizen that can come back to Poland. You come to Poland, come to-- and so. 

And he screamed. So I said, what happened? I come close. I could-- we got terrible fire, under the fire. I've been working with my-- he opened stomach, yeah. He say, showed me. 

I said Vanka. I don't know his name. We call him Vanka. We are Russia, you know, Vanka. 

I said, I know Russian. I took my-- my hand, with just five finger-- I pushed his stomach in. I'm not a doctor. I don't know. 

I patch him up. He got six foot. I'm a small guy. I carry him and his gun. The gun, I couldn't leave the gun. Because we are [INAUDIBLE]. We don't have too many guns. 

And the shrapnel hit him, and I [INAUDIBLE]. And I wake up. I got [INAUDIBLE] in hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You woke up? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. When I asked him what happened with Vanka. They say, he is dead. He died. 

This mean he died of my arms. And I-- and I-- I healed very good. I have un-- light wound. I have shrapnel. And they give me, after 10 days, I could work. I could go back to my regiment. 

The doctor, no, have a [INAUDIBLE] rest. So they put me in the camp to watch the prisoners, right? And [INAUDIBLE] not far from Haifa. I forgot that-- that they are all way. 

And I stay. But I not happy. And I very strict I want to go back to my company. And I went back to my company. 

And yeah, yeah, we're of, off, because still being continue to four-- 49 to March. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you fought in what battle mostly? 

SUBJECT: In the south, this mean Negev. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which cities? 

SUBJECT: I got wounded Be'er Sheva. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: This year '48, And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there any non-Jews in the Palmach. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I am-- I-- I-- in my company, you got two Germans, blond, blue eyes. And they are from Berlin. I said, how come-- how come you here? Are you Jews? 

No. I said how come you come here, I said. He said, I want to do something for the Jews, what the Germans did to six million Jews. [CRYING] They want to pay their respect this way. 

And when they are light wounded, and they survive, and they met-- and they change. They become Jews. They married Jewish girls. They have a children. 

One work in-- in Jerusalem in the Kol Yisrael radio. I saw them one time, one. I asked if the other. No, that's it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you have in this envelope? 

SUBJECT: I have it in this envelope-- I have a 19-- eh-- '46 [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] come one German to me. He say, you know, I know in the-- in the woods there are kill prisoners. And not far from where they kill the prisoners, there are lots of guns and ammunition what the Germans are hiding. 

Under condition, I go-- I go tell you exactly where is if I can get-- get a carton, two cartons cigarettes, American cigarettes. I said fine. Give me only time. 

I took with somebody, from a representative from the Jewish Center, and he connect. And he went to Governor, they call governor here a captain, every city American officer. And he said, he gave them more [INAUDIBLE] he got a plenty, you know? Nobody questions cigarette cartons. 

And really, one-- the next couple days later, come MP and they brought prisoners SS. And they're supposed to open the-- the grave. And the MP wear mask and gloves. And they ask, too, to the captain, the governor what they call it, to give a mask and the gloves. 

He said, no. You killed them. You pick up with your hand. And here they are in the casket. [CRYING] And we brought them to this-- this is in [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] a Jewish cemetery. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In other words, you took the bodies out and put them-- 

SUBJECT: In the-- they make casket, because we prepared for this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The SS prisoners had to do this work? 

SUBJECT: That's right, with their hand-- no gloves, no mask. They have to smell this. 

Here I've been. I hold the Israeli flag. And I think-- I think is somebody-- is a-- people and survivors that went, too. Is that OK? 

Here I been too with the flag is a minister. Because we don't know, could be all kinds people got killed. You have minister, a rabbis, priest, everybody makes speeches. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're at this mass grave? 

SUBJECT: Mass grave, yeah. This is Jewish cemetery hof. The picture is not clear. But is I've been in the middle. I carry the flag. And it's a nurse from the-- yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is in the other envelopes? 

SUBJECT: Um, one second-- the German who used to tell me the Jews are nothing. We don't know how-- we're not human beings. We're nothing. 

But I showed them. I am something! I wear the honor uniform from Israel! [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] Israel. I wear Israeli uniform. 

I fought in Palmach by the tanks. There's my picture. I am-- I used to be-- Israeli soldier. There-- there-- broken [INAUDIBLE] from-- from survivor from Holocaust pick up himself, because we took advice for [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] for they fought in Warsaw ghetto, for there hold up 30 days. 

And I have a story to tell. I met in [INAUDIBLE] one had cripple, had no left foot. And he said to me-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A German? 

SUBJECT: --German officer. And he said, you know what? I've been-- I used to be an officer SS. I said, why you want to talk to me? You know I've been a Jew. And I no like SS. 

He said, but you have to listen my story. I said, OK. This year 1947, no, '48, I'm sorry. '48, because Israel becomes a state, this year '48. 

And he said to me, I lost my leg because I fought against the Jews in Warsaw ghetto. They are heroes. I respect them. 

He said, if I have my-- my leg, I go today. I go fight for Israel. I say, why are you supposed to fight? 

He said, because I respect-- I learn something. I saw how they-- how they fought. That everybody a hero. I saw you kids, eight year, they risked their life. 

They been-- they used to go to the dead German bodies to grab their guns, the ammunition, the hand grenade, and they been delivered to-- to the old revolution, so they could fight them with ammunition. And I have a higher respect and I have not bad feeling I lost my leg. 

This is my father. [CRYING] He died November 3rd of 1950 in Israel. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did he get to Israel? 

SUBJECT: My father got to Israel this way. '40-- '48 October, he had papers for everybody, for me, to my brother, for his-- he married, met his second wife-- to go to United States. And he got a-- he got a message-- a wrong message. I'd been killed. 

So he said to my stepmother, he said, I can't go to America. I want to know where my son's grave is. So he decided to come into Israel. He come December 29, 1948. 

And he found me live. We been crying and we've been laughing for the mistake with the message. Yeah, I've been dead, but I alive. 

This is his stone, where he rests in peace. And this is-- this is big picture. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have anything else in the envelope? Do you have another envelope? 

SUBJECT: I have to look. Yeah, I have something here. Yes. I want the [INAUDIBLE], the nothing what they did for us-- I got this with my own blood, honor from Israel army, three medals. The medal represent '48 independent. The second medal represent '56. I We fought by the Suez Canal. 

This medal is special mission what I did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is special decoration-- 

SUBJECT: Decoration. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --for bravery? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And this is the symbol [INAUDIBLE] and this is Palmach is is [INAUDIBLE]. And this here-- I used to wear this in my division. Is this-- you know, what I-- where I-- yeah, that's right. 

I only brought this to prove-- we Jews, we know how to fight. But we not have the opportunity to fight. Because not-- yeah. And I hope never again hear crematorium for the Jews. And Israel left live of ever, of ever [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you want to-- 

SUBJECT: I want to make a statement, special. Not too many people know this. I know they can't speak for themselves. So I come here, speak for them. 

They have many opportunities go in any country. They are survivors from the Holocaust. They are young boys. They are intelligent boys. 

They picked up to go to Israel, they fought in the Palmach, in the Navy, in any formation. In-- in my-- in my division, I mentioned the three brothers. Two died and one survive. He died, too, in my company, the sev-- battalion from Palmach. 

And I wanted the world remember them. They want to fight for freedom for the Jews for future generation. And there's why they pick up and that's what they wanted. 

They are ready to die over to live. And we all here we know we have to-- over we go die. Over we go live. Some to die, some to live. I got lucky. I survived. Shalom. 

[MICROPHONE CLICKING] 

