[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: So, the hospice? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So we went there. And he saw on our faces that something was not kosher. So we asked him to give us a room. 

INTERVIEWER: In the hospice? 

SUBJECT: For my girlfriend. In the hospice, yes. And he said, look, I am Catholic. I will give you a room. I know what happens with you. Even I didn't look Jewish, but he knew immediately. It was already 12:00 in the night, you know. And he said, please sleep here. He gave us a room. I had my passport with me, but he said, no. I don't need it. But tomorrow morning, the first hour, please go out. And this we did. 

And we couldn't get a visa. Not at all. Not at all. I am mixing the times, you know, because I don't remember very well. In the year 1938, it was September. I didn't know anything. I didn't know that we will have to leave Germany. Not yet. 

So I went to Wiesbaden to take the bath in the water, and to drink the water, because I had rheumatism, and so. Will you believe that I couldn't find a room in Wiesbaden? No hotel gave me a room. Always with a sign, not allowed for Jewish people. For Jews. And I had to eat something, I had to drink something. I went to a cafeteria to drink something. Suddenly, there was music. Suddenly they started to play the Horst Wessel Lied. 

"Hangt die Juden, stellt die Bonzen an die Wand" or "Wenn Judenblut vom Messer spritzt, dann schmeckt's nochmal so gut." 

Can you translate it? 

INTERVIEWER: When Jew blood from the spurts from the knife, then they taste so much better. 

SUBJECT: Better. And I was standing with them, between that people. Nobody saw that I was Jewish. Nobody knew it. And I was standing there. So that the next day, I found where to sleep. A friend of mine, she said, come to me. And I slept there. The next day, I went to Baden-Baden to take the bath and to drink the water. I couldn't find a room. I went home. You know? 

And sure I was young. And I was very nervous, because I couldn't take it anymore, this happens. 

Now you want me to know from France? 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you no stay in Europe? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. My husband, he was a very wise man. He said, I don't like the atmosphere. I don't like it. I see too many German people here around. I don't like it. And when we are standing to look in a window, a department store, we were surrounded by German people. 

INTERVIEWER: In Paris? 

SUBJECT: In Paris. In Paris. It's unbelievable, but this is the truth. So my husband said, you know, I don't like it. In! 

INTERVIEWER: Paris in 1938? 

SUBJECT: 1938. It was the end of-- it was the end of 1938. Maybe November, December. I don't like that atmosphere. I don't like it. I don't like it. I don't know why, I don't like it. I see too many German people allowed. This is not normal. It wasn't normal. It was the fifth quinta columna, the-- 

INTERVIEWER: The fifth column. 

SUBJECT: The fifth column-- spies. We saw that. And we came together with other immigrants, so we saw everybody is looking for a visa. It was a terrible, terrible, terrible time in Paris, in France. One suicide after the other. It was terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: Suicide of-- 

SUBJECT: People. Jewish people. Because they all came in a not normal way to France. You know, so that they didn't let them stay in France. The government-- they didn't let them stay. Maybe we could arrange it, but we didn't try even, because we wanted to go out. My husband said, out, out, out. I don't want to stay here. I don't like it. Something is in the air that I don't like. 

So that we went from one to the other for a visa. We went to the Brazilian agent-- he was a Jew. Mr. Yefroikin was his name. And we went to him for a visa to Brazil, because we heard that he can get a visa for Brazil. So we went to him. And we saw one man, he gave him a taufschein, and he was a converted Jew. And Mr. Yefroikin took the tauf, this document, and threw it in the corner. He said, I have enough Jewish people to take care of. I don't need you. 

Well, this was at that time. Then everything changed. We couldn't get-- only for non-Jewish people they gave a visa to Brazil. Not for Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER: To Brazil? 

SUBJECT: To Brazil. To Brazil. 

INTERVIEWER: The authorities refused to-- 

SUBJECT: Refused. Yes. Argentina refused. We sent money to Argentina already, to to a cousin of mine. Because he wrote to us, when you send this and this money, I can get a visa for you for you to Argentina. We sent him the money, and he couldn't get it. So he sent us the money back. 

Only Bolivia was open. They only let, but not so easy. My husband had to sign a document that he will go for agriculture, to work on the camp. And my husband said, no. I don't sign this. I am an Optician. It was not true. My husband studied engineering, but he didn't finish. But my husband had always in mind to study to be an Optician. So he said, I am an Optician, and I don't go to Bolivia to the camp. 

He gave us the visa for a lot of money. Not the consul-- we didn't have the connection with the consul. We had connections to another office. This was from White Russia, a couple Weisrussland, from White Russia. They had an agency-- also for a lot of money, they could get for us the visa. We had to pay them a lot of money. 

INTERVIEWER: What was a lot of money? 

SUBJECT: Well, maybe, in that time-- today it is nothing-- but in that time maybe $2,000 or $3,000 each person. 

INTERVIEWER: Dollars? 

SUBJECT: Dollars. Yes. So we got the visa to Bolivia. We came to Bolivia. It was very nice. The people were very, very nice to us. I cannot complain. Not at all. And we lived there 24 or 25 years. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your husband do there? 

SUBJECT: Optician. My husband learned it. And we had the biggest optician business in the country. Yes. And I had jewelery. And my parents, they were already sent to the ghetto. And I got for them the visa to come to Bolivia. First I wrote to my father. My father was very orthodox. And I wrote to him, if you come to the country, if you want to eat meat, you have to learn shrieten, to be a shoretz. And he learned it only for chicken and so on, not for big animals. And he learned it. 

And then he asked me, because we didn't live in the biggest city in La Paz. We lived in Sucre, because my little child, she couldn't live-- La Paz is very high-- 13,500 feet high. And my child couldn't live there. She always fainted. So that we had to go lower, to another city, Sucre. And my father asked me if there is a cemetery, a Jewish cemetery. I said, no, there is no Jewish cemetery. But if you will come, you will make it. My father was from a lot of tradition. So then we will have a Jewish cemetery. Then later on, we had it. 

And again, I wanted my parents out from the ghetto. So I found in Sucre, in Bolivia, a family. The son of this family was a Bolivian consul in Hamburg. So I went to the parents, and I said to them, look, I'll pay you whatever you want. Please write to your son to write to my parents, to the ghetto in Gorlitz, to send them the passport. And your son should give them the visa to come to Bolivia. And they did it. They wrote took him. 

And I sent a cable, a telegram, to my parents. And that time they got it, the telegram. And it was Rosh Hashanah. And then my parents wrote to me, this was the happiest day in their life. They got the telegram to send the passport to Hamburg to the Bolivian consulate. But the German-- this was the Germans, they didn't give them the passport. They didn't want to give the passport. 

Both my parents, when they came to the Gorlitz, they had to give them, to give the passports. They took it away. The Polish passport. They took the passports away. 

INTERVIEWER: The German authorities? 

SUBJECT: The Germans did it. 

INTERVIEWER: On the border into Poland? 

SUBJECT: This I don't know. This I don't know where. So that they didn't have a document, and they couldn't come to Bolivia. 

INTERVIEWER: The Polish-- they couldn't get another Polish passport? 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. They took away the passport. 

INTERVIEWER: That was what year are you talking of? 

SUBJECT: This was-- I found a card from my father. He wrote this card. I took it to you to show you the card. He wrote this card when he was in the no man's land. He wrote it to my sister, to my brother-in-law, to Palestine. This was the year, in Yiddish, this was the year 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: 1939. 

SUBJECT: This is the only picture I have. 

INTERVIEWER: This card is mailed in 1939. 

SUBJECT: From the no man's land. 

INTERVIEWER: And the date is 18-11-39. So it's after the occupation of Poland. Poland was under German occupation. 

SUBJECT: I don't remember. No. I don't-- 

INTERVIEWER: When did you get to Bolivia? 

SUBJECT: To Bolivia, the first of May, 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: 1939. Could this be November 1939? 

SUBJECT: I would like to give this card to-- it's written so nicely. You'll see. You can read Yiddish? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Yes. It's written so-- I would like to give it to a museum or some place, I don't know. For me, it's a jewel, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: There will be a time that we'll be very grateful to get a card. We don't yet have the-- 

SUBJECT: Where can I go with this? Because you don't want-- because I don't live forever. And I want somebody to have this. 

INTERVIEWER: Yad Vashem is one place. 

SUBJECT: Yad Vashem. In the Jewish museum here? 

INTERVIEWER: I don't know. Our project will begin accepting that, but not yet. Possibly in a year or two. 

SUBJECT: Isn't this interesting? So many years I've had it. 

INTERVIEWER: That was the last? 

SUBJECT: No, this was not the last. Through the Red Cross-- oh, yes, this I have to tell you. I knew that my parents, they don't have not even to eat. Nothing. We were already in Bolivia. And we made a living-- not very much, because we had very little money. No language, no health anymore, no nurse anymore, but we made a living. How could I help my parents? 

I was thinking day and night, what can I do to send them a little bit of money? I didn't have the money, but I said, I would not eat. But I will send them something. So that we had a friend in Sucre in Bolivia. He was a photographer. And I was sitting with him-- he was a half Jew. I said to him, Mr. Lotz what can I do? There must be something that we can do. I would like to send to my parents a little bit of money. 

And we were talking and talking, and we had an idea. He made pictures for my child-- a dozen or two dozens. All of the same pictures. I have this out, too, but I didn't bring it to you. I have the last. The picture was, he put it on a cotton. Between the cotton and the picture, I put in $1.00. At that time, $1.00 was money. Put in $1.00. And he ironed it again. It was between the picture and the-- you understand what I mean? My parents, they received a few times this money, this picture. 

But now, how could I tell them to take away the picture, there is something inside? How can I write to them-- in that time, it was possible to write. How can I tell them to do this? So that I sent, every two weeks, the same picture-- no, every week-- the same picture with the same cotton. So I said to myself, they will say, what is it? Kathe is sending us always the same picture, the same-- there must be something. And they were looking and looking, and found the dollar. 

And then my parents wrote to me, it was sent to us from heaven. From God. Die hast uns der halten beim Leben.. You know what-- 

INTERVIEWER: You've kept us alive. 

SUBJECT: Alive. This I did a few times. Many times, maybe 10 times. They got the picture. The last picture came back, and I have it here. It came back and it said, they are not there anymore. And it came back with $1.00 inside. I have it. And I hold it like a precious jewel. I forgot to bring it. 

And I had-- I was in correspondence I don't know with whom. I don't know with whom. We had in Sucre a friend. He was a priest. He wrote to the Pope-- and my father was very religious. To the Pope to do something for these people. It was impossible. I wrote to Geneva, to the Menschenrechte. 

INTERVIEWER: Human rights. 

SUBJECT: Human rights. I wrote to the Quakers in the United States. I wrote-- I have such a file with letters that I wrote. I didn't sleep day and night, only to have my parents out. My two sisters, they were in Belgium. Then one of them, the youngest, was caught and went to Auschwitz. The other went to South France, and she's now in Argentina. I couldn't take my parents out. Impossible. From human rights, I they wrote to me to me-- it's not a question of money. If we can do something for your parents, we will do it. I told them, I will pay whatever it is. I am young, and I have money in my life. I will pay it with interest. It was impossible. It was impossible. 

So the last letter came back. They couldn't find any more my parents. And then I got-- I got a few letters from my parents through the Red Cross. And the two parents, they signed the letter. The last letter was signed only by my father. And he said, I don't have Panosa anymore. Only I. I-- that means that my mother maybe wasn't there anymore. I don't know. Then-- 

INTERVIEWER: That was what year? 

SUBJECT: This was I think 1942 or 1943. This I don't remember. Then my sister in Israel, she met a man from the same city-- From Gorlitz And he told her that he saw my father the last time. They all were taken on a Friday. It was the Black Friday, they called it. They all were taken to a place, to a plaza. And they had to shovel their own grave, and they killed them all. And my father was between them. This is what this man told. He was able to escape. 

I never in my life heard anymore from my parents. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever go back to Europe? 

SUBJECT: I went for my restitution. Because I left a lot, and I wanted it back. My husband didn't want-- didn't let me go. He said, I don't want their money. I don't want them at all. I said to him, I don't want them, but I want my money. With the money I can do many things. And I have to live. And so I did. I went to Europe. I was there six months. And I worked not only for me, but many other people. They got the money and the pension. I have also a pension from Germany. And I take it. 

INTERVIEWER: What has-- what is living with you now from this? How are you different? 

SUBJECT: First of all, my whole personality changed. I forgot to laugh. I was a very healthy and very happy person. I really am not anymore. And I cannot be anymore happy. Even sometimes people are talking to me and they say, oh, you are so nice. I am not. I forgot to really to love. I changed completely. My whole life has changed. Sometimes I say-- I am coming from a very, very religious home. Sometimes I say, is there a God in heaven or is there not? I cannot answer this question. I don't know. I don't know. I hope only that never again it will happen somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the fright? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: The fright. The fear. 

SUBJECT: The fear? What? What was the fear? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have it? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't. A person like we are, we cannot have fear anymore. No more. If something would happen to me. If something-- let me see. If I would meet a person, and I would know that he did something to my parents or to my sister, I think I would be able to kill him. I think so. I would be able. Yeah. This I have to tell you. 

I went to Germany a few times to make my restitution rights. I was staying in a hotel. And if you are in a hotel a few months or a few weeks, you'll meet the same people. So I was sitting there in Dortmund. And a man came and he said, well, you are going to the dining room? Let's go. I went. We are sitting at one table. 

And he started to tell me where he was during the war. He said, I was an officer. I was in Lembeck. Oh, I said. That's interesting. What have you done in Lembeck? Well, I was sent to Lembeck. Oh, you know, he said. I saw there many things. For instance, the people-- like they killed my parents. There were people, they had to make their own grave. And then they came with the maschinengewehr With a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Machine guns. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they made, [MACHINE GUN NOISES]. And the people, they fell into the grave. Then came the other, the andere lage. Then came the other line. And they made again, [MACHINE GUN NOISES]. And they fell into the grave. And then the third, they had to cover the grave. And the earth was still moving. 

When I heard this, I said to him, look-- what have you done there? He said, nothing. Nothing, you said? I said, you didn't do anything? You didn't say anything? Oh, no. What could I say? They would have killed me. And so what, I said, when they would have killed you? You are only one person. These are hundreds and thousands of persons. Why didn't you leave Germany? Why didn't you try to protest something? Why were you standing? Why didn't you go away from all of this, not to look how they are killing innocent people, children, old people and so on. He said, I couldn't do it. 

I said, look-- I'll tell you something. I don't want to see you anymore. And please don't sit again where I am sitting. Would you have invited me also in the year 1938? Would you have done this? Now you can invite me to eat with you together at the same table. Would you have done this also in 1938? 

This was an incident. And there are many things-- 

INTERVIEWER: He did not know you were a Jew? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: He knew or did not know that you were Jewish? This man? 

SUBJECT: He knew that I'm Jewish. Oh, I told everybody. I came-- the time I came from Israel, I went to Germany. And I told everybody, I'm coming from Israel. Oh, it was the year 1956. I remember. The Sinai War. And I told everybody, I'm coming now from Israel. And they said, but what is this thing? What's going on? It's evil, what they are doing there. This is terrible. 

I said, what? This is terrible. What do you think is terrible? Well, the whole war. Why do they start with the wars? I said, did I start with the war? Do you think that we will ask permission when to start with the war? We don't ask nobody's permission. And he couldn't understand. He said, what is Israel-- what is Israel-- what are they doing there? I said, we don't ask. We don't-- we are doing what we think it right to do. 

So that means that I told everybody that I am Jewish. Everybody. 

INTERVIEWER: We may have to stop pretty soon. You said you hope it could never happen again. What do you think? 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you something-- it can happen again. But we have to be very, very alert and very careful, specially here in the United States. Because the American Jew, he doesn't know in his dreams what happened there. The American Jew. I don't speak about non-Jews. Jews. When sometimes I told, in the beginning, I told a few people what happened, they said to me, is that so? My best girlfriend, she fled from Germany in the beginning, 1933. I came to visit her, and I told her what happened. She said-- my best girlfriend-- is that so? I cannot believe it. I said, you cannot believe it? You better believe it. 

And so I met many American Jewish people, and I can tell you only with all my heart, from the bottom of my heart, be careful. And the young American people, young Jewish people, if they have non-Jewish friends, you have to fight and to fight against antisemitism. This is what I can tell you. 

INTERVIEWER: Toda raba lach. Thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: I hope I could help you with something to make these declarations. I wish it wouldn't be necessary to do this. And now, I am always telling my daughter, because she was very little. She doesn't know this. She knows always-- she saw me always crying, and she didn't know why. Until now. She said, but Mommy, once you have to forget it. I said, never in my life I can forget this. Not only what I went through, but I was a very devoted daughter to my parents, and a very good sister. I suffered very much, very much, not only because of my parents, but because of all the Jewish people who suffered. 