[TEST SIGNAL] SUBJECT: In other words, I have-- 

INTERVIEWER: Look at him, at me, don't see us. 

SUBJECT: I see. 

INTERVIEWER: But look at him, at me, and particularly, the friend in -- 

SUBJECT: --because you can't hear it. 

INTERVIEWER: We can hear it-- 

SUBJECT: But it's not-- 

INTERVIEWER: We-- 

SUBJECT: It's not-- 

INTERVIEWER: We would like to-- you're going to speak to people. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I see. 

INTERVIEWER: It's going to be shown, so-- 

SUBJECT: I see. 

INTERVIEWER: Don't see it, but look at it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Look through us. 

INTERVIEWER: Through us. Like the-- like-- like now. OK? 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were saying it was 10 to eight, and you come running back. 

INTERVIEWER: You're sleeping [INAUDIBLE] in one place [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: I felt that I had no home. I had-- I had no home, and I made the decision that, somehow, I had to find a place in my room-- in our house, for me to sleep. 

So I put a board on top of the table. But I was much longer than the table. I extended the chair for my legs. And some kind of another board. There's a [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] a board that-- where my mother used to make noodles. I remember it very clearly. And somehow I made a place for myself. And this is where I slept until-- I slept like that-- occasionally, I used to run back to my friend because the place was much more comfortable, and the bed, than-- 

And I was afraid to go out in the street. This was already the ghetto. And although the SS was roaming around, but I was afraid to go out for another reason. I was afraid to look at the bodies-- the swollen bodies --laying in the streets-- on the main street, on the street where people used to shop, where the market. 

The hunger was so great in the city that the Germans put the very homeless and the hungry in the synagogue. And I remember going to that street one time, and the people were yelling and screaming for bread and water because there was none. 

INTERVIEWER: In Yiddish? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What words? 

SUBJECT: They were just, help us, help us. Give us-- wasser, essen, broit. I mean, they were yelling to people that couldn't-- couldn't do anything about it. There were people laying in the streets-- children. Children. The first time in my life I saw children swollen from hunger. There was not exactly any food in our house, either. 

I remember occupying my time, again, with teaching children, just as I did before the Germans occupied the town, because there were no schools for children-- for Jewish children. So pe-- people that still had some food or some way of getting-- paying --were still asking me to come to their house and help their children. They should be taught a little bit of Polish, reading, and writing. And I remember telling them that I can only do this if they can pay me with food. 

And there were those that had connections, because food was brought in to the ghetto, in spite of the hunger, there were-- there was always food brought and smuggled there. And some people had connections. I remember one lady was paying me with flour, that somehow she got. And somebody else was paying me with, like, you would call it a cereal of some sort. And I used to bring this home. And it was just great, because my mother used to make all kinds of things. So I, in a way, were helping us survive. 

The hunger was so great, and the-- the-- the sickness. There was typhus-- was-- there wasn't a home that didn't have a sick person with typhus. It couldn't be reported, because that meant, if the Germans knew, they would probably-- so there were sick people in each home. 

And I remember my younger sister had typhus. And she was with us, sleeping in the same bed with my mother. And we were very well aware that this was very-- 

INTERVIEWER: Contagious. 

SUBJECT: Contagious. But somehow, she made it. She was sick for quite a while. And there was this crisis. And she would have temperature. And our lifestyle was going on as always. Nobody knew about it, and everybody knew about it. And somehow, she did not die. She lived to be deported later. 

In nine-- this is already-- this is ghetto, 1940, 1941. In 1942, in the spring, the Germans announced that, in the city of Rata, was very big ammunition factory that no Jew was ever allowed to work there during-- before the Germans occupied-- during the normal days, no Jews were allowed to work there. 

But in 1942, the Germans announced that they allowed Jews to come to work at the ammunition factory. And the ages-- men and women --the age between 16 and 40. And those people will be spared of whatever has to come. They sort of would be protected. 

And the rumors were, of course, accompanying this announcement, that, whatever happens, whatever the Germans are going to do with those people that work in places of this importance, the rest of the family is going to be spared, because we were going to go to work in the morning, they were going to feed us, and come back home to sleep. 

And, knowing this, I volunteered to enroll to be admitted to the ammunition factory. I remember my mother saying-- my mother was older than 40 --and I remember her saying, I only wish I could go. Because you had to show you-- passports. We all had passports with our pictures. 

And I was the only one in my family, my younger sisters being much too young, my mother, too old. My older sister was married at the time, and she had a little boy. She was no longer with us. She lived with her in-laws, and she had a little baby. 

I started working in the ammunition factory, and the work was not too bad, although we worked one day-- one week day, one week night, and we were brought in-- the SS came for us, and took us back. And I had enough food, and sometimes, I could even smuggle some food back to the house for the rest of the household. 

And this went on for about two months. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you get paid? 

SUBJECT: No money. No money at all. Just twice a day, we were fed, I believe. We had a piece of bread in the morning, and soup during the day. 

The work was-- we were doing parts for guns under the supervision of a Polish foreman. And we were told to-- not to break anything. In case if some part were broken, this was considered sabotage. 

INTERVIEWER: How long was the shift? 

SUBJECT: Eight-hour shift. Eight-hour shift. One week day, one week night. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to ask you something about life at home. You are now several years into the ghetto. Would the family sit together? Were there still holidays celebrated? Were there cultural events? 

[SIGH] 

Live in the ghetto-- and in the family. 

SUBJECT: The life in the ghetto that I recall had no more cultural events for me. There was-- my father couldn't even go to show to school. He couldn't go to the rabbi. He was afraid to go out. There was no culture. 

But the family sort of stuck together. We still had this little-- the little food that we had, sabbath was still observed, like the way we were used to. Because our house couldn't be any other-- my father still prayed and hoped that God will help. 

And I remember, one time, having a discussion with him, and he called me a name. I said, how can God help? How-- how was God helping? Look what's happening to people like you. 

People-- most-- the people-- the religious people suffered more, because they were particularly harsh to people-- to religious people, and people with beards, and people of the sort. And he called me a name, and he said, oh, don't talk like that. Don't talk like that, because God will help. He probably always believed that God will help. 

One incident, before I started working in the-- in the ammunition factory, I was awakened by gun-- by-- by shotguns. And I ran to the window. It was during the night. It was dark. And I saw the SD The SD was the sicherheitsdienst. This was the upper echelon of the SS. They were the ones who usually gave the orders, not carry it out. 

But this time, there were a group-- groups of four with their machine gun-- guns on their shoulder, because, although-- although it was dark, but I could see. Inside was-- the house was not lit up. But I could see the street. 

They were sort of going in to the homes. And that street, they were, like, going into one house. And they skipped one. Went into another one, and the next thing, I heard shots. And the next thing I heard screams. And I woke my mother up, and my father. And we were all standing, looking at it. At that time, I thought they were just going-- I just couldn't understand why they're skipping some of the hou-- homes, why they were not going just from one house to another. 

But somehow, which I found out later, they had some sort of list. And at that time, I was ready, really. I was ready for them to come, because they were close. They were like two houses away. I-- I-- I-- I thought, they're coming in, and this-- they're going to-- they're just going to-- they didn't even take the people. They didn't arrest the people, because they shot the people right then and there. If the name or the person answered to whatever looking for. 

And somehow, the night passed, and I had woke-- they-- they had disappeared. They went away. And in the morning, I saw the Jewish police, I should say, and other Jewish people who were part of the ghetto, with small wagons going around collecting the bodies of all those that they had shot the night before. 

And in those days I recollect it was just a question of time when it's going to happen. We were almost positive that it's just-- it's just a question of when are they going to get us, and how they're going to do it, in what form, and how. 

But when the announcement came that I started working the ammunition factory, I sort of had hope again that, somehow, my work is going to be so important that, somehow, I'm going to get away from it, and I'm somehow going to be saved. And I remember my mother saying, oh, it's a wonderful thing that you're going to work there. Now, maybe, we have some hope. In other words, we still hope that there will be some way of living, or making it. 

After a short time of working in the ammunition factory, we were told to go home and take our belongings, because we will be staying there. We will be sleeping there. We will not be allowed to go home. And this is the last time I said goodbye to my mother and father. I remember it very clearly. 

I didn't like the idea. I-- I-- it didn't sound good. It didn't look good, because-- we couldn't-- but they said we were able to communicate, you'll be able to write your mother-- to your parents. You'll be able to visit. So we were hoping that, maybe, once in awhile we'll have permission to go to the ghetto and visit our parents. 

But I remember, now, my mother saying, you'll be the one that will live, because somehow, I have hope that you'll make it. And she, of course, was right, because I never saw them again. 

Shortly after that, when we work-- one night, we were told that something is going on in the ghetto, although we were no longer part of the ghetto. We couldn't go to the ghetto-- only special privileged people. I never-- I never went to the ghetto again. We were heard that something is going on in the ghetto, and it didn't sounded good. 

I remember, during the night shift, at that time-- at that particular week, we worked the night shift. And when we went to the bathroom, it was a floor above us. If we looked out, we could see the ghetto was lit up. It was very bright, which not before. Before, we-- we-- we didn't even know exactly which-- which part of the city was the ghetto. 

Well, we didn't know it at the time, but in the morning, when we were about to go home from our night shift, people came in from the ghetto. It seems that this was the final-- I don't know how to say it in English. [? [POLISH] ?] in Polish. The final-- 

INTERVIEWER: Liquidation 

SUBJECT: --liquidation of the ghetto. And during this-- the bright lights during the night were the lamps that they had put in in order to do this gradually. We asked questions. 

Whom did you see? 

INTERVIEWER: To see-- they put in the lights to-- to be able to see. 

SUBJECT: I did not see that. 

INTERVIEWER: No, the Germans. 

SUBJECT: People-- the Germans, so they could do it in the right, proper way to know who was going where, and to assemble the people, to make sure nobody remains behind. 

I was only told how they systematically took-- at one street after another, they told them to go to this big place-- this particular large space. And from there, on foot, they were taken to the train station. 

I didn't have anybody in particular telling me that they saw my mother and father, my sisters, or my brother-in-law. But I had no hope that they survived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know where they were taken-- where they-- 

SUBJECT: This particular transport was taken to Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew it then. 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't know it then. We were told that they would be going to work, but I knew my father couldn't do any physical work. And my sisters-- my young-- one sister was 10 years old, and one sister was 13. And they were on such poor physical condition, I know they couldn't do much work. 

In other words, I knew that this was the end. I somehow didn't-- didn't expect them to live. So I was all alone then in the ammunition factor, working, sort of waiting for what the next step was going to be. We worked, stayed there, until 1944, August. 

During our work in the ammunition factory, I had witnessed terrible things there. At one time, a young boy was working next to me, a night shift, and one of the parts on the machine broke. It was just an accident. And the foreman told the boss, who was German. 

And the next thing, they took the boy out, told all of us to go out from the barracks. The ammunition factory was one part, and we were sleeping in a-- in barracks, but together, in all, about 10 minutes walk from it. They made sure that everybody should be present there, and they just shot him. 

They just killed the boy. He was about 16. I know his brother. I know his family. And I remember, Reich was the German. He was smoking a cigarette while the firing squad just shot him. And he walked away as if nothing happened. We were just standing there. 

And the next thing, we were called go to work. I mean-- at one time, we were just doing things like a robot. I-- we weren't thinking. We weren't-- we were just told-- we were just doing what we were told. We were like machines. 

The next thing that happened in the barracks in our fields, somebody escaped. And they couldn't find the person that escaped. And they took out the closest kin, a sister, a sister-in-law, a mother, and they killed those people. Again, brought them into the fields, make sure everybody is out there to watch it, and killed them. 

Another time, in 1944, or was it late 1943, we heard rumors that Lublin-- that the city of Lublin was completely liquidated, and the next thing, they would liquidate our-- the-- the barracks, and our work is no longer important, and we'll be shifted some place. Somehow, we got notice. 

But it turned out that the group of Germans who were part of liquidating the Lublin ghetto came to occupy our place where we worked. They-- they took over our living quarters. And it was no longer the ammunition factory, but it was KL. 

And they took away all of our clothes, and we were given striped dresses with kl painted in red on the back of our clothes. And we thought this is the end, because its sort of-- we-- I-- I was-- I was terribly, terribly afraid of that, because, somehow, our life had changed. Up until then, we still had, like, a little box with personal belongings, little mementos, but when the KL took over, we had no personal possession. 

INTERVIEWER: What effect did it have on you? 

SUBJECT: At that point, not much. Not much-- not much. In fact-- I-- I remember not being afraid anymore. I was just hoping that whatever has to come, it should come fast, swift. I had given up on living at all. I was just concerned how much longer and where are we going to be taken. I know it's not going to be here, because this was still in Rata. I knew that they will take us from here someplace. We just didn't know where. A lot other ter-- terrible things had happened. I became completely immune to all that, I should say. 

The only other thing that I remember, it seems that some people were building a bunker on our camp. Four people, and the bunker was discovered. And we were told that they brought these people to the surface. And we were standing there, waiting, that the next thing they're going to be shot in front of our eyes, because that would be the only way to punish these people. But the camp leader decided otherwise. He didn't-- he said, you-- I will let you live. Which was surprised, how come he-- he was so good. 

Well, four days later the entire camp was evacuated. We were taken, on foot, from Rata with the SS walking next to us, through the city of Rata, to the cities and-- and places where I lived and grew up, to these streets where I lived, walking, not tell us where we're going. Seeing all that was a terrible experience. It was so bad. 

We didn't know where we were going. The people that tried to escape, they shot. And we were walked out of the city. It seems that the people-- the people that were at the end, the old people --they put on little wagons. And they told them that, if you can't walk, it doesn't matter. You can ride the wagon. The same evening, when we stopped to take a rest, the evening we slept in the field, we found out-- I didn't see them shooting them --but all those that they told they could ride on the wagon were shot. So there was no such thing as not walking. 

We walked on foot to a city called Tomaszow Mazowiecki. 

INTERVIEWER: We are now in 1944. 

SUBJECT: This is 1944, August-- August, 1944. 

At the time, we didn't know why-- or course, later on, we were told that they didn't have enough cars for shipping us somewhere, and so we walked. We were-- it was hot, exhausted, and, as I say, like a robot, we didn't know where we were going. 

They took us to Tomaszow Mazowiecki. They took us to a prison, the women separate. We were 500 women, 200-- 2,500 men. The women separate. And they didn't tell us how long we're going to stay, or what we're doing there. Once a day, we were fed soup. 

We stayed in prison for about three or four days. And that was also a horrible experience. The room where we stayed was so small, that one-- actually, there was no room for us to sit --one was sort of sitting on top of the other. And we discovered that we started to-- to-- to-- to scratch ourselves. It seems that there was-- there were terribly-- not worms, but lice in that room, coming from under the floors, the woodwork, from all over. And we were just pulling pieces from ourselves. There was just no way-- for four days, there was no soap, there was no water, there was nothing like that. 

So after four days, we were told that we're going to Germany-- German came to our place-- to the prison, announced that we are being shipped to Germany. 

Each of us receive a whole bread, a bread had four pounds. And we were so happy. I didn't have a whole bread in my hands for years. But then-- then I said, I thought that this, if we got a bread-- a large bread like this, then we are going on a very long journey. So I better not eat the bread now, because I might not have-- this bread might have to last a long time. 

Well, the journey lasted only one night. We were in those cattle trains going very fast. And, in the morning, we arrived. This train stopped, and we saw a big sign, Auschwitz. By then, we knew what Auschwitz was, we've heard that this is a place where people do not come back. 

And we were chased out of the train, and had to leave. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell in detail about the arrival at Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when the train stopped? What do you see? What do you think? 

SUBJECT: The train stopped. They only took out the women. The men remained in the trains. And as we were walking away, first of all, right then and there, they told us to leave-- to leave everything we had. And the only thing we really had was that loaf of bread that we got, from a few hours before. 

Then they left. Since we turned back-- we looked back, and we saw the men remain in the trains. Then we knew for sure that we are going straight to the ovens. And we had heard about the ovens. We didn't know how it looked, and what we expected, but we knew-- this was actually that I considered my death march. I was-- not even concerned anymore, since I knew my mother, my father, my sisters were gone. I had no other close people to worry about then. Then I was just I remember thinking to myself, this is it. They are gone, and now it's my turn. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think of-- that you would be reunited, meet them? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Not being a religious person, I never thought-- because I knew that they're dead a long time ago. They were dead in 1942, when they wanted to Treblinka. And I sort of felt relieved, in a way, that I don't suffer anymore. 

And when we arrived at the building, we were told to strip. I remember men sitting there. They shaved our heads-- not mine. My head-- not my head-- they shaved the heads of the other girls, and by some, I don't know, miracle, or a-- I can't explain today-- they-- there were those that got out with with their hair. My head was not shaved. 

We were humiliated being naked in front of these strange men. And what-- I remember, which I found out later on, that this was Mengele. He stood there in front, with other Germans. 

And my cousin was with me, and her sister, and a little girl. Everything went so fast, that I didn't realize that her sister, the little girl, disappeared. And I was just with my cousin, Rina. And she started looking around, and she says, where's my sister? Where's my sister? 

And we didn't have too much time to ask questions, because they were pushing us and shoving us in the right direction. And then we looked out the window-- she sort of went left, we were going right. And I remember looking out the window, and I saw her sister with the little girl on a truck, like an open truck. And then, we were pushed to the right, into a big room 

And one other incident stands out in my mind. There was a lady with a little girl in the room. Pushing her on-- between her legs. She had no clothes on. The girl was about three or four. And somebody was chasing her. And some of the men attending there came after her, and she started screaming. And she was-- she was trying to hide the child somewhere. And they took her out, and the little girl. 

And although I saw it happening, I saw just a few minutes before, my cousin's sister and the little girl. And I still didn't realize, at the time, that they were just taking them away to be gassed. Because I thought, at the time, that we also are going in somewhere where they're going to open something. We were looking up, and looking for the gas that was supposed to come down, that we expected it. And then we saw water. It was actual water coming down. We had a shower. 

After the shower we walked out, and we were given different clothes. And really not believing that we were still alive. We really had to touch ourselves to believe it that we are still alive. And then, they walked us to a field. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember that selection? Was is at the railway station, in a building, or is it hazy? 

SUBJECT: Not at the railway station. In a building. In a building. Definitely in a building, because I remember, they told us to put things on the table if anybody had any possessions of any kind. It was inside the building. Yes, inside a building. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you remember these things? Clearly, in a rush? 

SUBJECT: Very much in a rush. Very much in a rush. Not realizing, at all, at the time, that the people that were going in one direction were not to come back. No, it happened much too fast. And with the incident with the little girl and the mother, trying to hide-- which, of course, I-- I-- I recollect this later that this meant-- evidently that woman knew that they wouldn't let the baby-- the little girl go through, so she was trying to-- to-- to save her. But I really didn't, because I thought, this is the end for us, as well as the other-- I didn't make any distinction between the people that they took and the group that we were with. 

I found out later, of course, we didn't see these people anymore. When they marched us to a field, they were no longer there. 

We were put into barrack 8. When we walked into the barrack, there were a lot of other people already on those-- sleeping there, or being there. And I remember we were about 10 or eight people on one-- 

INTERVIEWER: Bunk. 

SUBJECT: Barrack. No, not the barrack. The place where we slept. Bunk, yeah. 

I remember trying to say something to the people and they couldn't speak Yiddish or Polish. I remember how annoyed I was. I said, what kind of people are they here. If they can't speak Yiddish, what are they doing here? 

It turned out that these were Hungarian Jewish women. And they didn't speak Yiddish, they only spoke-- spoke Hungarian. And, of course, we couldn't communicate. 

I don't remember if we-- if I was happy being alive. I was practically very indifferent. We were not doing any work in Auschwitz. In the morning, we were woken early in the morning for a roll call, which lasted hours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe it. 

SUBJECT: We had to stand five in a row in front of the barrack. And the field was tremendous. There were many, many barracks-- tremendous field. And everybody, of course, had to be out at the same time. 

And we were just standing there for hours. I don't know, I guess it was-- just, if the reason-- just let it stand there. Just counting us. No work, no torture, no pushing, no shoving. Just standing there. And then until they finally-- we were finished counting, and then we would told to disperse. 

The ovens were going day and night. We were very close. We were like feet away from the ovens. We'd see the smoke. We'd see the fire. We saw the people coming. We were like-- a barbed wire not far from where we were. We could see the trains arriving. But we didn't see taking the people off. We didn't see any of that from our field. We could only see the ovens, the smoke, and the fire, day and night. 

INTERVIEWER: And the trains. 

SUBJECT: And the trains. But we didn't see the people getting out. Either they were going out from them. 

In the morning-- I remember we were going to bed --in the morning, I woke up, and I used to ask-- we used to ask one another, is it still on? Is the fire on? Is it burning? And the answer was, yes. 

I felt, at the time in Auschwitz that this was just-- just a question of time, either they have too many. They can't burn so many at one time. It was just because we felt completely not important. We didn't work. We didn't contribute to anything. We didn't do any work. How can we exist? 

The Germans would feed us without giving anything for it. So we felt-- I felt --that this is just-- they let me live because there's no room for me in the oven. As soon as they'll be room, they'll just come and wind us up, and put us right in where the others were. But somehow they were doing it slowly. 

During those days that we were roaming around, the whistle used to blow, and that was what they called blocksperre Everybody had to go into the blocks, to the barracks. No one was outside. And they made a selection. The SS would come in and look us over. We had to get off the bunks, stand in front of the bunk, and they were walking through and looking at us. Those that looked very thin and sort of sickly, they took them out, never to return. 

And one of those blocksperre I remember my cousin and I decided not to stay there, not to go in. But instead, we were going-- we-- we sneaked over to the kitchen, because we were terribly hungry. There was very little food. And we were afraid that if we're going to look so very thin, the next time they'll come into the barrack, it's going to be our necks. 

So we decided to sneak over to the kitchen. And we weren't allowed to be near the kitchen at any time, and especially during the blocksperre, because that meant everybody had to be inside. And we tried to grab potato or a turnip or something that was-- nothing was there, but in the garbage, we found a big turnip, it's something that-- I don't see these things here now. But I understand this was fed the cows were eating it, but it meant enough food, a lot to us. 

I didn't realize then that I was risking my life. Because if they would find us outside the barrack, we would have been shot immediately. But I guess that the surviving, the will to live, and not being thin so they couldn't take us, was greater than I thought it was. 

We came back, and everybody thought that we were crazy, why we take-- took a chance like that. And if we were selling turnip for bread. We gave a large piece of turnip for a tiny piece of bread. We exchanged. And it sort of let us-- we felt good about it. We felt-- we satisfied the hunger for a few days. 

A few weeks later, we were told that we're going to be tattooed, that this particular group that came from Rata, from the ammunition factory, we're considered good workers. And we are going to be tattooed. 

So some of our friends thought that this is a very good sign, because that means that it's important, that they want us. Because the people that went to the ovens straight, never-- they never bothered tattooing. So that's the sort of a ray of hope, that we're going to live. 

And this was already, let's say, November. In Poland, November, it's very cold. The early days of December, standing on this roll call. It was so terrible. We were so very cold. 

Now, there was no water. There was no-- no-- no paper of any kind. There was no-- they used to open the-- the water for an hour, for thousands of women to go and wash in that hour. We used to push and shove. 

The bathroom was closed. It was opened only for certain times, certain hours, so we can all get in. 

In 1944, in-- at the early December, a group of Germans came to Auschwitz looking for workers that worked in the ammunition factory in Rata, because they needed some people for working in the cement factory in Czechoslovakia. And our group was selected-- not the entire group. We were 250 women. Only 100-- 100 of us were sent to cement. 

And that was the first time, and during the entire war-- this was 1939 --that I really felt that, maybe, I will make it, maybe I will live, because we left Auschwitz. We left Auschwitz, and they gave us a decent dress, and a coat, because we were going to Czechoslovakia to work in that factory. 

We were, again, that was a small town, Czechoslakia, the name Trutnov. 