DORI LAUB: The first page of the album, and the album bears your name. Roll tape. And now. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: My name is Martin Feyman, and I was born in a small town, and then we moved to a bigger city. 

DORI LAUB: What year, which time? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: In 1927 on the Jewish holiday Rosh Hashanah. And then we moved to a bigger city named Bedzin. 

DORI LAUB: In Poland? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: That's not far from the German border. I don't know. My family, my father mostly-- he was a Zionist more or less when the Jabotinsky could follow us. 

And I belonged to organizations, to Zionist organizations like HaNoar HaTzioni. And I went to school. I went to the gymnasium. And finally, just before-- the beginning of '39, I decided to go to kibbutz. I wanted to go to Israel. 

DORI LAUB: What was your father doing? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: My father was a barber. He had a big barbershop. There was four of us in our family, two boys and two girls. So in the beginning of '39-- 

DORI LAUB: And the customer in the barbershop-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: The customers? Sure. 

DORI LAUB: Who were they? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: All kind of men, women. And they had for both of us-- in Poland, there used to be a barber shop for-- for both sexes. 

DORI LAUB: Was this the Jewish community? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. The town where I came from was 85% Jewish, a very big population. 

DORI LAUB: How many? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I would say about 65% of them were Jews. My whole ambition was to go to Israel. But there was no way. It cost a lot of money to-- to go on certificates. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember meetings of the HaNoar HaTzioni? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Oh, sure. I used to-- when I started, I was a young kid. Then as I progressed, I become a kvutza I had-- I had my own kids. And as you progress, you had to-- eventually, you have to go to a kibbutz. Because there is no way out. Because you're getting older, you've got to-- you've got to go to Israel. 

DORI LAUB: What was such a meeting of a kvutza like? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We used to teach in Hebrew, and teach being Boy Scouts, and teach them about Israel. We used to teach the kids about geography of Israel, what Israel has got, resources, and very little politics. The only the taught them is Zionism and clean living. We didn't think. We couldn't smoke-- just like Boy Scouts. And that was part of the-- growing up. 

And then in '38-- in the beginning of '39, I decided to go to-- to kibbutz. So I went to kibbutz in the upper part of Poland, almost near the Russian border, in a small town town, Kryowieze. It's not far from a big town, Jazwo. And I was there to do war work till '39. 

DORI LAUB: Till September? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Till September of '30. So we-- 

DORI LAUB: What was this life-- what was life like? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: The kibbutz was a big farm. We had a tremendous farm. We had an engineer that was running it, agricultural engineer. My job was, we had a tremendous amount of cows and horses, and self-sufficient farm. In the other three months, we used to have a different job, like my turn was to deliver milk to the city. 

So I had to get up 3 o'clock in the morning and get the wagon to go to the city, deliver milk from house to house. Or if I had to watch the cows or spread the manure, whatever was in the farm. This, every three months, used to change until you were actually prepared to go to Israel and go to kibbutz. 

So in September, they-- I would say the 20th-- the war was in progress already. We were getting robbed by the farmers, by the people. So we picked ourself up and went back home, went back to Bedzin. When I came into Bedzin, I was-- at that time, the whole city was fingerprinted and documented and everything. And I was-- I had nothing. 

And at that time, there was-- they were catching all the-- that was the first people, first young people that they-- they took to labor camps. It wasn't a concentration, but just a labor camp. They were building that famous Reichsautobahn. 

DORI LAUB: The labor camps in Germany? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. So I was picked up with about several hundred other boys from my hometown and was sent away. So this wasn't-- 

DORI LAUB: Didn't you go to Russia? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Wait a minute. This was-- when I came-- when I came back from-- I got it all mixed up. I'm getting ti all mixed up. From the kibbutz, I went to Russia, and then I came home. I went to Russia. I went to the-- I still wanted to go to Israel. And we got as far as-- I don't know if I can mention names. 

DORI LAUB: You said you were heading towards the Caspian Sea? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We were almost near Iran and the Caspian Sea. You see, the Caspian Sea freezes over in the winter. And we walked 3/4 of the way, almost near it, and we we got caught. It was four of us, four boys, two from Lemberg, from Lviv, and two from my hometown, and another kid with me from my hometown. He got caught there. We got shipped back to the city, and we got put in jail with somebody. I think he was a Jewish fellow from Russia, a big officer. 

He came into jail one night. He said, here is two tickets. Go back home. If not, you're going to wind up in Siberia. So that was-- that was 1940. That's when I got back to Bedzin and smuggled to the border. There was no place for me, anyplace. I had to-- I had to go back home. 

DORI LAUB: You mean you crossed the border? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: At that time, they had a border between Russia and Germany already. 

DORI LAUB: From the German to the Russian-occupied-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: From the Russian-occupied to the German-occupied. 

DORI LAUB: When you wanted to go to the Caspian Sea? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. When I went, there was no border. 

DORI LAUB: There was no border? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Because the Russians, they just started to progress. And we went with the army towards-- towards the Russian-- the Russian place. See, the Russian came in as far as Przemysl. And by the time when we started-- we started marching, we just caught the Russians over there. So there was no border yet. And from there, we registered to go to Russia. 

DORI LAUB: How did you know which way to go towards Palestine? Maps? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We had maps. We had to go the closest-- we had to go the closest way. We looked at the map, and the Russians were-- were registering young fellows to go to the coal mines in Russia. So we registered, and we-- we went there. They picked us up and took us to Russia. 

And there, I worked in the coal mine. And then we found out there was a whole bunch of-- from all different cities. We find out that there's a way to get out of there if I signed my name on the book that I don't want to work here anymore. 

So they asked, where do you want to go. So we figured out Astrakhan was the closest from the Caspian Sea. So we went there, and I was working in a-- in a factory that they make ships. I was electrician there. And one night, we picked ourself up, and we-- we took off. 

DORI LAUB: And what? Can you describe that one night? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: One night, we came home from work in the afternoon, and we got all set up. We took the minimal things so the Russians wouldn't see that we are-- we are running away. And we went out, and we went across the-- went on the ice in the Caspian Sea. 

DORI LAUB: On the ice? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, and very thick ice. Because the Caspian Sea is closed up, they devoted to catch them there. 

DORI LAUB: You begin walking? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Walking. We walked all night. In the morning, we got caught. 

DORI LAUB: But you were in the middle of the sea? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: It was all-- on the edges, all frozen. 

DORI LAUB: You walked along the edge of the sea? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, of the sea. It was all frozen. We saw a lot of people walking back and forth there, a lot of Russians. And the Secret Service picked us up. We could almost see-- almost see the border. 

DORI LAUB: To-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: To Iran. 

DORI LAUB: To Iran, which is also on the Caspian Sea. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. It's on the other side. 

DORI LAUB: So how far were you from the border? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: It wasn't too far. We walked all night. I don't know how far it was, but I know we walked all night. It was a very clear, clear night. And then all of a sudden, they-- the Secret Service swooped down on us, and they picked us up. And they took us all back. That was-- that was the beginning of the-- of the bad luck for me. 

So finally, we came back to-- to my hometown. Like I said, I had no papers or anything. The only way out for me was-- and then they said that if-- if the young people are going to go to the camps, they're going to leave our parents home. So I was strong. I was young. I had a trade. I had education. So I went. 

DORI LAUB: When did you learn to be an electrician? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I was-- I was working after school. Everybody to work after school. We had to support the family. Everybody was pitching in. 

So the first camp I worked-- I was-- I was in, we were making the autobahn, the famous Reichsautobahn. We were-- in the beginning, I was an electrician, and then they-- they were shot in help. I was running a machine to mix cement to pour it. We used to pour it day and night, wintertime. And we'd build bridges and everything. And this was going on for quite a while. 

They kept on-- as the thing progressed, we kept on moving from place to place. And at that time, they were running short in the skilled help, the Germans. So the commander picked us up, whoever had a skill. They took us out. I was-- I was actually a troubleshooter. That's what you'd call it. They used to take take me out of a camp and take me out to farm land over there. And his-- his trashing machine was on the bum. So I was the guy who-- so I came in one night. I came in to one farmer way in the middle of Germany. I didn't even know where I was. There was two big guys with dogs, two SS with dogs, and I was only one guy, one little fellow. They took me in to the farm. 

And the tarshing machine was-- was stuck. I took the motor apart, and I tried to fix it up. So the farmer's wife, she come over, she says-- she says to me, what did you do? There's two guys with machine guns watching you. I figured if I'm going to tell her I'm a Jewish, she wouldn't believe me. She has never seen an Jew in her life. So finally, I said-- I said to myself, what can I lose. I told her I'm a Jew. 

So what are you-- why did they all watch you like that because you're a Jew? So by that this happened, they come in split us apart. But she gave me some food and stuff, and I had to hide it. When I came back to camp, I spread it all over the guys. Everybody had something. And that was the-- that's the way I was going from camp to camp. I was never too long in one camp until the war got close. They-- 

DORI LAUB: Were you dressed in any particular way? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. I was dressed in a white-- white and blue pajama with wooden shoes. Did you ever walk on wooden shoes in the wintertime with snow? As you start walking, you get higher and higher and higher. It starts to stick on you. And you-- but you lose one side. You're lopsided. 

And they-- and then they-- the war was getting-- for them, it was getting very bad. 

DORI LAUB: And you went-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: For the Germans. 

DORI LAUB: From camp to camp in Germany? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: You remember some of the names of the camps? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Oh, there were so many names, some of them small camps that they-- they-- you didn't-- you didn't see them in any papers. It was just 300, 400 people in the camp. 

In one camp I was, it was-- the name was Graditz, Faulbruck and Graditz. It was a combination of two camps. And I was there with my-- I found my brother there. And we had a-- with typhoid fever. But 2,000 guys in there. And we come out about 35 of us. It was my brother and I and about 33 other guys. And the all died of typhoid. 

DORI LAUB: What do you remember day after day with typhoid? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I can't even imagine it. It's unbelievable. I never told it to anybody. People walking around like dogs. 

DORI LAUB: You and your brother have not been able to talk about it even? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I never did. And even-- I never told my wife about it. You have never seen people with typhoid fever. It was unbelievable. People were dying like flies. No food, no water, just rain water from the ground. And I never got sick. It never affected me. I ate with them. I drank with them. And I took care of my brother. 

And finally, they-- they decided that whatever can still walk around, they're going to take them out, the Germans. Because the whole camp was closed up, sealed tight. 

DORI LAUB: By-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: By the Germans. 

DORI LAUB: Who? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: The SS. 

DORI LAUB: What did they look like? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Well, they were all stone fierce. They came in. When they saw, typhoid fever, they didn't want the thing to spend in the town, the city. The closed out the whole camp. 

DORI LAUB: Did they leave, too? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: And we had one chef, the cook. Come to find out he was-- we were brought up together in the same backyard. And he-- when he-- when we recovered-- I used to feed him water. That's all what they needed was water. He recovered, and he went down to the basement. He found peels from potatoes, and he cooked it for the people who walked around to eat and survive. And he survived, too. He's now-- he's a-- so how-- that's how my brother and I survived. 

DORI LAUB: 2,000 people were completely closed off? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. No food, no water, nothing. 

DORI LAUB: For how long? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They were waiting for us to die out. We were dying anyway. We were dying. There were piles and piles of dead people every morning. You know what happened? You get high temperature, very high. You start burning up. And you're running around, you bark like a dog on all fours. You know, you're no human being anymore. 

DORI LAUB: People went crazy with fever? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, and then they died. They were always laughing to see every morning a bunch of people dead. Then when they took us out, they took us into another camp. 

DORI LAUB: The Germans had no appell, nothing? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Nobody-- nobody stuck their nose in there. 

DORI LAUB: Only there were guards with machine guns? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: There were guards with machine guns outside, and that was it. 

DORI LAUB: How long was that? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I don't know how long the time was. Because sometime it came-- when they came in, and we were 35 people still walking around, they took us out. They looked us over, and they send us-- there was and old mill, and old flour mill. 

DORI LAUB: I still can't quite grasp it. Over 1,900? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They just died. They were taking them out on wagons, buried them. 

DORI LAUB: In the camp? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: You had a cemetery there? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Were there any ritual, any prayer said? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Who should-- who could-- who could stand up? We were so involved. Those-- those few who can walk around, we were trying to help whoever we could to survive. It was very hard because there was nothing there to-- to help with. 

DORI LAUB: Mr. Feyman, tell me how you tried to do something for a particular person there. Do you remember? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I had-- this fellow who is in Israel now and my brother and they were, they were burned up for fever and they needed water. And that particular night, it rained. So we went out, I went outside and got some water in a puddle. It was clear rainwater. And I kept feeding them. 

In the morning, I could see that they start to, start to move around and felt better. By that time, I was-- we were lucky because two days later when they start to walk around, they took us out. If they were to be laying down, they would have been dead. I never know what they did with the rest because they took us out and put us, put us in another camp. 

DORI LAUB: And for weeks and weeks, no German came in? No food? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Nobody came in. Nobody came in. When the typhoid fever broke out, we didn't see nobody. And it broke out from dirt, and I think lice, and all kind of-- 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember conver-- what people used to say to each other? Or what-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: There was very little talk because the people were going out of their minds. Very little talk. Then we come to another camp, they start to feed us. They, they brought in people from different places and they made another camp. And at that time, I started-- they come and they ask me if, uh, they were, they were looking for people to spread to different camps. 

So they took my brother away from me. And they send me to one place and send him another place. At that time I went to the first concentration camp. Until now, it was still labor camps. They called them labor camps. So I came to, uh, Langenbeilau, was a labor camp, was a concentration camp. To 

DORI LAUB: What year? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Hm? 

DORI LAUB: What year? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: That must have been 1944. Yeah. It was still winter, in the beginning of '44. And as a mechanic, I was assigned to a garage. 

DORI LAUB: Tell me, what do you remember coming into the first concentration camp? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: To, to the labor camp, or concentration camp? 

DORI LAUB: The con-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I wasn't-- there was two different camps and I started out with just a labor camp. 

DORI LAUB: The concentration camp. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: From day two they start to, to put numbers on us. By the time when there was quite a few thousand people in the that spot it was a big, big box. A lot of people. I didn't even know how many people were there. And they start to, uh, to put numbers on us. 

They called me out and two other guys. We had to go out on a job. So they took us, picked us up and we left with the, with the SS for about two weeks. When I came back to the camp, they were all done with the numbers. That's why I have no number. 

And from there, from the same camp that was getting the-- they picked us up one time, all the tradesmen. We were a group. We were plumbers, electricians, carpenters, masons. They took us into Gross-Rosen. We didn't know where we were going. 

And they brought us into the-- I don't know if anybody familiar with the camp in Gross-Rosen. There was a, a camp in the Stehkom-- I was Stehkommando. It was mud up to your knees. And you get up in the morning and you got out and you stood there. And you stood there until night. At night you went back to the barracks. Every day. 

I figured that that's it. But I, out of this one I would never get out. But I was lucky for once reason because where we lived in Bedzin in my hometown, there was a Polish school in, uh, in the complex and the houses where we lived. Polish kids. And their principal lived in the downstairs, we lived on the third floor, he lived downstairs with his wife and kids. There was three kids there. Three polish kids. 

We lived very friendly with them because we lived in the same house and we played together. And I was in Gross-Rosen the Stehkommando, the commander that was standing up. A bunch of, bunch of guys came out and they walked up and down looking at the people just falling down in the heat and mud. The guy looked at me and I looked at him. He says, in Polish, what are you doing here? I said, nothing. I don't know what I'm doing. He said, come on out. 

Then I recognized him. He was one of those principal's son. He was the kapo over there. He was kind of in charge of the young ones. He put me in a truck. I was going back to the same camp I came from. He said, you're going to die over here. That's how I survived. 

DORI LAUB: What was the Stehkommando work to do? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: He just stood there. 

DORI LAUB: That was the work? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: That was work. They didn't know what to do with us. So we came out there. I don't know how many of us. Rows and rows of people. We just stood there all day. Up to our knees in mud and the sun was beating down on our head. You stood there for 16, 12 hours. That depends. 

We always left a few of them out there. And when we went back, people collapsed, died. I was there for two weeks. I thought that that was it until he got me out. I never knew what happened to him afterwards. 

DORI LAUB: And after those 16 hours? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: He went back to the barracks and gave us a cup of soup a slice of bread. That was it. 

DORI LAUB: And next day? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Next day same thing again. 

DORI LAUB: How early? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Sometimes-- that depends how, how crazy they were. Sometimes woke us up 3:00 in the morning, sometimes 7:00 in the morning. That depends who was in charge that night. We knew exactly who was in charge what, what time you're going to get up. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe one of those people in charge? Who was in charge and-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We could never see because there was so many people, so many of us. They only had four or five SS men watching us. Because most of them were all around in towers. There was only a handful of people walking around with the SS looking at us. 

So we got up in the morning and we go-- walked out there five abreast, walked in there. And we stood there. And they were-- and they were counting and recounting and counting. All day long they were counting us. 

MALCA BLUM: What did you do all day? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Nothing. 

MALCA BLUM: You were not allowed to talk or more or-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We couldn't talk. We couldn't move. We couldn't make sudden moves. And you just, that was the worst thing I ever-- I didn't mind working hard. 

MALCA BLUM: Mm-hm. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: But I couldn't stand up like this. That was-- That was the worst part. 

DORI LAUB: What if someone needed to go-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They did it right there. 

DORI LAUB: --relieve yourself. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Right then and there. 

DORI LAUB: Standing? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. When you fell down, you were finished. 

MALCA BLUM: In what way? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They'd take you out and we didn't-- we never knew what happened to 'em. 

MALCA BLUM: Mm-hm. These were young people, old people? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Young and young people and old people, all kind of people. 

MALCA BLUM: Almost. 

DORI LAUB: Can you stop it? 

CREW: No. 

CREW: We're rolling, John. John? 

CREW: Rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: You know, eh, when we-- if you-- if you don't mind stepping back a little bit. When I was in Graditz during the epidemic, we had an orchestra there playing, our own fellas still have their instruments. Every night, you used to go in, whoever could walk, used to go into a big, we had a big hall. It was an old mill. And everybody was starving, everybody was hungry, but they kept on playing. And they-- 

DORI LAUB: During the typhoid epidemic? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. They kept on playing. And finally, those who were playing, I don't know what happened. One day, they all disappeared. Then it got real dull, real bad. They disappeared. We didn't know what happened to them. We never ask any questions to anybody. 

But later on when I got to Gross-Rosen, those same guys were playing in Gross-Rosen. While we were standing outside doing nothing, and dying in the sun, they were play-- they-- they-- they had a big orchestra. And I recognized some of those guys, that they were with me in camp. They would play there. I don't know how they got there or who took them out of there. But they were there. They had a big orchestra playing. 

DORI LAUB: Hours and hours? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They must have been well fed for them to play. 

DORI LAUB: What instrument did they have? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They-- the two fellas I knew had clarinets. One had a saxophone and, um, and, um, one trumpet. And they were playing all kind of songs. They must have getting-- they m-- they must have gotten good food from somebody. 

DORI LAUB: What songs? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They were playing anything they can think of. I don't know. I-- Some of 'em I didn't even recognize, some polish songs, some Yiddish songs, some-- then, they couldn't play very little German songs. And playing dance music and all kind of-- 

But I can-- I could never understand how they could play those instruments without eating. So somebody must have-- I think that was for the-- for the SS, what, they had a big kick out of it. Seeing people dying, playing-- playing music, some sadistic things. 

DORI LAUB: They would also play all the 16 hours? No? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They-- they-- they used to have interruptions every two, three hours. And then they came back and they played some more. 

DORI LAUB: And you were standing in the sun? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. Just standing there-- 

DORI LAUB: And-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: --doing nothing. 

DORI LAUB: --an orchestra was playing? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Was there ever any singing? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. 

DORI LAUB: Forbidden? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: You couldn't talk. You couldn't sing. The only thing you have to d-- do is stay and stay and listen to them. And after a while, it gets on your nerves. And, eh-- So this was-- this was in Gross-Rosen. And, eh, I never knew what happened to the-- the people they took out of that-- that epidemic. 

Some of 'em disappeared, the bodies disappeared over there, half alive. You didn't-- we know what happened. They used to-- they had a-- a bunch of guys. I think they were from Hungary, Hungarians. And that-- and they were-- they were the people who were taking care of the bodies, half dead and three quarter dead. So we never knew what happened to them. 

So the only thing-- the only people I knew was the people who-- who could still walk around and the people were laying down and they could-- and they were still breathing. That's the only people we knew. And, eh, that-- that's how my brother survived. He's over here now in-- in the United States. He wound up in Italy after the war. 

DORI LAUB: Going back to that epidemic in Gr-- in Graditz. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Graditz. Faulbruck Graditz, there was a twin-- twin little town, two towns. 

DORI LAUB: When you got together in the evening and the orchestra, there were no Germans to watch you? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. 

DORI LAUB: So you could talk, sing. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: You see, we were-- eh, everybody was so downhearted. How can you sing when you're-- when you're dirty, you're filthy, you're hungry, you have no clothes, you haven't washed in weeks. There was no water to wash. So nobody had the-- we just sat there because we were told to go in and sit there. 

DORI LAUB: By whom? There were no Germans. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Oh, the G-- the Germans were all around us. They were-- they were not inside. But they were all around us. And th-- And they talked to us. 

DORI LAUB: How? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: By speakers. 

DORI LAUB: Loud? Can you describe? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. They had big loudspeakers. And they said, now, everybody go in and listen to your music. And we had some kapos over there who made sure that we got there. 

DORI LAUB: Do you speak German? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Who me? Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Can you repeat what you heard on the loudspeaker in German? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No, I forgot it. 

DORI LAUB: It begins with, "achtung." 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I can't even repeat it. I'm gonna choke up. I don't want to hear that no more. There were all kind of dirty sayings to us. 

DORI LAUB: Like? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Dirty German sayings, I don't remember no more. I-- see, I tried to blank this thing out for years. And, eh, I could never-- I could never repeat it. 'Cause this was-- this was embedded in my brain for-- for weeks and weeks. 

And I couldn't live with it. I thought I'm gonna go out of my mind if I ever start thinking about it. They call us all kind of name, Schweinejuden, verfluchtet, schmutzige Juden and all that. And we, uh, um, and then they said, eh, deine amerikanische Bruder die fuhren die Kriege against, gegen Deutschland and all that stuff, you know? 

DORI LAUB: Your American brothers. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Eh, waging war against-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Waging war against us-- 

DORI LAUB: the Jews-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: --against the Germans. This was going on and on. So after a while, you tried to, eh, you can, eh, block this thing out. You concentrate on one thing. 

DORI LAUB: Like? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Life. Stay alive. And some day, I'm gonna win. 

DORI LAUB: What do you remember thinking when you tried not to hear or when you were-- what kind of thoughts? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I was thinking f-- I was looking forward. Try to survive and somehow see the Germans going down the drain. And that's the only thing I lived for. I didn't care what happened to me. As long as I could see the end of the war and defeated Germany. That's all. 

In one of the camps, I was in one labor camp. And I was brought in there as electrician. They had something-- some trouble in there. And, eh, they brought us from the-- They were washing clothes for the-- the German soldiers. I was brought in there. That's where I met my wife. In, eh, 'til we got, I wa-- she was working there. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe them? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, I was brought into that camp. And there was a camp for-- there was, actually, it was two camps. One camp was divided for women, one for men. I was brought in there. I was a Facharbeiter, if you know what that is. 

DORI LAUB: Skilled labor. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Skilled, skilled electrician. Actually, what they had is combined. A mechanic and electrician was all one job. So I was brought in there and we were working in the-- in the waschbad where they taking care of the motors, the pumps. So I met the w-- met my wife over there. She was washing clothes. 

DORI LAUB: What did she look like? Who was she in that moment? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: She was-- she was a v-- beautiful girl. She still is. She was very young. And, eh-- and I was put into the camp for the men in the duration of the-- of the job I had to do. And when we got finished with the job, there-- there was no transportation for us any place else. 

So the had a-- a warehouse from iron, a iron warehouse. That-- that those irons they used to use to put in cement and make, eh-- eisenbeton, like beton. So they put us there and we were carrying iron from the warehouse to the trains and loading them. And my wife, she worked in the, sometimes, the kitchen, something she washing clothes. So she had access to some more food than I did. 

So at night, we used to get together through the-- through the wires. Because there was just a wire, uh, fence in between, through the women's camp and the men's camp. And so we made the arrangement that, eh, she used to cook potatoes. And she used to give it to me and-- because the women always-- they always had more access to-- to food places than-- than we did. 

DORI LAUB: How did you feel when you first saw her? Can you describe how she looked? What did you say to her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: See what happened, I had a girlfriend in Bedzin. When I came to-- to this camp where she was-- 

DORI LAUB: What year was it about? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: That was in, I don't know, '42, beginning of '43. This-- this friend of mine from-- from my hometown, from Bedzin, they were still there. There was just a handful of-- of Jews still left there. She wrote-- She had a cousin, my girl, that was with my wife in that same camp. 

So she wrote to her to look out for me, to look me up and look out for me. Because she knew that I was-- I was transported to this camp. So she came with my-- with my wife to look for me, to find out who I am. And that's how I got to know her, is nice-- a nice, young, beautiful girl. 

And we started talking, eh. And I was a skilled laborer, so I was making-- I was going out on different jobs just to bring home all kind of wires and a piece of board. So we used to make albums. We used to take aluminum wire, we used to flatten it out and-- and on-- on the board and make holes and put names in there and all kind of different-- just to manufacture stuff. 

DORI LAUB: Albums? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, album for pictures. No, I-- I had access. When I was going out on different jobs, I had access to, sometimes to cardboard, so-- so bevel board or plywood or whatever it was. 

MALCA BLUM: What kind of pictures? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No, but some of the girls had pictures from home that they had. That was just something to occupy us at night. So I used to-- I-- I made an album for my wife, you know, so she could s-- stick her pictures in. And that's how we got to know each other. And every night, we used to stay near the fence. Everybody was lined up. 

This SS over there was very-- it was kind of, eh, more lenient. So we stood across the fence and we talked and told stories. Find out where she's from. And come to find out that she wasn't far from-- from-- from my hometown. Um, and then, after the war, after the whole thing was finished-- 

DORI LAUB: Before, eh, while you were talking through the fence, did you already feel something for her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We must have. Because at that-- at that time I still didn't know what-- what this thing was all about, but I kept coming back. And she kept coming out. So I felt if she kept coming out to look for me and I kept coming out and looking for her, that's-- but there was no future in that. 

They were still in the middle, and we didn't know how the war's gonna end, who was gonna win. If, uh, the Germans gonna win, where-- where we gonna be? But we never talked about that. And then, she got transferred to a-- to a camp where they were making, I don't know, some kind of a powder. I think it was for the V1. And I found her after the camp. She was green as grass, hair, body, everything. That's how green she was from that powder. I didn't even recognize her. 

DORI LAUB: What, eh-- talking through the wire, you were-- were you talking of love? Or-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We were talking about, eh, everything except future. 

MALCA BLUM: You talked about your families? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: About our families, about her families, where she'd come from and-- And then when I got, eh-- in 1944, when I got into that-- when I got out of that typhoid fev-- fever camp into a better camp, eh, they were-- they were bringing in people from all different camps that they were liquidated into this camp that we survived out of. 

And, eh, so I haven't-- I was there, the first one, it was 35. There was nobody there but us. And then they start bringing in people. The people, we kept watching and they're bringing them in. It was very interesting because I wanted to see, am I going to recognize somebody? Is somebody from my hometown? Is my-- any-- any of my family? 

So there was a little kid came off, he was a very young kid. And somehow or the other, I don't know, he looked like somebody I knew. So I went over to him and I asked him, eh, can you tell me your name? He told me his name and I find out that it was my wife's brother, a young kid, a very Hasidic kid. 

Because my wife's parents were very religious. So I took him with me and he stayed with me in that camp for about two or three months. Then they picked up all the young kids and all the old people. They shipped them out. And that was it. 

DORI LAUB: To? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: We don't know where or what or when. One morning I got up and they were all gone. 

DORI LAUB: Did you think of-- that she will be your wife while you were-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. I just fell in love with the girl. 

DORI LAUB: When? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: When I saw her. 

DORI LAUB: The first. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. And, eh, but I didn't think anything was going to happen. Because we don't have-- how can you think anything? 'Cause you don't know if you're gonna be alive tomorrow morning. 

DORI LAUB: Did you tell her you fell in love-- you had fell in love with her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: You told her through wire? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I told her through the wire. But, eh, we never thought it, we never talked about it because there was no use talking about it. 

DORI LAUB: You remember what you said to her or how you declared your love? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. I didn't think I-- I-- I come over there because she understood that the way I was-- I was coming to see her and the way I was doing-- making things for her, that this-- and I understood that, she-- if she wouldn't like me or she wouldn't care for me, she wouldn't come out to talk to me. And a matter of fact, from this, from that-- from that camp, there was about 15 or 16 couples got married after the war. They live in Israel. They live in New York. 

DORI LAUB: From talking through the wire? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Talking through the fence. 

DORI LAUB: Through the fence. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. Everybody, after the war was over, we tried to locate 'em and-- they all got married. 

DORI LAUB: But they didn't-- I want to know, did they say to each other they love each other over through the wire or not? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No, I don't-- I don't-- I didn't. I just told my wife, when the war was over, when I was-- when I found her, that's when I told her, that I-- that I loved her and I'd like to-- try to get-- if she would-- if she would marry me. But through the fence, nobody thought about, eh, what's gonna happen. We just lived by the day, that was it. 

And we were happy because we had the girls there. And because of the girls, a lot of boys were alive. Because everybody was trying to be on his best and they're trying to-- to wash and shave and then live the best way you could and have clean clothes. And because if you got a g-- if you got girls, you want to look presentable, no matter how-- if you haven't got anything, you want to look presentable. So it-- that was a big uplift for us. 

And we were lucky. We had very good, eh, very lenient, eh, guards. They didn't care. They just walked around the outside. And every time, every night we come home from work, we all got in, we washed. And that the first thing, out to the fence. Then we stood there 'til late, sometimes. That was the only amusement, talking through a fence. 

DORI LAUB: Everyone with his own girl. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. Everybody had his own spot. And that's how a lot of guys survived. Because they-- they had, eh, something to-- to live for, something to look forward to. Because I-- the only thing-- then, when I went to a different camp, that's the only thing I was thinking about, is she still alive? Where is she? She didn't know where I was. And then, in the-- 

DORI LAUB: Did you im-- did you imagine her, say something to her in s-- while you were alone? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. 

DORI LAUB: No, later on. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No. Then when I was in-- in the Sportschule When I came back from Gross-Rosen, they put us back in the Sportschule in Langenbielau. 

DORI LAUB: Sportschule? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, there used to be a Sportschule and they-- they pushed us in there. You know what a Sportschule is? 

MALCA BLUM: What is it? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: It's, um, a-- a school for the athletes, for German athletes, it used to be. It was dilapidated and they called it a Sportschule and they pushed us in there. And, eh, we were there, that was in-- that-- that was in '45 already. And I worked out on a job one night. 

And I worked outside about 17 hours in the freezing, pouring rain stringing wires in the city after-- after they-- they bombed it. That was Reichenbach. I don't know if you've, uh-- if you ever heard of Reichenbach. When I came back two days later, I caught pneumonia. 

And I got very sick. They had a-- they had a-- a room for sick people. They had a doctor there, too, a German-- a German Jewish doctor. But he-- that's all you-- that's all you had. He was a doctor. That's all you had. Band-- he had bandages, about a handful of bandages, that was it. 

So he looked me over. He poked me here. And then he says, you has, eh, double pneumonia. But I-- I w-- I didn't even know what he was talking about. And then, somehow or the other, I lost consciousness. I could hear, but I couldn't move, couldn't talk. And they wrapped me up in a blanket. I could-- I could hear what they were doing to me. And I couldn't make any movements. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember what you heard? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I couldn't hear. I couldn't understand. It was gargling like. But I could feel they were-- they were rolling me into a blanket. And they threw me out into a shed. That was in the winter in the beginning of 1945. . There was about a whole slew of the dead people. I was on the top of them. 

I don't know how long I was there. That's the honest truth. But when I came to, the only thing I wanted to do is drink. It was all ice and frost on that blanket. So I kept chewing on that ice and that frost. And I survived. I crawled out of there and I came back to the-- to the barracks. 

And I had to get into a bag. At that time, that was-- was April already. It was-- It was getting warm. I got into a bag. Because there-- there wasn't too many people there because some of them they were chasing to-- towards-- towards the American zone. They picked them up and they were chasing a-- away from the Russians. 

So there was a lot of empty bags. And some of them hid. And when they-- when they walked away, they came out. So I mingled-- I mingled with those guys. We were all hidden for like two or three weeks until the-- the Russians came in. And they opened up the camp and there was a lot of-- there was a-- a couple of hundred of us. 

But the only things is, I had no clothes. I j-- I just had a blanket. So we went into the city, to Reichenbach. One Russian soldier opened up a house and-- and got clothes for me. And when I found my wife, she was told by, uh-- by one of my friends and from that camp that I died. 

She came to-- he came to see her. And, eh, that's where I-- that's where I found her, with-- with one of my friends. And he told her that I died of pneumonia. And they threw me out in the shed and I was dead. I was considered officially dead. So when I came and she saw me-- 

DORI LAUB: You-- where did you find her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I found out where from-- because after the war, when the war finished, we all stood in that camp. Because there was no-- we-- we just got out of the camp and-- and went to the-- in the-- in the-- in the nearest town. Because we didn't want to live in the camp. We stayed in houses. We saw people coming and going. 

So everybody kept asking, where are you from? Oh, I'm from from Bedzin. Oh, from Bedzin. So I kept asking about her, did you see anybody named so and so? She's from a little town named Olkusz. Finally, I f-- I found somebody who knew her, that she was-- that she lived through. And-- and-- and where she is, that she is living in a town named Waldenburg. 

So I got a hold of a bicycle and I start, that was about 60, 70 miles. As I started riding, a truck went by, the Russians. So I stopped them. See, I was in Russia. I-- I went to school there and I-- I know how to speak it. So I talked to them. They picked me up. And they took me in. 

And I found over there, my friend's mother, she came out alive from camp. So he lived with his mother. And my wife was there. But she just left. She went back to where she came out of there. But I knew she was alive and I knew that she was well. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember meeting her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Well, I went back to camp where she was. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember meeting her? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, that's where I-- I met my friend, he said, she just left. She went back to camp. So I got back on my bike and I drove into the camp and I met her with all her girlfriends that were just trying to, eh, to get organized and start moving. 

DORI LAUB: Desc-- can you describe that meeting? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: But she didn't know I was alive. She cried. I cried. And-- 

DORI LAUB: Well, how-- where did you find her? In what place-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I went into the-- 

DORI LAUB: --exactly? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: She was in one room in one of the barracks. And I walked in. And there was a lot of bunch of girls there. So, but, I picked her out. She saw me, she turned white. She thought-- she still thought I was dead. And we kissed and we hugged. 

And everybody was dancing around us, that we-- we found each other. And from then, out of there, I-- I didn't let go her no more. Every place I went, she went. So we traveled around in Germany. And then we went to Berlin. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember the moment of liberation? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, the only thing I remember is-- I was-- I was-- I was in a haze. Well, I just come out of-- of a pneumonia. I had very high temperature. Only thing I remember, I was just walking around like a zombie. I saw three Russians breaking the-- the gate down and coming into the camp. 

And I couldn't recognize, I didn't know who they were. Because to me, a s-- a uniform was a uniform until I look close and I saw the red star. So I start mumbling Russian to them. So they start to bring in food. And I was scared to eat food. So there was when, that finally-- one guy came in. 

MALCA BLUM: You were scared to eat the food? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I was scared. Because I-- I didn't eat for-- for 5 and 1/2 years. And they were bringing us salamis and bolognas and all kind of stuff. I had brains enough to-- to know that, eh, you can't eat that. Because a lot of-- a lot of those kids died from eating that stuff. 

Then a-- a jeep came in and with-- with one officer and two soldiers, tried to ask if we-- if there was any Jews over here. We were all Jewish. He was a Russian officer. And, uh, so he took us out and he was-- he sent soldiers around to get us clothes. And they fed us rice and milk. 

DORI LAUB: That was your first-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Encounter on the outside. 

DORI LAUB: With Germans, with German civilians? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: What was that like? Can you describe? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They told us, see, we were walking back and forth through the city every day in our clothes, you know, in our pajamas. And then, they-- when-- when they saw us, they were scared. They thought that we gonna-- we gonna rip 'em apart. And then they told us they didn't know what was going on. 

But, uh, most of 'em left the town anyway. It was one-- three thirds-- two thirds of the town was empty. Because they were running away from the Russians to begin with. They were told by the-- by the high commands to go to the Americans, to go west and get liberated and get-- to the English or the Americans, so just run away from the Russians. So the town, it was almost empty. And, uh-- 

MALCA BLUM: Did they approach you, the German people? Or did-- how did they-- 

MARTIN FEYMAN: They were-- They were trying to, eh, to give us places where to live. You shouldn't live in the camps no more now. But for me, I wanted to get out, get out as fast, any place, as fast out of Germany as I-- as I could. Actually, I wanted to go to Israel. I s-- I still had Israel. 

But then, there was a friend of mine that, he was in my kvutsa before the war. He was, uh, much younger than I am. And I saw in one of the-- see, I was going from town to town. We were trying to organize who is what and who is left from my hometown who I know. 

And he was having speeches about Israel to any place where there was a Jewish camp. And then we found out-- I wanted to get out of this-- this particular area where I was encamped. This was-- was too, eh-- was-- I-- I couldn't take it there. So we packed up and went to Berlin, to the American sector of Berlin. 

We still wanted to go to Israel. But come to find out that they-- they were catching the guys and were taking them to Cyprus. And I sat down with my wife, I said, listen, if we go and we get caught in Cyprus behind barbed wires, I'm finished. I don't want to see barb-- barbed wires. I don't want to-- 'Cause if I'm gonna see more barbed wires, I'll go out of my mind. I couldn't take it no more. So there was, eh, they were registering for United States. 

DORI LAUB: Why? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I was behind barbed wires all through the war. And I couldn't take no more, being imprisoned. I couldn't take it. I knew I wouldn't. Because the English were catching us in 1945 and they were bringing us to Cyprus. And I knew I would never make it. So I talked it over with my wife and we registered for the United States. 

DORI LAUB: And your family? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: My family, I never knew what happened to them. And, um, I know I met some people who were at the last-- at the last, eh, in my hometown, when they took out the last Jews out of there, out of the home town. And the one that had-- my mother had her grandson with her. He was seven-year-old boy. They want to send her to a labor camp and take him away. She didn't want to go. So she went with him. And that was it. 

DORI LAUB: She went with him where? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I don't know, either to Auschwitz-- because they never-- 

MALCA BLUM: That was your sister's son. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah, my older sister. She went before. 

MALCA BLUM: She was taken. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Because at that time all this thing was going on, I was in camp already. 

MALCA BLUM: Yeah. 

MARTIN FEYMAN: See, they were closing up that-- that city little by little. They were pushing them out of the city into the suburb. And then they closed the suburb. And then they made it smaller and they made it smaller. 

DORI LAUB: So your mother went with her grandchild? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Yeah. And for my--- my two sister, that's the only story I got from somebody who saw it. For my two sisters, I didn't know anything. If my uncles, my father had, eh, six brothers and three sisters. 

DORI LAUB: And your father? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: Huh? 

DORI LAUB: And your father? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: I didn't know anything either. He had six brothers and three sisters. There were nine kids. All-- all my uncles and aunts, they're all gone. One uncle, I found, my father's youngest-- the baby brother. Actually, he found me after the war. And we came to the United States together. 

MALCA BLUM: And your mother's whole family? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: My mother's whole family is all gone except that, well, she had one brother that-- that left Poland before the war. He went to Paris, went to France. He was a singer. And, eh, then he went underground through the war. And he was the only one alive when the war was over. But he died a couple of years ago. 

DORI LAUB: So Bedzin, did you go ever back to, eh, with your family, did you ever go back to Bedzin? 

MARTIN FEYMAN: No, matter of fact, I didn't. Maybe it was foolish but I didn't. When the war was over, I went over to the Poland become big, towards Germany, they took Liegnitz and everything. I went over there to the border And I was told by a Polish officer, what are you a Jew? What are you-- wh-- what are you-- 