CREW: Tape is rolling. 

CREW: Five seconds, Laura. OK. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: I've been trying, all this time, to give you an-- uh, some picture of what I've seen. And, uh, I've only mentioned, uh, a few camps. And you know that I mean-- you have, uh, a resume here that I've sung in 50 camps. 

And in some of these camps, uh, there was-- they-- there was a bit of cust-- a custom that after we would have finished our evening, they would give an evening for us, the people in the camp. And for instance, and there was a camp that was called Sankt Ottilien. 

So you understand it was a monastery. But it was a camp. In the monastery, it was very close to Dachau. And they used the mon-- parts of the monastery as a-- as a, um, a hospital for people. 

So when we came from whatever camp we were going to-- Sankt Ottilien we were met at the gate by young children who sang songs to us, you know, greeting with-- with flags and-- and flowers. And we came through. And it was rather a peculiar incident. As they were singing Jewish songs, Hebrew songs, and giving us these gifts, in the background, we heard the chimes of the church bell. 

And watching [INAUDIBLE] to one of the monasteries were men in their-- in their robes. In their, you know, monk, uh, outfits. In my mind, that made a very, very unusual picture. Young children, Jewish and Hebrew songs, church bells in the background, monks were-- were-- were going through. 

Now, in that-- in that-- Sankt Ottilien after the evening we had, they had an orchestra. Imagine. They had an orchestra that they-- that-- they had an orchestra. 

INTERVIEWER: Where'd they get the instruments? 

EMMA SHAVER: They-- some-- they were there in so many months already. You know, you could get anything you wanted in Germany with cigarettes. Cigarettes was the-- sort of the monetary exchange. In the morning, you'd get up-- like, as here, they look at Wall Street and see, what is IBM today, or whatever, you know, stock you have. 

The quotation was, what is the cigarette worth today? And all of us, you see-- we were all in uniform. I was entitled to my rations. Now, I don't smoke. I never smoked. 

But I never watched the day that I-- that I was entitled to get my cigarettes as carefully as-- as-- I mean, watch that day. I don't think I watched other things so-- so-- so carefully. Because I'd get cigarettes, I'd get coffee, I'd get tea. I'd get soap. I'd get all these things, and that was all money. That was all barter. Very important. 

So you see, with cigarettes, they could get, you know-- or we could supply-- on record, could supply them tunes with some-- some-- some instruments and things of that sort. And UNRRA did perform a function there. And we had the committe for that. 

So Sankt Ottilien had a little orchestra. And they played for us. And then they had two young ladies that sang, and they sang songs that were sung in the ghetto. In the ghetto of Vilna. And, uh, I remember one song that they sang-- I-- I know-- I knew-- remember more than the one. But one song that I felt that I must get. 

That song, I must have for my-- for my-- and so this is to answer your question, where did I hear these songs? I heard them there. Wasn't simple, you know, to get them. But before I left Germany, I had those songs. The music, the words, and all. And then when I came back to America, again, as a minor minor, um, made, you know, piano settings for-- for some of these songs. 

INTERVIEWER: What were some of those songs? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, one was-- I told you, was the Partisan song. And the other one was Es Brent Es Brent is a song-- a very powerful song. I think the most powerful song. It was written by Gebirtig, who was a-- like, a Jewish troubadour. He wrote-- he wrote the words and the music to his songs. 

And many songs-- Phyllis knows them, too-- I sing them in concert. But he song-- wrote one song just at the beginning of the Holocaust. And it's called Es Brent It's burning. And the-- I'll make it as short as I can. It says, it's burning, you know, brethren. 

INTERVIEWER: How does it sound? 

[SINGING] Es brent, briderlekh, es brent. Undzer orem shtetl, nebekh, brent! 

EMMA SHAVER: It's something like-- it's burning our little town. Our poor, little town is burning. And all these wild winds, or something, were sort of-- cast it all aside. Anyway, to make sure, the refrain there is, [SINGING] and you stand with folded arms and you watch how our little town is burning. 

And there's another one, the fire will come and, you know, they say, heaven forbid, our whole town will disappear in flame. Our town and all of us, together, will disappear-- disappear in-- in flame and fire. And all that will-- will-- will remain will be sort of burnt, dark, ashes, wools. You know, the. 

And again, you stand with folded arms and-- and watch how our little town-- uh, uh, town is burning. But the fourth stanza says, it's burnt. It's burning, you know. Brethren-- sisters, brothers. It's burning. Our little town is burning. 

But the-- the, um, the help of it lies in your hands. Don't stand so with folded arms. Take whatever you can find, whatever, you know, receptacle you can find. 

Fill it, even if you have to fill it with your own blood. And you'll quench that fire. Because if you don't-- because if this little town is meaningful, dear to you, then you are-- you are the ones that can do it. That is the message, you see. 

INTERVIEWER: Who gave you that message? Who told you that song? 

EMMA SHAVER: Who? I-- I, uh-- I read it and I knew it. And I must say, I can recite the song. I don't know whether I can sing it as well today. You know-- you know, today, I am-- you know how-- more or less how old I am. I'm not ashamed-- I'm afraid to say it. But I don't say the way I did. But I can recite the song in Yiddish maybe better than I can sing it. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you just sing one stanza, and then recite one stanza, just so we get a feeling. 

EMMA SHAVER: Don't ask me to sing. Please don't. 

INTERVIEWER: We'll cover it with-- we'll cover it with the record. 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, you-- I have it in one of my-- in my records. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. We'll cover it. 

EMMA SHAVER: You will have it. But you see-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well then recite it. 

EMMA SHAVER: In Yiddish? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. The way it is on your record. 

EMMA SHAVER: Wow. I'll be very glad to do it. sbrent! briderlekh, sbrent! oy, undzer orem shtetl nebekh brent! beyze vintn mit yirgozn raysn, brekhn un tseblozn, un di beyze vintn hudshen- undzer shtetl brent, alts arum shoyn brent! un ir shteyt un kukt azoy zikh mit farleygte hent. un ir shteyt un kukt azoy zikh- undzer shtetl brent! 

Then there's another stan-- another phase of the same idea. The third one says, sbrent! briderlekh, sbrent! es ken kholile kumen der moment undzer shtot mit undz tsuzamen zol oyf ash avek in flamen, blaybn zol - vi nokh a shlakht, nor puste, shvartse vent! un ir shteyt un kukt azoy zikh mit farleygte hent. un ir shteyt un kukt azoy zikh- undzer shtetl brent! 

But then it says-- sbrent! briderlekh, sbrent! di hilf iz nor in aykh aleyn gevendt! oyb dos shtetl iz aykh tayer, nemt di keylim, lesht dos fayer, lesht mit ayer eygn blut, bavayzt, az ir dos kent.   kukt nit, brider, ot azoy zikh mit farleygte hent.  kukt nit, brider, lesht dos fayer- veil undzer shtetl brent! 

This is a very powerful song. And that, I heard, too, there. And also, of course, I-- ani ma'amin which has become the-- the song you and your first rendition-- you-- I-- I just sort of listened to myself. How many times you were-- used the word, I believe? I believe this. I believe that. You did, in your first-- uh, presentation that I heard. And that's it. 

Ani ma'amin means I believe. I believe that the Messiah will come. He may be delayed on his way, but I believe with all my heart, with all my senses-- he may be late, but the Messiah will come. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you first hear that song in Germany? 

EMMA SHAVER: I heard it sung-- that one, I can't even pinpoint where I heard it. Really, I cannot pinpoint where I heard it. But it's-- it's sort of like a thread that goes through the, you know-- I heard another song sung. It's not on this record. It's on another record, and I hope one day, you'll hear it-- you'll hear it. 

It's called Jugendmarsch. You know, also. And that, I heard-- I was in a camp that was-- that had 500 children. 500 children. No parents. And I sang for them. 

And he said to me-- at the close, he says, you know, Mrs. Shaver, you are probably singing for the greatest audience-- the largest, not the greatest, but the largest number-- the largest in numbers audience that you have ever sang-- uh, sung in-- that you've ever sung for in your life. And I looked at him and I said, what is he saying? There are only 500 children here. He said-- but then he says, each child here represents 10,000 children. It's true. 

So there, I heard a song sung by the children again that is called, um, Mir gedenkan alla sohnen mir dermahnen alla freund, ewig mir gedenkan undzer naechte die der hind. And the refrain is, Jung is jeder jeder ware es jung, yohren haben kein bedyt alter konnen auch sein kinder in ein neye freier zeit It means, young, young, everyone is young if you only will it, you see. Old people can also be young in a new and free, you know, time. 

That was another song that I heard them singing. And then there is this Eyn, Zvey, Drey. It's also depicts how they lived at one time in the-- in the ghetto, where they were free. 

I mean, in their city before it became the ghetto. Everybody, everyone went on his way to work, did his-- whatever he was supposed to do. But then came a time we couldn't move around wherever we wanted to. We had to go there and there. And we had to do what we were told to do, you see. 

And also, that one ends also-- all of them will also always end on a positive tone. Ne-- never on a-- on a tone of neg-- of-- of despair. Always po-- positive. Saying that, you know, um, uh, and, uh-- well, I-- I-- I-- the idea is that, uh, again, uh, there will come the time, you know, when we will-- we will be free again. And of course, again, Jung is alla jeder ware es jung 

Now, there are many more songs that I did not record, you know, that I've heard there. And another thing. There are many songs that were sung, but I didn't choose to take them all. That doesn't mean that these songs should not be, uh, in some way, um-- you know, we have to collect them and to keep them in a repository. 

I did not think they were of the best, not as far as words are concerned, nor the setting to it. Because in those years, you know, the popular song, as you will hear today, was, let's say, a tango rhythm, or some other rhythm that, you know, was-- which was-- that-- that the chanteuse would sing. And two such-- well, you know, [SINGING] yum, duh-dum-dum or to some tango rhy-- you know, as I say, tango rhythm. 

And to such rhythms, you would hear words that were absolutely incongruous. You know, how could you say [SINGING] my mother went to the gas station-- the gas ovens or something of the sort. It was impossible for me. I mean, I couldn't do that. And there are hundred such songs, and I believe they have-- they should be-- they should be collected. And-- and-- and kept in a-- as a-- as a-- as another expression of that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go to some of the former concentration camps, but now that-- now-- at that time, perhaps, they were already displaced persons camps? 

EMMA SHAVER: Yeah. Oh, yes. I was in Dachau I was in Dachau the year-- the-- to the-- to the year, the day-- the year of liberation. And you will find that. When you will look through the pictures, you will find there, where they had a ceremony. We went through the-- we actually went through the crematoria. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: The names, however, on your list of the 50 camps are names most of us have never heard. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were those concen-- former concentration camps, or just places where-- 

EMMA SHAVER: They were places that they-- they were-- that they-- that, as I told you, like they went to the Garmisch-Partenkirchen They went to a place like-- Bamberg was a town. And some places, like-- some-- well, one Jew or some-- a leader, let's say, from-- from a certain town in-- in-- in Poland would go to-- went to Stuttgart. And they would occupy a certain street in Stuttgart. 

And in the-- they would-- they live in these-- in these homes. And some of them were-- you know, were camps that-- some of them were soup kitchens. Some of them were-- were, uh, I mean, the places where I appeared. But around and around were little huts and little places of that sort. 

And this-- you remember, you showed me a picture. And oh, that was just formed. Because the Jews that were infiltrating-- you know, coming from-- from Russia through Czechoslovakia into Germany-- it was almost even, uh-- I looked at it and I thought to myself, you know, if somebody could sit way up above and look down what's happening below, and-- and seeing all these streams of Jewish people, displaced, all trying to converge to get into Germany. Of all places, to get into Germany, to this-- on this soil. 

But there was a reason for it. Because from Germany, we had all the tools to take them out, you see. To send them to-- either to Italy or to France or to other places, you see. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Is it a misunderstanding-- many people think that the people-- that the Jews were forced to stay in the very same concentration camps where they had been, except that now they were called something else. Is that a misunderstanding? 

EMMA SHAVER: Not that I have been, except that they were camps close by. Let's say there was a camp close to Dachau, or the camps close to Auschwitz, you know? Or-- or let's say camps like-- like Bergen-Belsen you know? These were all-- or Birkenau. 

These were all camps, but they called them-- yeah, yeah, they-- some places, they called them Bergen-Belsen But they actually, you know-- some of the camps were, you know, converted into-- into a sort of displaced persons-- some of the, you know, these camps of-- of-- extermination camps, let's say, were then-- yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think and feel when you saw people living in the same circumstances that they had lived in when life was about to be snuffed out any minute? Did you talk to them? Did you-- about that? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, yes. You would talk. Some people, at that time, weren't-- were reluctant to talk too much about their, you know, their experiences. They were so happy to be free, to be able to move around, or not to feel that if they'll take a piece of bread somewheres, that they could be shot for it or something and so on. 

That-- and then again, it was difficult. It's like, uh, when you see a group of people who have made-- who have had the same experience sitting together, and you-- or the-- and-- and each want to tell-- they all went through the same thing. And it was almost, maybe like one is trying to outshine the other, you know? 

To tell one, you know, can top-- can top a story or to top a story. And that was also a time, yet they were too-- it was too close and they-- and they wanted to forget. They wanted to forget it immediately. They wanted to enjoy what they-- what they had. 

They would go on outings. They would go-- we went to-- I went with a group of them. We went to-- to, uh, to Berchtesgaden You know, where-- to the-- Hitler's, uh, the Eagle's Nest, you see, up there. 

There was a sort of-- it was a very beautiful place, you know? And so-- so they were still, at that time, still reluctant to talk. I found them even reluctant to talk after I came to America, those that I've met, you see. So-- and is there any-- anything else you want to-- 

INTERVIEWER: The problem of remembering the Holocaust-- I know that that was something you became involved in-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --with the survivors. What, how? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, again, it's the same story. They-- they, you know-- many people felt, in the early days, you know, to-- to remember, let's say, the Holocaust days. Some didn't-- some were, you know, reluctant to do so. It was too soon to-- their wounds were-- you know, really open and exposed. 

And-- and Jews that did not go through it felt, you know, the homeless to say, oh, dear, I would love to go, but I just can't stand it. It's too painful. It's too painful. That used to burn me up. Because you know, what is it to sit an hour to-- even if it's painful, take the pain. 

But you must remember. It must not be forgot-- be-- be forgotten. And I-- I think I told that to-- to-- to-- to Phyllis. If Phyllis wants to come in, she can come in. I told Phyllis that, um, uh, the, uh-- what was I going to tell you? 

Yes. In the beginning, that they wouldn't-- they didn't want to listen to many of these stories. And somehow or other, I remembered that I was present at the first-- in-- in Munich-- at the first year when they-- when they had the first-- I can't say it was a celebration, but a sort of commemoration of the first year of liberation. 

And it was held in the-- in the Munich University auditorium, which was completely bombed out, maybe the auditorium. You will find pictures of that there. So I don't want to [INAUDIBLE]. Do you want to-- 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

EMMA SHAVER: And there were pictures of that. I mean, we were-- we were asked to participate in it, our group. And I sang there again, you know? And-- and-- in meeting, when we were meeting with the, let's say, with the-- the committee of displaced persons, and speaking-- because after all, Leivik was with us and he is-- he was a great, you know, a great writer, first of all. 

He could see the whole picture and tie it up with our-- with our past. He could even tie up the picture with what stands before us. So I mean, to-- Leivik's word would-- would be listened to. 

And having this meeting, I remember making-- it's not important who made the statement. But let's say this was the statement that was made. That-- how can we decide what day to make the day of remembrance, you know? Yom HaShoah the day of remembrance. Or Yom Hazikaron is even a better name. Zikaron is the-- it means to remember. What day? 

And what form should it take? Should it take a jubilant form? Should it take-- should it take a form like we do on-- when we cry about the destruction of the temple? And I'm not-- I'll tell you afterwards. 

Anyway, the-- the-- the feeling is that-- anyway, I felt that way. We're too close to it. Was it decided the year that Moses took the Jews out of-- out of Egypt-- was it decided the following year that the-- that, uh, we-- we had the Haggadah 

We didn't have it the following year. We didn't know what form it would take. The people, the sons of the Jewish people, they will find the right way to-- to commemorate that event. And they found the right way. Haggadah festival of freedom. 

Was it a year after that Haman almost slaughtered all the Jews, you know, in-- in Babylonia-- I don't remember [INAUDIBLE] Whatever [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Persia. 

EMMA SHAVER: I'll think of-- huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Persia. 

EMMA SHAVER: Persia-- well, a part of that. Whether it was decided the year after that Haman met his fate, and-- and Mordecai and Esther came out jubilant-- I mean victorious-- and the Jewish people were saved? Was the Megillah Esther, which we read on every Purim, was it written the next year? 

It wasn't. It took time un-- until the-- the-- the people would find-- would find the-- the way-- the way-- the proper way to remember that-- that particular incident. 

So it is with this. Who are we to say-- do we know-- should it be a day of mourning? Should it be a day of jubilation? We-- we-- we're here. We survived it. And what form? It'll take time. Here, we're already-- it's already 30-some-- '46. We have yet to find-- here, look what-- look what you are doing. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel about the World Gathering? 

EMMA SHAVER: I think it's a-- I think it's a marvelous thing. I think it should be absolutely, uh-- it should be done. Because as it was said-- as you said, and that-- it should not be delayed. Because the longer we delay it, there will be less and less of these people to be there. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that's a vehicle for finding the way to commemorate this tragedy? 

EMMA SHAVER: I think the-- the event itself is important for the-- the survivors. But what will be written and what you are going to collect as a result of this World-- you know, of this World-- 

INTERVIEWER: Gathering. 

EMMA SHAVER: --Gathering. That is important. The-- the event itself, as an event, is important, just for those that survived. But there's going to be material. You are gathering personal, individual material. That is very important. 

INTERVIEWER: The material you have in your head-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --from a time that has been very poorly documented-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --is something that cannot be gathered-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --unless you tell us now-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Of course. 

INTERVIEWER: --any strong impressions. And what I am thinking is I would like you to do two things. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: One is to explain Ani ma'aamin perhaps give us the words, sing it a little if you will-- 

EMMA SHAVER: No, I can't do that. 

INTERVIEWER: --or recite it. And then I'm going to ask Phyllis to come in and talk to you about-- OK? Fist, start with the-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, the words of Ani ma'amin are very simple. I believe with all my heart, with all my soul, that the Messiah will come. He may tarry on his way, but I believe-- bemuna shlema with-- with all-- with implicit faith, that the Messiah will come. And that is all that Ani ma'amin stands for. And that was a fighting-- that was a song that kept the spirit up, not only amongst-- it's-- it's-- it's taken from-- from one of our religious books. 

But it was taken up by all people, whether they were extremely orthodox or some of them, you know, let's say, who were-- who had-- were Jews, and were not, you know, practicing Jews, in the sense, you know, they wouldn't go to synagogue three times a day or do all the other, you know, Mitzvah you know, or good deeds that religion But that was the song that was-- and it's usually associated with the Warsaw get-- with the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, Ani ma'amin But it's universal. 

INTERVIEWER: That's what they told you. 

EMMA SHAVER: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: They told you-- 

EMMA SHAVER: [INAUDIBLE] When I sang, let's say, in-- on these days of commemoration, I sang several times in-- in Israel, in the main Auditorium. And they-- they have an evening, what they call an evening of remembrance, and they ask me to come to sing. 

Now, I am not singing publicly for many years now. And but these songs, I don't feel are songs, you see. I feel they are messages. And I know that I can sing them and convey that message, whether I sing it with a beautiful note or not, you see. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you recite Ani ma'amin 

EMMA SHAVER: Ani ma'amin 

I have to sing it in order to remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- well, say it the way you would sing. 

Ani ma'amin 

INTERVIEWER: Stop tape. 

CREW: Five seconds. 

CREW: Speed. 

CREW: OK. Any time. 

EMMA SHAVER: I would like, at this time, to introduce to you my niece, whom I remember, uh, even before she was born. 

[PHYLLIS CHUCKLES] 

We walked in the halls of the hospital, waiting for her to arrive. She is a niece to me through my husband. In fact, at the time, she was the only niece we had. And, uh, so she was rather something very, very special to us. And, uh, we have spent many, many times-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: I should say we have. 

EMMA SHAVER: And enjoying many things, talks and other things. But before I go on further, and here, I have now a grandniece, a niece of my niece. A third generation. And how-- how delighted, more than delighted, it all-- oh, it proves a point to me. That whatever happens in Israel, anywhere, any part of the world, as far as Jewish people are concerned, I am so sure-- I am so sure that, as Jews, we will survive. 

And this is an example. Here is my niece, born in Detroit. But she was a part of a family that had great, strong-- they had strong convictions about Jewishness, about Israel, about our Jewish heritage. And she absorbed it like a sponge. 

She even told me one day that-- she told me-- I read it. I still have the paper that-- she delivered a paper in-- in one of her graduating classes. She delivered a paper, and the-- the subject matter was, like, if you will it, it will-- it will-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: It is-- it is no dream. 

EMMA SHAVER: It-- it is no dream. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: To quote Theodor Herzl. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. And that was quoting Herzl's-- Herzl's statement, when he started the 50th-- the-- the-- the first Congress in Basel. And I know that we were both-- my husband and I-- my husband was very proud that-- that his niece, you know, to give this paper in her graduating school-- class on-- on a Zionistic and Jewish theme. 

And so we have had many, many talks. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: So now, if-- if-- if-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: I have things I could say about you, as well. 

EMMA SHAVER: So yeah. So Phyllis can-- will talk. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Well, I'm deeply touched by what you've said, uh, Aunt Emma. And I also very much feel the spirit of your dear departed husband, and my dear Uncle Morris. And it's wonderful to have, as you say, my daughter present to share in this wonderful and memorable occasion. 

But just as you remember things that I have written and things that I did, I-- I want to share with you, and with those who may be watching us, something that you wrote during the time that you were traveling in the DP camps and visiting all these various people, and sharing their experiences. You wrote me a letter and I want to quote a passage from it. 

"My gratitude for my family is even deeper now when I see, all about me, such loneliness. Men, women, and children, once members of large family groups, now, after years of horrible torture and human degradation, remain all alone. A single, broken remnant of their family." 

I remember that-- reading that very well, and was very much touched by it. And I've tried to remember, through the years, how important it is to have continuity in the Jewish family. And I hope that, if there's anything that we have achieved in our generation, it is to give that feeling of responsibility and the continuance of our heritage to my daughter, Susie, to my other children, and to all the children who are to come after us. Because then and only then, really, can we make any meaning at all out of the Holocaust experience. 

And I hope that whatever small part we've played, and all those who've worked diligently with us, that we will be repaid many, many, many, many times if this legacy can be continued and can be remembered. And the tools which we are using today can become a meaningful part of the future so that we can ensure a life of peace and tranquility from now on. 

INTERVIEWER: Aunt Emma, what are the messages that you would like to give Susie and-- from your experience in 1946? I mean, from that experience specifically. It was something you did that no one else that I've ever heard of has done, or I ever knew, anyway. 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, the-- my message, it would be a general one. Other people have done it better than I can. I-- I'm-- I'm just a singer, not a writer, you know? Or-- or one. 

But my message is-- is-- would be just very, very personal. I felt that I was really somehow given the-- the greatest opportunity-- no, opportunity is not the word. Uh, the-- the, uh-- it's a-- the greatest privilege that could be given to a person-- a Jewish person. 

To-- to have and-- and to have been asked to go to the count-- to-- to Germany, at the time. To live with my people. To do whatever I could to-- uh, to, uh, uh, to-- well, now to a-- to-- to make them feel that they are human beings. They are not just parasites and people of no-- of no-- like they've all-- people that have always taken from the world-- from everyone, and have never contributed anything at-- at all to-- to the world. 

And-- and this was, to me, when I was chosen to go, perhaps the greatest-- the greatest experience in my life. I treasure it as the greatest experience, except for another one, which is a very personal one. And I don't think it's time for me to tell that story here. Except for that experience, this is the greatest that was my-- well, I believe very much that there is a power above that rules-- that rules the world. And I've-- and I believe that he, the ruler, the Almighty, has really blessed me in this respect. 

INTERVIEWER: You wrote a book-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --about your experiences. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So you did write. What was that book about? 

EMMA SHAVER: Just mostly-- I couldn't tell you everything. But mostly, what you've heard me tell you today. It wasn't a book to tell you about Emma Shaver, the singer. It was a book to tell you about Emma Shaver-- I hope that it is-- a daughter of her people. That's the way I'd like to be-- I'd like to be remembered that way. Being a daughter of my people. That's it. Beyond that, I can't say anything more. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: I feel the presence, really, of-- of all the family with us. And the whole family of nations, really, of all the Jewish people with us as we sit here and talk. And it gives me-- I like to end things-- I'm an incurable optimist, anyway. But I like to end things on a very positive note. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't you lose people in the Holocaust? Your own family? 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Oh, yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you mention? 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Oh, yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. We lost-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: We lost my mother and my husband's older sister. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: That's right. 

EMMA SHAVER: We were very fortunate to-- two-- two of her children, a son and daughter, that my husband, only as he knew how to do it. And I don't have to say it. Phyllis will tell you. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: Only as he knew how to do it, got them out of-- out of Poland just in time. Otherwise, they would also be, you know-- and besides the sister, there were-- well, there were aunts and uncles and, uh-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Her husband-- 

EMMA SHAVER: And nieces-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: --perished, of course. 

EMMA SHAVER: --and --and nieces and nephews and cousins and I can't tell you the exact number. You know, like, a specific number of 70 or 60, whatever. But the entire family was-- was gone. 

INTERVIEWER: When you met the survivors in Europe, did you try to find out-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Of course we did. We did. And I-- we did find one cousin in Italy. And then, of course, we brought him to Israel and he lived-- he lived in Israel until he died. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER: My question's can't be heard, so you'll have to repeat them. When you went there, you knew that some of your family had died. You thought maybe some had survived. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you talk about that? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, uh, we-- we surely tried to find-- look for them in all documentation, wherever there was some documentation at the time. There was no Yad Vashem at that time, or [INAUDIBLE]. 

I had a list with me. In fact, it was more than a list. I had a-- a book, you know, an alphabetical book with cross-- you know, with cross names on it to look for people. Not only my people, or our people, you know, from my side of the family or her side. 

But I had many friends in Detroit that gave me names and I have-- of course, I have documentation on that, too, of letters where I found them. And I was able to-- to-- to-- at least to make their-- to leave Germany sooner than if they had-- because-- sooner than if they would have to wait for their turn. But there was a-- there was some advantage in having an American uniform. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: And so [INAUDIBLE]. And then I had not only-- there was one specific case. You know, there was a marvelous singer by the name of Delia Reinhardt, who was-- who was very closely associated, musically, with Bruno Walter. And I met her-- she was a Christian and she was a beautiful person. 

And we became very friendly. And there was a correspondence that was going on through me because I had an APO number, which was not-- you know, they-- they-- it wasn't censored. So Bruno Walter would write to me, you know, uh, the letter. And you will find it there, too. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: I came across some of those letters, yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: And he would write to me. That is, the envelope was. But inside was a letter for Delia. You see. And Delia would do the same. She would give me a letter for Bruno Walter, and I would send it to Bru-- Bruno Walter with my APO number. And that would-- and that would go on, you see. 

INTERVIEWER: To close on a little more somber note-- and you cannot hear my question on the tape. You lost family there. Did you make any attempt, in 1946, to find out how they perished? But repeat my question. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. Well, personally, my family all were in Russia. And it was very difficult to get to Russia. We did learn of some survivors afterwards. They wrote to us, you know, by mail. But, uh-- so there was no way of going into Russia after-- after 1946. 

No-- no-- no way, no how. I wanted to go to Russia to do the same thing that I did in Germany because I also felt that the Russian Jews needed that sort of uplift-- that spiritual, cultural, uplift of Jewish songs at that time, too. But dealing with the Russian embassy is a story of another [INAUDIBLE]. I finally did manage-- that is, my husband did because he was a-- he was a Shaver. 

[PHYLLIS CHUCKLES] 

And, uh, he managed to-- that I-- I was permitted to go to Poland and we were in Warsaw. We saw Warsaw after the-- you know, after the, uh, after the Holocaust. But it was long after because we were there in 1961. And, uh-- but I was invited, by the Jewish committee, to give concerts for Jewish people. 

Because I wasn't interested to sing for the Polish people. I wanted to sing for Jewish people. And I did give several concerts in various different cities in-- in Poland. And the last concert I gave was in-- was in Warsaw itself. 

And of course, at that time, we visited the places, you know, where-- where we-- my husband Warsaw as, one would say, the-- he knew the palm of his hand. He knew every-- every-- every-- area and how you could make shortcuts to go into this part through that way and so forth. But it wasn't the same Warsaw anymore. 

You know, they had rebuilt it. But it wasn't the same. And of course, we found no one there, at that time. There was no-- no-- even-- I could say, nothing to remember, no one to remember. 

And so we didn't-- except those that we've found in the-- in the very, very early days. Yes, we did find some cousins also that had survived the-- the-- what, the-- the, uh, Holocaust in-- in France, in Paris. That they weren't apart 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone speak to you about how those that were lost went to t heir 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, it would be-- the-- the-- the cousins of my husband. Again, my husband's family, they were-- they lived in Paris and, uh, they hid in their apartments. And one day, the mother and daughter went down the street and never returned again. Just as simple as that. 

The boys, some of them fought in the-- in the, uh-- so the-- fought in the French army. And sort of went over and they saved themselves. Some hid themselves. So we did, when we came back after-- you know, that period when I was coming back from the camps together with my husband, we stopped in Warsaw and in Paris. And we did find, uh, about, uh, three cousins that were-- that survived. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Isn't it true, though, that my father and your husband's sister, Yitta, perished in the Warsaw ghetto? 

EMMA SHAVER: Oh, she did. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: This, they-- this, we do know. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: How it happened, we don't know. But we do know that she perished in the Warsaw ghetto. 

EMMA SHAVER: That, we do. And of course, Morris Dorn, which is a first cousin, and the children. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yeah. Because she is memorialized in Israel in that way. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yeah. We've-- we're memorializing her in many ways. My-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: My song of books are-- are-- are in her memory. And I believe that-- that, uh, that, um-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: My parents, Nat and-- 

EMMA SHAVER: No, Nat and 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: --Goldie Shaver. 

EMMA SHAVER: --Goldie and you And Phyllis and Herb and the children are thinking, in some way, of memorializing Yitta. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: Am I right? 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yes, we are. We are. 

INTERVIEWER: At the risk of pressing you, I'm going to ask you one last question, I promise. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: To go back again and tell me, as clearly as possible, what motivated you to do what you did in 1946? 

EMMA SHAVER: I told you, my dear. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I want you-- 

EMMA SHAVER: My motivation was to serve, in some way. And the only way I could serve-- I would do other things, too, you know, if I-- if I-- they-- but they wouldn't, you know, they weren't just letting people come in to Germany at that time. You had to have a reason. You had to pass the-- the-- all the-- uh, the-- all the, um, military governments. And-- and we did not get in so easily, too. Because, uh, we had to pass the-- the, uh, military government's permission to come in. 

And the only way I could serve was in-- in my capacity. And I felt it was a good capa-- it was a good thing to do that. I mean, because that would also uplift them. If I could make someone-- at first, I thought I was doing a terrible thing. 

If I'd look out in the audience and I'd sing a Jewish lullaby, and I'd see a great big husk of a man sitting in front of me and weeping, I would-- while I was singing, I'd say to myself, well, what are you doing, Emma? Is that the right thing to do? To make this man-- after all he he's gone through, to make him cry? 

But afterwards, I realized-- and it was told to me by others. You'll see, it's something they-- I-- in these evenings, I gave them, through these songs, the capacity, or the-- the-- the-- the feeling that they could open up. It was a catharsis. 

They-- they could open up and cry again. They were human. Before that, they couldn't cry. They've-- they've seen so much that nothing-- nothing touched them anymore. 

So if they could begin to cry again, I didn't-- I didn't realize that when I went there. I-- all I knew was that I wanted to serve. That's all. In whatever way it was possible. And that was the only way I could do it, was-- was through-- because I was well-equipped as a Jewish singer. 

I had the repertoire, Jewish and Hebrew. I had other things, too. I could have sung arias, too, if I wanted. But that was not the object, you see. And-- and I felt I was fully, fully equipped to do that job. And my heart was in it, so that was-- that was it. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: I think that, in the same way the videotaping project that we are involved in does this for survivors, too. Perhaps not in as dramatic a way, but it does provide a kind of catharsis. We keep hearing this over and over again from people who give their testimony. That while they may have trepidation to start with, once they begin to open up, they feel as though they're-- 

EMMA SHAVER: You can-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: --they're serving a useful purpose, just as you did in such a magnificent way. And that there will be a purpose to it, beyond the actual performance. 

EMMA SHAVER: You're doing even a service to that particular purpose-- to-- person. That she can open up and cry again. You know, to-- to-- to-- to let some of these feelings go and-- and perhaps, you know, be able to live as a-- as a human being again. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: More easily. 

EMMA SHAVER: More easily. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Yeah. 

EMMA SHAVER: It's very important. It's-- and it's not only important to them. It's important to their children. Because, you have read, there is a great study going on now of children of survivors. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: That's right. 

EMMA SHAVER: The survive-- these children were not even born in-- in-- in, uh, before Hitler. They were born afterwards, after the camps. Some of them were born here or wherever. And there is a problem, you know, a psychological problem of these-- of these children by the parents being able to talk about it freely, which they couldn't do to their children. 

And the children are sort of-- in a sort of a state like, you know, oh, what my mother and father have gone through. I must be very good. I must do this. I must do that. I can't-- I can't-- I can't aggravate. I can't-- you know? They are going through a tremendous thing. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: You know, Susie, you-- I remember when I became involved in this project, Susie saying to me, I'm so glad you're talking about it. I've heard that there's an Aunt I don't know, Yitta. But I want to hear more about it. I want to understand so that I can do my part, too. Remember you having said that to me? 

SUBJECT 3: Yes. 

EMMA SHAVER: So you see-- 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: So it permeates every generation, I think. 

EMMA SHAVER: So that, I think, is a very important thing. And that's-- that's how I felt. I was grateful. I still am grateful. I think it was the greatest privilege that I was ever given. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: And we're privileged to be a part of it, too. Believe me, we are. 

EMMA SHAVER: If I didn't-- if I didn't-- had-- wouldn't come from a family such as ours, I wouldn't have what I-- what I've got inside, what I have inside. 

PHYLLIS SHAVER: Well, it's a mutual feeling of love and respect, and it's a wonderful thing to be a part of. 