INTERVIEWER 1: You opened an album of old photos. And the photos begin. And OK. 

SUBJECT: My name is Ladisleus Goldberger. I been born in Austro-Hungary in 1906, April 27th, in my mother's parents' home. And I was taken back to the city, the name-- this is a small town where I was born-- to the city where my father lived. I was the first child. Taken back as 8-10 days old. Usually, at that time, you know, the mother ran back to the parents you know, to deliver the child. 

And I lived in the city Munkacs. This is at the time, Austro-Hungary under Karpaten. And I was growing up as a child in a very religious environment. My mother came from-- my father and my mother came very religious families. Naturally, my mother spoke perfectly Jewish. 

But the second language was German. The third language was starting a broken Hungarian. But later on, as we became, you know-- we went to the school, the children, she started also. But at home, we spoke, in beginning, Jewish. And I grow up there in an environment, the Jewish environment. I go-- I went to Jewish schools, so-called cheder. In 1900-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the cheder? 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the cheder? 

SUBJECT: The cheder was exactly the same system. This was Munkacs. I have to characterize Munkacs as a city where over 50% of the population was Jewish. In the beginning of the year, as I remember as a child, there was no stores open on Saturday at all, because almost all the stores-- and all the so-called merchants have been Jewish. The rest or population from the environment in the city, there was Ruthenians so-called small Russians, we called it. They spoke a kind of Ukraine language. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many people lived in the city? 

SUBJECT: Around 30,000. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And 15,000 were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Minimum or more. And Saturday, naturally, the old-fashioned Jewish with the caftans and with the shtreimel. Know what a shtreimel is? You know, I don't know how to translate that. And during the war, there have been, you know, a lot of so-called Polish rabbis, refugees. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which war? 

SUBJECT: Belzer- during the First World War. Belzer rabbi was the famous, very famous the Munkacs rabbi was also very famous. They have been involved in politics, and also in Hasidic life. Really Hasidic life, you know, in the Saturday, you have seen the unnumerated people who went, you know, to the synagogue, or to the shul in the caftans and in the shtreimel. So as usually as the Polish people, you could see this, you know, the so-called-- you call the shtetl in Poland before, you know, when Sholem Aleichem had basically described it. 

Naturally, there was no such case, you know, that a Jewish boy shall not go to cheder. The cheder was, you know, the same system as the Polish system. I went to school in the morning. Afternoon, the cheder. Coming home at 6, at 7, at 8 o'clock. 

And that was going on also when I went, you know, in the gymnasium. Until the age of 15, I went in not cheder, this [INAUDIBLE] so-called where I learned the so-called Talmud. I had to pay or my parents had to pay more. 

Because I am-- they allowed the rabbi-- or the teacher-- has allowed that I shall visit the school. Because otherwise, they have made, you know, four or six elementary schools, and that's strange. A Jewish guy has nothing to do it. After I went to the high school-- the high school was commercial school, special school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father was-- 

SUBJECT: My father was in cereal business. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In cereal? 

SUBJECT: In the cereal business. And during the war, he was many times tried to be drafted, but he escaped the draft-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: First? 

SUBJECT: First World War, he escaped the war. He was not a soldier. But in cereal, he couldn't work. and then during the war, he worked, you know, in different kinds of groceries. He delivered, and he was-- he had a boat from Holland at that time, you know, was delivered through Holland. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were the first of how many? 

SUBJECT: I first of six children. In 1906, I been born. In 1907 or after-- '07, I think, born a sister. After the sister, a brother, 1911. Then was a brother again, 1915. 1917, a daughter. And 1918 another daughter. Two children died, you know, during the first couple weeks. Their life had been three chil-- three daughters and three children. 

Naturally, I was actually the first scapegoat, in order to remain [INAUDIBLE]. Because my grandfather, you know, asked this. And he and my mother respected the father very well. And my grandfather came from far away from the city, around 50-60 kilometers. 

She ke-- she was an old lady already. She had children, she kissed the hand of my grandfather. And my father gave him, you know, on the-- on the table, you know, this first place, it was where he was very respected. He was a very respected man also in the-- in his own place in a small town. 

He owned, you know, a little field, a little forest. He had a little small grocery store, you know. He had grown, you know, the cattles. And unlike in Jewish, you say this is a person a ton bal(e)bo's It means, you know, he had from everything, but not considered well in that time, you know. 

Nobody was considered as rich. They made a living, very primitive living. Their whole life was also primitive relatively. Today, when we consider the thinking it was very primitive, OK? Everybody worked hard. Even he was in cereal business, he did not make so much money, you know, to make, you know, some luxuries maybe. The simplest living when you could make, then you have been considered you are a good situated person. 

If you grow up in that way, later on my brother, the third child-- this child, my sister has studied, you know? I finished the high school, and so-called high school. This was the Handelsakademie. This is a commerce academy on lower level, four years. After four years, gymnasium. And then I went, you know, to-- in 19-- this was in 1900-- I lost a year. I have to interrupt. 

We have had to flee during the war twice, deep in Hungarian territory. Because you know, the Russian front has neared. But this city was not occupied by the Russians. They did not reach that time. But we left this for one time, 1914 one time for three or four weeks. In 1915, almost for a whole winter. 

We lived somewhere, you know, somewhere in a furnished home. In 1917 we have also left the city, closed the home. This was a rented home at that time. Closed the home, because it had broken out in the city a typhoid. We had to leave. 

A lot of people die because they didn't have any possibilities during the war, you know. They didn't give any help unless a purpose. There was no people. We lived in a big place. There was 20 tenants. There was, you know, at least a half of families lost one or two members on the family because of typhoid. 

We- my father had taken us to another city when the typhoid was not. And we came after the worst, when typhoid has recessed, then we came back. It was 1917. And 1918 was an end of the war. 1919, we became communists. 

Hungary, you remember became communist. You know, the head of the Communist Party was Béla Kun. Béla Kun went after the communists. Communism has been defeated, he fled to Russia, and Stalin has finished with him. He was a Jew. 

In 1919, communism broke out also in the city. We had storages with merchandise. My father accepted a different kind of-- not serious at the time during the war. He was-- he-- he-- he-- he did what he could by-- and it was sealed up up whole-- the whole magazine, and the whole, you know, warehouse for him. But paying a certain amount, they open it. It was-- it lasted not long, you know. I don't know, a month or more, communist. 

1920, first we became Romanians. Romania left, then we became Czechoslovakians. This was an agreement made, you know, in, I think in America between the Carpatho Rusyn delegates and Czechoslovakia-- what Czechoslovakia became in 1918, on October 28th, became an independent state again after 300 years. In order to organize the so-called small entente, was Czechoslovakia, Romania. Czechoslovakia, Romania-- yes, and I think only Czechoslovakia. To circle Hungary, because Hungary was-- Austro-Hungary was complete dismantled. Czechoslovakia, one part of it became you know, as independent. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to hear about your life. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And naturally we stopped everything. We were-- until then, was in Hungarian language. Next year, we became Czechs. We had to start to learn Czech. But this was tolerated this place, you know. I continue in the Hungarian language, my study. Even the high school, the commercial school, although was required. 

This compulsory was the so-called Russian language, the so-called local Russian language, what to a certain degree was similar to the Ukrainian language or the Czech, which I didn't force to learn the Czech language. You could choose of them. I have chosen the Czech language and the Russian language both. But the main language was continuously parallel was already Russian and Czech schools, yes. 

And I remain Hungarian language. I finish, and I have made up my fourth class exam [INAUDIBLE] and they call this the [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH] in Czech language afterward. But I studied and I learned already from my age of six German language. I spoke German also, because I told you, I mentioned my mother spoke very well in German. She read-- she read mostly German books or English books. She could read very well [INAUDIBLE] 

At first, I went to Prague. Studied three years in the so-called [? Hans ?] Academy. It was the higher academy. There was the lower academy and the [? Hans ?] Academy. I didn't finish complete, because I had to come back. Was some sickness [INAUDIBLE] 

And I went-- in 1929 I went-- I got a job in the lumber business. 90 kilometers from the city was another city Huszt, This was near to the Romanian border. Romania naturally become-- it got also bigger. It got a big part from Hungary also. 

This city lived based on numers, because you know, the whole environment higher from this 50 kilometers. There was the Carpathians, and everybody has some lift, or he was employed, or he had some field. Anyhow, some land, forest. Anyhow, everybody was based on this. A very good position. 

I became in 1932, I became, you know, the general manager, the manager of this company. The company was a family company, 3,000-- how do you call this-- this wasn't acre, but smaller, you know. What you call, you know, this-- [INAUDIBLE] it goes-- anyhow, this is approximately to be 6-- 5,000 acres forest, what they have inherited from their father. 

There were two brothers. And an other family also, but the two brothers have had bought out the whole. They had also a lumber mill. They had also a factory. And little by little, they have taken over as a youngster. But in-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Were they Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 3: --owners of the mill? 

SUBJECT: Jewish. I had to be, you know-- this was exceptional, requested by my grandfather that I shall not go. I wanted to go in a bank. Because I studied international financing and management. But my grandfather said, no way. 

If you go and work at Saturday. Because at that time, you know, it was six-day work. I will not go to your home. Not go through mother. The mother says, I'm going to go to your home, and I will not eat in your home. To work Saturday, this was, you know, a sin. 

And I stood there-- 1930, you remember, was, you know, the Depression. We have been in problem. I thought I was a lot. The company has also suffered a lot of losses. And I have to manage in here, you know. 

I did not like the, you know, the army. And I tried to escape from the army. It was compulsory here. The draft-- there was draft, and I didn't go. I made up [INAUDIBLE] 

But in 1936, it happened that by buying from the state a forest, [INAUDIBLE] there was, you know two rivals and the other rival who did not get, you know, the option, we got it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your competitor? 

SUBJECT: The competitor. Not a competitor. It was also a relative mine. And I was then seated, and I had to go, you know, again to the army to draft, to be drafted again, and to make you know, a gun. And partially from 1936 until '38, I was, you know, once in the army, once again from out from the army. It costed me a lot of money, you know. 

But in final final analysis in 1938, as you remember, that Hitler started, you know, to claim that Sudetenland belongs to him. There are the Germans, and the Germans persecute us. It's not true. It wasn't true at all. Naturally, there was a movement, a tremendous movement supported by the Germans, the so-called Henlein movement with all the Germans, you know, many, you know, Nazis. I was on the border in 1938. On the border of the German-Czechoslovakian border, in the bunkers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the Sudetenland? 

SUBJECT: In Sudetenland, the borders. Which then became the so-called Munich, with Chamberlain, and they have to give up, you know, the Sudetenland without one shot of the gun. It was for everything turned over to him. Even the ammunition, everything has to be turned over to him. 

There wasn't no built another Maginot Line. The same against the Germans, the same as the French has built the Maginot Line. But the difference was only that this Maginot Line did not need to know even to fight. It has turned over-- been turned over. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember-- was your unit withdrawing from the border? 

SUBJECT: Positively. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the day, what-- how you found out? 

SUBJECT: This was, you know-- this was our limit from first 1938, from October 1st to October 10th. The exact date I cannot remember. This was, you know-- we have to retreat, you know, every day in a certain [INAUDIBLE]. But everything to leave. Everything, you shouldn't take with you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the-- not the date, but the day the order came, what soldiers said to each other? 

SUBJECT: We have cried like babies. Like babies. Although, I have to make, you know, [INAUDIBLE] 

During the time-- the whole time-- in Czechoslovakia, although we have seen 1936, when Hitler had occupied Austria, what's going on we did not believe. We did not believe in that, that he will succeed. He will succeed [INAUDIBLE] We have experienced the Kristallnacht. 

Czechoslovakian Jews have been very high educated. Nothing has been done. Which, you know, this is characteristic, this so-called-- I have to make this [INAUDIBLE] doesn't belong to me-- characteristic that Jewish people has an inclination to be optimistic. They did not do anything about that, you know, because although they have heard what happened in Germany with the Germans people-- with the German Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So let's come back to you. You were a Czech soldier. 

SUBJECT: A Czech soldier, and I came back in like-- in 1938 I came back. I came back in 1938, in October-- wait a minute-- 1938-- in-- no, in November. I was released to go home. Because I was the-- there was a general mobilization. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, what-- 

SUBJECT: General mobilization [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that in expectation of peace, or of-- 

SUBJECT: No expectation of peace, you know, a general mobilization. And as soon when they have turned over, there was, you know, Benes was the head of the government. He was after Masaryk died, he-- he-- not that, he was, I think, the president of the republic. He said, I have a plan. He thought he would succeed with the plan. 

I don't want to involve to a party, because, you know, there was also some very bad thing, you know? We have been very, very, angry that Poland has also, you know, ask, you know, a part of Czechoslovakia when Czechoslovakia was completely divided. In 1940, he was the second, you know, who was ran out by-- ran out by the-- by Hitler. And I came home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you expect the war? 

SUBJECT: No. We accepted that this Czechoslovakian is in trouble. Then came also the Vienna agreement, where the Hungarian has asked a part from Czechoslovakia, and they got also a big part for them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, but I want to come back to you. Did you expect a war to break out after the-- when you were demobilized? 

SUBJECT: Sure we-- no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did not. 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't know what actually what would happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You thought there would be peace? 

SUBJECT: No, we thought, you know, we didn't know. We have seen, you know, actually there is dismantled Czechoslovakia cannot exist without it. And then came right away Vienna. The Vienna agreement for Hungarian has asked a part was also cut out. Then you couldn't and then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --think about you, whether the soldiers-- 

SUBJECT: I came back. I came back to Carpatho Rus. Carpatho Rus there was no-- Carpatho Rus was cut off. The whole road was cut off. You had to travel-- when you want to go to Prague, you had to travel only through different kind of roads. Because, you know, everything was cut off. The railroad was cut off, you know, became Hungary. We had a terrible life. 

It didn't take long. This was from November, from October. And in March, you know, Hitler marched in in Prague. Declared Prague-- Czech as complete protectorate, a German protectorate. Slovakia became independent, so-called independent. And Carpatho Rus became so-called independent in beginning. To be-- to get an autonomy. 

But we couldn't, you know-- we have been, you know-- I was involved. We couldn't live in such a way, let's say businesslike. Because we have-- all business was based to deliver merchandise to Hungary on the-- on the so-called River Tisza. We transported the lumber on the water. And 1939, March 15th, the Hungarians marched in in Carpatho Rus. And we became Hungarians. 

Naturally, before we have heard already that Hungary has joined the Hitler movements in the direction against the Jew. They brought in all the so-called Jewish law, the first Jewish law, already in 1938. And make sure you know, because, you know, in beginning, it was everything fine, you know, we have [INAUDIBLE] 

No, we didn't have, you know, anything, you know, a border we can-- could deliver already from the-- from the Carpathian direct the lumber, you know, on the water. And we became Hungarians, and it was a very comfortable-- I can say you know, business-like was more profitable the whole situation. Forgetting, you know, about the Jewish law, but we didn't care. We care less. 

But in 1940, they started to recruit Jewish people in the army. Not as beginning. I was, you know, as a Hungarian soldier, not a simple soldier, I was let's say, a second lieutenant in the army in the Czech army. Here, I-- we got some-- some, uh, I think, you know. Sergeant 

But they didn't take long. In 1941, they have taken away every-- every ranks, Jew cannot be, you know, in any ranks more. But we have to go, you know, to work as a company, working on roads, on different kinds. At that time, was not yet in war with Ukraine. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were those strictly Jewish units, or mixed? 

SUBJECT: Strictly Jewish units supervised by-- by-- by Gentile, a Gentile group. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Initially, when you were drafted and a Sergeant, was it also a Jewish-- 

SUBJECT: Nationally was-- no, no one there was-- I wasn't. When he came in the unit, we didn't have already any ranks. But still, in army clothing. Afterwards came out a law, Jewish people cannot have, you know, army clothing. Jewish people can't have their own clothing, and we pay him for-- oh, a couple pennies only for the-- for using their own clothes. Imagine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From when to when were you in the Hungarian army? 

SUBJECT: The Hungarian army beginning was only, you know, a draft. Then 1900-- I-- in 1940, I already, they started. But I-- the first time in 1941. I was the first time from 1941 from April to end of the year. 

But I had the possibility that the commander was a major, a pension. He was in pension, but he was caught. And he was a very nice person. Very nice, and certainly [INAUDIBLE] because he was a very poor man. And there was very rich boys also. They supported him, and we have been, you know, everything. We have paid, you know-- the certain people who could afford. 

But unfortunately, in 1941, there was, you know, a father of families who left the home et al with nothing. And we have made their-- there was, you know, also rich people. At that time was not taken away, the land, from the Jewish people. Only after 1941-42 have taken away everything. They couldn't own any land more. 

There was an also land owners and then we have made, you know, a so-called-- what is it-- trust. Put in money, and every father will have the family penniless. We found out we have sent a certain amount in Hungarian currency to his family. I was there. The secretary for anything like [INAUDIBLE]. A very substantial amount was sent every month, you know, by male to the family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those are the families of quote, Jewish soldiers and-- 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] they do not care if they have left a mother with three or four or five children. He got a call. Within 24 hours, you have to present yourself there and then. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, and what were those units doing? 

SUBJECT: They have work only roads instead having, you know, a shotgun or a sword, as a solider, they have a shop. That's all. And they went, you know, and naturally depended also up to the headquarters. Not the headquarters-- also from the headquarters, but also all of the people who-- that was, you know, grouping. 

And they are have been Gentiles who had, you know, supervised us. But have been considered as soldiers. Going over the shoulder right away and so on. And in the line, five people like soldiers, you know. Only we did not make the duty. This is so-called you know, forced labor companies. 

Depended on the people, and on the commander, what kind of people they have been. Some place, some companies have been treated terrible. They had been beaten. They had been [INAUDIBLE]. I and my company had not seen such a thing. But there was another company that was. In 1941, I was sent home. In 1942, I was called again in September. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To the Hungarian army? 

SUBJECT: To the-- the same group that was already worse the situation. Because in 1941, Germany attacked Russia. Hungary joined them with 250,000 people, an army, which was destroyed completely, you know, when the Don in-- in-- the Don river when there was, you know, the break out the Russian came in. It was simultaneously in '42 when the Leningrad, the so-called Leningrad fight was-- the Leningrad almost fall, and then the Russia has taken back. Not Leningrad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: Stalingrad. They have been sent, you know, to Ukraine. I was-- momentarily I was working in the so-called local, local called in the country. We have built a railroad. The railroad was damaged, and we have built a railroad. Put, you know, there the dirt, and to put there. 

And the other side, there was the two companies, the similar companies from Budapest. This company was you know, from Carpatho Rus People from Carpatho Rus. And at once we have been gathered all thee three companies, there came something, a higher ranking Hungarian officer with his staff. And he-- at that time was some changes, after the 42nd, 1942, there was some ameliorating a little by the Hungarians. They have seen there is something wrong, and they have killed many people. They were beaten almost to death and so on. 

And there was also in the country, there was in Transylvania that belonged to [INAUDIBLE] Hungary to back, you know, Transylvania from Romania. That and the Carpathian have been beating people very badly. It was, you know-- it depended on the commander. 

And there was in front of me, I have seen this high ranking officer ask, has somebody some complaints? And there was a simple shoemaker from home. And he said, I don't know, maybe he was-- well, he wasn't a general, but he was, you know, what do you call after major? What is the other rank? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Captain 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Captain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A colonel? 

SUBJECT: No. Colonel. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Colonel? 

SUBJECT: A colonel, I'm sorry. Captain is lower than major. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right. 

SUBJECT: The colonel asked-- asked if has somebody complaint? Nobody had moved. They were afraid. And this simple boy said, Mr. Colonel-- because everything is mister-- not like American language, you know, you cannot even talk, Mr. Colonel, allow me to take out-- this was around November, winter. Allow me to take off my shirt, my jacket, and my shirt. 

And he took off one. [INAUDIBLE] And he took off, and there, see, you know, stripes of beating. And in front of me, we are stunned there, you know, like, you know, everything, you know, 

INTERVIEWER 1: Military? 

SUBJECT: Military. Who did it? He said-- and he said to us, so arrogant, please ask my commandant. I was punished for what? For something absolutely not worthwhile. He was real antisemitic. 

And in front of me, he said, yes, Mister-- also Mister-- Mister Lieutenant. We are so. How do you call they say? Big-- such a big fighter that your place is not here. Then you have to go on the front. And the second day, he was disappeared. What happened with him, I don't know. 

There was a [INAUDIBLE] time a little bit in local in Hungary. Were there people are in Ukraine? I don't have to say what happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were also units of munkaszlogalat, Jewish. 

SUBJECT: [NON-ENGLISH] the so-called [NON-ENGLISH] 

INTERVIEWER 1: So soldiers in the Hungarian army? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was the work, the forced labor who were sent to the Russian front. Is that-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, Jewish-- Jewish [NON-ENGLISH] they have been sent to the Russian front, and they have been, you know, used for different kind of purposes, among them to look for mines, hidden mines, booby traps, you know. They start to go, you know, with something, you know, with electric thing you know, they have been used for it. And also, they have been, as they said, and I told you-- I found out in deportation, later I recounted deportation that my brother was sent to Ukraine. 

And the deportation in [INAUDIBLE] I found out, you know, I know you. Your brother I know-- I knew also. I was with him, and he got fell in typhoid. [NON-ENGLISH] I don't know what kind of typhoid is this? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Typhus. 

SUBJECT: And they have been gathered in one big barrack as are called hospital, but no-- and nothing similar to a hospital. They have gathered them there. They didn't give them anything. They didn't know what to do when the Hungarian army-- as I said, they have with gasoline poured around the barrack, the barrack was only from wood, all made of wood. 

And they have burned the barrack. And who tried to escape from there, they went around, you know, with-- with rifles, and with shotguns, and so on. They shot the people [INAUDIBLE] My brother died there in 1943. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Those-- 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

Can go. Rolling. 

SUBJECT: In 1942-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to ask you something. You were [NON-ENGLISH] that's work soldiers. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, work soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have the pride of a soldier? Did you sing the Hungarian anthem? 

SUBJECT: No, no, not at all. Not at all. We have been considered-- you know, in '42, we had there, for example, a sergeant, he was a drunkard. And if we didn't give him enough money, you know, and [? condemn. ?] Then he-- I was beaten once by him like a wild dog. And calling me Stalin, Stalin, Stalin and beaten, because he didn't get you know, the amount what he ask. 

He was, you know, a-- he was a gendarme in pension. But he was called in. This, for them, this was fun. It was fun, and there was different kind of punishments. Punishment, you know, to hang by the arm up, or to put, you know, among the to-- the hand to tie and to [INAUDIBLE] between one stake for an hour or two. And then they turned him over. Not to stay, though. 

And somebody when he was tied up and to hang by the two arms. When he fainted, he was poured water-- they poured water on him, you know, to be alive for 15 minutes, half hours, some people also more. For nothing, you know? Looking, you know the shoes are not clean. Then you had fine. 

You are a-- you are a working guy, a soldier. But when you come, you know, in the evening at 5:00 or a 6:00, you know, when the commandant, you know, is looking the whole thing, you know, the whole group, your shoes are not clean. I come from work, and this was the problem, the first problem, not to clean my shoes. 

In '42, as I said, we have been very badly treated. Two weeks, we didn't have what we eat at all, because he didn't get the supply, for example. We got-- we had-- we didn't have bread. We had some soups, but no fat and so on. 

But you could survive, because we got packages from home, you know? And we could buy for money if it was possible in the near-- in a near town, you know? It wasn't, you know, complete legal, but we could in '42. 

When I felt that this group, this company is destined to go out to Ukraine, to leave this place. And there was the commandant. He said, you know, to be prepared. This is after it happened the colonel hing happened and everything happened that the things, but the group was prepared to be sent out. 

And the commandant probably got, you know, a-- not a request, maybe he got, you know, an order that the people shall be supplied, or to give the possibility to supply themselves with warm clothing. Because in Ukraine, [INAUDIBLE] And so-- because you couldn't get away-- how do you call-- the furlough for a time. And I said, you know, give me a furlough for seven days. I will, in my city, I will collect at least for two people, you know, winter clothing. 

Because there was, you know, really poor people. So I got the furlough. Then I found I did not intend to go come back. I went in the store. And I bought, you know, some warm clothing for 10 people. I send it to the company. The company was still in the place with the intention to be sent away. 

And having before some attack, you know, appendix attack, I had a reason to send a telegram that I have a heavy appendix attack-- appendix attack. I cannot go, and therefore, I sent this. Otherwise, I would be in a war. Either way, a deserter and this is too bad. 

And I looked. I had my boss had a son-in-law, he was a doctor. And he had connections you know, with other doctors. The doctor, incidentally, was you know, in the army drafted. And he gave a certificate. It has to be delivered [INAUDIBLE] this has to be delivered right away in the hospital. 

Imagine a healthy-- absolutely, I didn't have anything trouble. Then a healthy appendix was operated for money in order to stay in the hospital 14 days with an open wound. And the doctor who operated me, he has shown, you know, that look there for the other doctors looking, just full with pus. Was absolutely nothing. There was no-- also drafted Jewish doctors in the hospital for nothing to work in the hospital. 

And incidentally, this boy was a good friend of my this doctor. He told me [INAUDIBLE] he has shown, you know, [INAUDIBLE]. And the wound have to be kept open until I then find out that the company was sent out to Ukraine. Afterwards, I went, you know, to the headquarters to present myself. I had a right to get three months, you know, furlough after that. 

And in 1943 in the meantime, I have arranged by the minister of agriculture that the company became important for the army. We have delivered a lot for army, and so I got with many other boys in the family, an occupational deferment. From 1943 in March, I was not in the more in the army. But you couldn't leave. 

This place only, there was, you know, a commandant who was, you know, under super-- who kept us under supervision. But the commandant got his salary every month. He could go free everywhere. Only occasionally, because he knew when you traveled even on-- in-- to Budapest or somewhere else, you know, there was many occasions that they came, you know, some identification to identify yourself, you know, what are you are most younger people. 

My brother was drafted as a steady soldier who was to be, you know, in the army, you know, for two years. It costed me money through my sister to try to get him out from there. And I got him out, you know, around the 19-- end of 1943 and beginning of 1944. 

I thought I am lucky I have done something good. I made it wrong for him, because maybe as [NON-ENGLISH] the so-called as working soldier, maybe he would have a possibility to escape Auschwitz. So I remain in Auschwitz. So I remain in-- I'm sorry. I remain in Huszt. I remain in Huszt the whole time till '44, March the 19th, when the German came in. They started to first to make a list of all the Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the Germans coming in? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Remember, you know, where I lived. I had, you know, [INAUDIBLE] I had to give up, you know, one room. And there was their big, you know, truck. And the Germans have been-- they're not very, very nice people. I played with them chess. 

And he said, you know, when the war is over, I will go home, and we have a small hotel in Austria and so on. And you didn't see, you know, and so there was only special units and so-called SS and SR. In the way, you have been lucky. And you have been supervised not by the SR, only by the so-called army. German army was never so bad, you know, as the SR taking care of you, especially special units. 

And it-- German efficiency is no question about it. This was complete, you know, went, you know, exactly like the clock. Order, gave order, you have to create, you know, a committee, Jewish committee, Judenrat, they call. They don't want to deal with all the Jews. 

And the SS, Sturmfuhrer, the highest ranking SS has right away occupied, you know, the most beautiful house of a Jewish doctor. It was the headquarters. And he gave orders. Speaking very well in German, so I said, you know, I finished the school in German language. He contact me. We have had one that was taken-- one moment. 

When all the names was already gathered, we had to present them. And at once, they came, a group of gendarme, Hungarian gendarmes. They started to empty certain streets, certain streets where most of the population was Jewish. Empty all the streets. Empty all the furniture. Taken away, and put the furniture all in the synagogues. There was many synagogues there. 

And right away going from home to home where a Jewish family lived-- you have 15, 20 minutes, dependent, you know, on the gendarme what you can take with you. If you want to take some-- no vehicles, you know, you can't take a vehicle like a horse and buggies. You have to move in the ghetto. They created a ghetto, a complete ghetto from April 1st. 

I think April 1st. It was after Passover, after Passover. They finished within two weeks. They finished with 6,000, 6-7,000 Jews. I have to interrupt here, and I have to explain something what-- whatever, you know, it doesn't belong, you know, to my personal. But it belongs to my personal experience. 

We had the forests. We have been also in lumber business. We bought lumber, we had also our own forests. On the border-- on the Polish border, which was already occupied by the Germans-- Hungary became, you know, exactly a border with the Germans, because Poland was dissolved partially away. On the border in 1941, when I was [NON-ENGLISH] when I was, you know, a soldier, a working soldier, I got a telegram from my boss, you know. 

He ran away from the city, although the city was not [INAUDIBLE]. On the border living Jews had been evacuated regardless. They asked for citizenship. Who the devil-- excuse me for the expression-- had a paper that he is a Hungarian citizen? Who did it? 

Later on, everybody did it, because they ran, you know, to the minister-- to the minister of foreign affairs, and to ask for a paper, there is Americans, and they had to prove that his grandfather lived here before the Czechoslovakian and so on. And everybody was gathered with the family [INAUDIBLE] and they have been thrown abroad of the border, of the Polish border. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Into Poland? 

SUBJECT: Into Poland, where Hungary-- where the Germans have been working. And there, if you have heard, you know, what happened with these Jews, you know. They have been exterminated like rats. You have heard, you know, communists, [INAUDIBLE] and so on. 

And from where I know that? Because some people still could escape, and they came over the Donets. They paid, you know, for the Ukrainians who cooperated with the Germans, money what they had something hidden and so on. They came over, and they saw what happening communists digging graves and so on. 

A friend of mine, you know, who lived through the whole thing, and also families, something somewhere families were [INAUDIBLE]. Some far relatives who went through the whole thing was miserable. I was, for example, at once on the border there was a small town that's called [? Toron. ?] And at once I have heard, you know, that a lot of families succeed to come back to Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have to change tapes. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

