INTERVIEWER: It's so strange. You see, Auschwitz, I never associated it with the name of a real place. I thought it was just-- 

CREW: You didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I didn't even know it was the name of a-- 

SUBJECT: My grandfather was the owner of this plane-- of the place that the camp was built. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh my goodness. So we have to go back and say some of those things. It doesn't matter. 

SUBJECT: I said it was the town. It was a Jewish town. 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, I never knew. 

CREW: I didn't know it was a Jewish town. I knew it was a town. 

SUBJECT: Very Jewish. All right? 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling. OK. 

SUBJECT: So not to time to details, I got the address of somebody who was living in a small village on the bottom in Slovakia and Poland. And some friends of my family let him know, and he was a-- wait-- a car was sent. It was a double deck. It was a lorry. It was built special. It was a double. And we had been hidden under the floor of this lorry, three of us. 

And we came to the forest that he used-- it was a sign that he will be staying and cutting the wood. And I have to call his name. His name was Pertik And he knows already about me and he was already paid, and he help us. And we have been going maybe four, five nights, hidden ourself in woods during day till we reach Liptovsky Svaty Mikulas. It was a little town on the Slovakia border. 

To cut it short, after a couple of days, we tried to reach Hungarian through border. And I was caught, fetched by the local police, put in a prison, and I was related on with a group of some others who had been fetched by the police. Were brought to a jail in Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of a prison? 

SUBJECT: Was a normal prison, nothing special. It was a normal Kosice. It was a town of Kosice. It was a prison of Kosice. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they put you in prison? Did they say? 

SUBJECT: That we have been escaping borders. They found us and we are not legal. We are not Slovak. I'm proclaim myself as a Roman Catholic Polish Christian, not Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have papers? 

SUBJECT: I got some very badly made papers down in ghetto. But I got mine on a new name Czeslawa Kuszak and I got some photos that said Czeslawa Kuszak. As a non-Jewish person, I tried to save my life and I was brought in a jail in Budapest. It was the same jail that Hannah Szenes was killed later on there. And it was still before the German invasion to Hungary. 

So there was still a Polish community there. And they tried to help the people in the jail after three or four weeks. I was-- I went out of the jail. And it was about January '44. But the 19 of March '44 was German invasion two Hungary. And I tried to escape to Romania and I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you living after you got out of jail? 

SUBJECT: It was very bad. I was penniless and I was hungry and I didn't have nothing to eat. It was a very difficult period. 

INTERVIEWER: So where were you? The detail. 

SUBJECT: I was first I was working as a-- it was a Polish camp. I maybe for a couple of, four or five weeks, I was in a Polish camp working as a kitchen maid. And later on when the German invasion came, I escaped to Budapest and was really coming sometime to the Jewish community, and they help us a little bit. 

INTERVIEWER: Then you told you were Jewish? You told them? 

SUBJECT: In the Jewish community. Normally not. But we didn't have much-- didn't get much help there. It was very difficult. We really have been-- the people who escape and didn't have families, they have been really hungry for bread. I was ill. I got from such a skin disease from the jail still, from this. And it was terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like for a young girl, a 17 year old girl-- 

SUBJECT: 18 I was already. 

INTERVIEWER: In a prison with normal prisoners, of criminals? 

SUBJECT: It was such a shock, because when we have been taken in Kosice in the first time, it was a group trying to go escape to go to the border of to Hungary. And we didn't know each other. But have been some young girl, my age and even younger, and some other people. 

And when we have been divided, they put us in a terrible state, because we didn't know what is going on, and trying to persuade us to commit that we are Jewish. And we know when we come-- when we attend that we are Jewish, we will be sent to Auschwitz. Because people have been sent from this place to Auschwitz. So we persuade them we are Christian. And the greatest shock was the jail in Budapest when we came. Because they make us such a delousing what it's called. 

INTERVIEWER: Delousing. 

SUBJECT: You know. And we have-- there was something like that I remember. And we had been quite young. And it was a group of prostitutes coming. So they put us together with these girls. And they-- it was some command giving to us. We didn't understand Hungarian, yes. We didn't hear. 

So some lady was in charge of this. She give us [INAUDIBLE] and she told me we didn't have enough our guests. We need you are from abroad. And this was to us, we have been so naive this time. It was such a terrible shock. And we have been brought during night, very late in the night, to a very big room in this jail in Budapest. 

And each one was thrown out on a bed of somebody else, yes. And I was thrown on a bed of a woman, and I didn't know who she is. And I was lying very quiet. In the morning, I recognized her as a lady from ghetto. I know her very well. And so it was my first feeling that I got, you know, I was put by pure chance on a bed of somebody I know from ghetto. And I have to tell her that her brother was shot and is not more alive. 

INTERVIEWER: In the ghetto, you saw people shot and you-- 

SUBJECT: A lot of people I had been shot. Because when I was left it was this liquidation committee. All the people they found in these shelters, in the bunkers, and all kinds, they'd been shot on the spot. 

INTERVIEWER: Your own family? Did you see them get-- 

SUBJECT: No. They have been-- my father was taken before, and my mother was taken to a camp Szebnie, which was with my brother. And the-- I know later on that they have been-- my brother was taken a week before my mother to Auschwitz, and later, my mother. And I know sure it was she was killed in Auschwitz, because my cousin, my first cousin who escaped, who she's here in Israel, she recognized her when she was naked already, going to the crematorium. 

She saw her. And my mother recognized her. They had been put vis-a-vis, one to another. By pure chance. She was brought from another town. But she recognized my mother. I know. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother was naked, you said? 

SUBJECT: Yes. My mother was not even 40 when she was killed. My hus-- yes. She was brought in Auschwitz. She was brought naked to crematorium. My first cousin, she is about two years older than I am. She recognized. She was very close to her. She recognized her. She saw her in a group. My mother saw her too. 

INTERVIEWER: But your cousin managed to escape? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my cousin was in Auschwitz, and later on in some other camps in Germany. And she came here maybe '50, because she was in Italy, later in Germany, Italy but she's here. 

INTERVIEWER: Explain about Auschwitz. Because it's an irony that your family was lived there and then came back and died there. 

SUBJECT: This Auschwitz, which is called in Polish Oswiecim, used to be once Austria. It was a very typical Jewish town, with a lot of religious Jewish people living in, with a strong Jewish tradition. Even my-- the schools have been in Germany, in the German language. Because once was Austria. And just the tragedy is that Jewish people there had been very attached to the German culture there. They used to speak between German in Auschwitz. They have been very much involved in what is going Vienna. 

They used to go, my grandfather, we used to live in Vienna from Auschwitz. He was a very rich Jew, and he used to live partially in Vienna, keeping a flat in Vienna. And it was such a typical Jewish town that Saturday was everything closed. The town was dead. And the old people had been going with the Shtreimel you know, which was the Orthodox Jewish people used to out on the market. And I think it was the majority was Jewish there in Auschwitz, in Oswiecim. 

CREW: Did your family own anything there? 

SUBJECT: Yes. There are books and papers about my father and my grandfather. He used to be not very rich, but very good person. He used to keep all the poor people in Oswiecim. Giving them not only money to live, but he bought a special house for them. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he do? What was he-- 

SUBJECT: He was in trade with bringing import of fruits from Italy and to Tyrol, and from Italy to Poland. And he used to have good contacts on the race and so on. So he used to-- it was-- there are lots of stories about him. I got books and articles that he used to, for instance, during-- 

He was very religious. During the first war, he used to go every Friday to the race station and speaking with a loudspeaker to people who are religious. And there'd be a lot of refugees going, who likes not to go on Saturday, not to the steps Saturday. He may stay in his house. 

And herein resides the family who will stay four years in his house. They found me. They found me. Some of them are in the States, a few of all, from the- And he used to build for them a house and they should-- and give him such an honor. They don't feel that they are kept people. 

And he used to have even I was taught part of the land where the camp was built. He was killed on the street in Tarnov. But my mother, her brother, her sister, and all the family have been killed in quite in the same place they had been born in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think the Germans used Auschwitz as a major camp because it was a Jewish community? 

SUBJECT: Not at all. It was such a strategic place. A lot of trains used to go through this place. It was such a border. It was just from strategic point of view, it was the land that they could develop such a camp. It was not that it was Jewish. Nothing to do with the Jewish people there. 

INTERVIEWER: How did the books and papers of your family, how were they preserved? 

SUBJECT: Nothing is preserved. There are people who survived or people who came here before the war, and they wrote articles. And there's a book published about some Hasidim and there's a capital about my grandfather, because he was so known of his charity. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the-- do you remember the last time you saw your family? Do you have memories of them? 

SUBJECT: I remember the terrible day of the 1st, I think, of September, '43 that we had been separated in a Bochnia ghetto. The last day of the ghetto, they had been divided. And I was taken out to stay, first of all, but later on was to put in a group that has to be killed. And 90 people had been brought to a place that they had been to executed. And I was between these 90 people who was on the spot. And we had been surrounded by some police from Estonia. How it's called? 

CREW: Estonia. 

SUBJECT: Estonia. They couldn't even speak German, not any language. not any communication with us. And we have been surrounded and have been women and children. And was the lagerfuhrer, our miller was there and von Hase I think. And the order was already given then we have been shotten. They asked us to undress ourselves. I remember a little girl of a lady who had name was Grossmann, maybe three or three years old girl, blonde girl. Her mother told her, run away, run away. So she run away. And the commander told in German ask. 

Wo ist die kleine Blonde? 

And he fetch her and he kill her on the spot. I saw it. Her mother saw it too. It was before everybody was killed. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the question? 

SUBJECT: She was running away. In German, where is the little blonde girl? And she was running away. She was about three, four. I think her name was Lily. A very pretty girl. 

INTERVIEWER: She was running away from her-- 

SUBJECT: Her mother probably told her run away, because we had been put together about 90 some people, to be killed on the spot. And her mother was thinking maybe she run away, she will save her life. And he just fetch her. 

And when we have been undressed quite in-- quite to it, was somebody who was, and his name was Freddy. He used to be a German Orden Jew. And during being in ghetto, he was not so nice. He work for the gestapo men there, and he was not popular by us. But in the last moment, he become such a hero. He asked us, all of us, to call Shema Yisrael. And he asked the German, von Hase, to stop for a moment that we could pray. 

And he was the first, which was unbelievable, because he was not such a nice character. And he was the one who become in last moment so brave. And we all after him we have been praying Shema Yisrael. And suddenly came the lagerfuhrer, the commander of ghetto, and he told that he got three, still three places left in the liquidation commander for three girls. And he chose just me and two others. 

INTERVIEWER: There were three places to stay in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: To stay in the group that still would have been alive. And he took me and two other girls out of this group, and we shouldn't be killed. One is living in Jerusalem, and one is not more alive. She was killed maybe one month later on. She was one year younger than I am. And the one who is alive in Jerusalem is like a cripple. She is still a victim of what happened. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean that saying the prayer, the Shema? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Saved your life, because-- 

SUBJECT: No. I don't think it was a pure-- we felt a necessity to pray, but nobody dared. He was the first who asked. But being through that we pray, this postponed the time of the execution. And he came suddenly and he tells that he got still three places left in between the 250 people that he left for make the liquidation of the ghetto. And he just pointed three of us and took us in the last moment away. 

When I came to this country, to Israel, and I give some statement, I talk about this girl in Jerusalem as also not more alive, because I was sure she's not more alive. And after some years, I met her by pure chance in Jerusalem. And we are now in contact. 

But you see, it's I who tried to build my life and to educate myself and to do my-- she is really living with the past. She is all the time she is a permanent victim of this war. Maybe just a terrible experience that we got in the last moment, all the people have been killed on our eyes, and that it couldn't happen. It was just pure chance that we didn't be included. 

And another thing which I still remembered was awful. In this group had been two sisters. Rosen was the name. Very pretty girls about my age. And one was blonde, one was black. I remember the German people taking, when she was already killed on the grass, kept taking photographs of her. 

INTERVIEWER: What German people? The citizens or the soldiers? 

SUBJECT: No. There have been Estonian people around us. But on the background have been German people. 

INTERVIEWER: Watching? 

SUBJECT: They have been SS. So it was the day of the execution of the ghetto, the definite of the ghetto. And there had been a lot of German people on jobs there. 

CREW: And they were standing around and watching? 

SUBJECT: They had been standing around. And I remember it, because it was so shocking, you know. She was killed, just now killed, and she was naked. She was a really-- a real beauty. Very tall, very blonde. And I remember taking her picture when she was dead. It was-- there's a little thing, but you still remember it, you know. It was-- everything was cruel, but it so-- you know, how can you do things like this? 

INTERVIEWER: They shot her? 

SUBJECT: She was shot between all the people. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what memories-- 

SUBJECT: Excuse me. And I remember another thing. That waiting for the execution, it was the German soldiers not-- in the first line was the Eston by side And he got his knob down. So he asked me to sew him his knob. And I used to have-- 

CREW: His button? 

SUBJECT: It's his button. And I used to have, you know, such a long hair and so on. So they used to speak between them the gentleman, look at the young girl's what a beautiful hair she's got, and she's going to be killed in a few moments. We're like, you know, I was listen to it. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember of the indignities or any situations that you noticed or experienced before the war, before the Germans actually came? When there was discrimination against people? 

SUBJECT: I tell you what you make on me. Of course, I was less than 14, but I still have been listening to radio and still news and everything. Everyone knows what happened in Germany to the Jews. But one thing I remember. I remember the group of German Jew coming to Poland. 

It was from [INAUDIBLE] through the border. It was maybe two years before the war as refugees without anything. They used to be Polish citizens living in Germany, and they had been thrown out of Germany suddenly and came to Poland. And each family, not each family, but some family in Krakow had been asked to pick up such a family of refugees to their home. We used have also such a family. And they had been-- it was-- I couldn't even speak with the girl. 

But I still have friends between this. One even escape from another family. Good of people, very-- you can see the manners and good family and elegant coming without anything. Poor. Throw out some little things and was-- this gave us such a, you know, knock out. What is going to be? How is this possible? And this maybe was the first time I had fear that danger is coming on us. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you act? How did you behave? 

SUBJECT: It was to us, we used to have normal life. Suddenly came a group of people throw out of their homes, of their houses without anything, you know, with children and everything. It was I remember it was shocking. And from this time, I think everybody was aware that something is going to happen. And we have heard about what is going, and I don't think we have been prepared for that terrible thing that really came. Nobody was prepared for such a thing. But we had the feeling that something's going to change with us. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that everyone knew about what was happening to the Jews in Germany, but in Israel they didn't know? In Israel? 

SUBJECT: I'm telling you what happened later on during the Holocaust. What I told you just now was before the Holocaust. What happened during the years '42, '43, '44 that people have been executed by plan, which has a genius fantastic plan. Everything according, planmassig, it was called in German. It was not enough knowing this country. It was maybe by purpose kept from-- the English policy was not to-- that the Jewish community in Israel shouldn't know about it, about how it was. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you feel that you have been able to manage, and this other girl who escaped at the same time as you did not-- was not able to live, rebuild her life? 

SUBJECT: You see, I don't know how. Maybe it's a personal thing. I am trying very hard to do it. It's not easy to make it. Maybe I got most strong power over will, what will power and maybe more desire for life. But it's not easy even for me. But I don't know. Maybe she's not enough strong. She's weak. She's a really very broken person. She's young and she looks very old and she used to look very old even 10, 15 years ago. 

CREW: Was there any. 