INTERVIEWER: And what I have now is-- is your story. And from time to time, we are going to ask you questions. Uh-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So tell you what I told you before? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, you will tell again-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --the things that you told me before. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Look, but maybe-- maybe we can begin by you telling us your name and when you were born and something about your hometown. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

CREW: As you speak, also, don't forget-- 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

CREW: Please, as you speak-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

CREW: Look at the camera, also. 

SUBJECT: Look-- yes, OK. I was born in Vilna. That was then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your name? 

SUBJECT: Vil-- Russia. And my name is Gitte Lemo I was there, in the primary school-- 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

SUBJECT: I was born there. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

SUBJECT: Uh, 1893, April 5. And then I was in the g-- gymnasium. That is like here, the high school, plus-- plus two college years. And after I finished-- I went to the gymnasium, 18 years, there. 

The First World War broke out. And I was in the school with all these organizer. Of all the-- of all the things and demonstration, and so on and so forth. And when the-- the-- um-- the war broke out, I at once started to work, about the refugees. 

And-- and till-- I um, I worked in the-- in that organization. And um, and I-- I start a-- I took of a course-- a course in to be a practical nurse. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And so I worked a couple of years there. And um, one day, somebody came to me, um, and asked-- uh, told me that a-- a certain Mr Jaffe, Yev Borisovich, Jaffe he's, uh-- he would like to talk to you. So I told her, I'm sorry, I cannot talk now. 

Because I have a line of people who are staying in line for very long. And I must finish before, with them. Then I will te-- talk to him. And he should go to the office and wait till I will be free. I did not know what a big shot he was. I-- I found out this later. But that wouldn't impress me anyway. 

So when I was through, I turn around, and I see a very good-looking blond Jewish man, sitting there and waiting. I was surprise. And he introduces him, I am Mr. Jaffe And Mr. Jaffe was a very known Zionist pioneer, the first of that who went to-- after the pogrom, he went to Israel. And he was also a Russian poet. 

And I started, if I knew that before, I would not change my attitude. But I would not be so surprise. And we talk together. And he suddenly told me, you know, you must go and-- and work with a refugee. 

So I told him, what I know about-- eh, about that? I don't know anything. I-- I work here, in the hospital, and I take care of the wounded soldiers. 

And I don't know about anything organizing organization uh, for the refugee. He told me, you must. And he introduced me to Yekopo. That is a one of organization that is here, you know, ORT. There was Yekopo, ORT, Soyuz Gorodov, and another. But the difference between here the WISTA and Yekopo was that we worked only Jews for the Jews, Catholic for the Catholic, and so on and so forth. 

So he was so persistent that I create the hospital and the other work that I did. And I went, and I was, my god, a teenager without any experience. So when I came to-- uh, to the new place, it was the first thing that we looked for, was a place to put the-- to open the ambulance, to open the high school-- school, to open a kindergarten. 

And under me was a feldscher. You haven't got that in-- in Ru-- in-- in America. Feldscher. 

INTERVIEWER: Physician Assistant. 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: Physician Assistant. 

SUBJECT: Physician Assis-- Assistant, I did not know. And she was very experienced. And the doctor, the medical doctor was just now finished. And he did not know a thing. So he always ask her opinion. 

So that there was a doctor that was under me, the feldscher, the doctor's assistants, and a teacher in a kindergarten. So I uh-- so I found, always, quarters. And we painted it, renovated. We-- we are ready to open that. And as soon as we finished, the military came over and took it over. The military forces had always, the preference. I could not do a thing. OK. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of refugees were you expecting? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of refugees were you-- were you expecting? 

SUBJECT: That's because every Jews was a spy. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were expecting Jewish refugees? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Jewish refu-- the Jews would only work for the Jews, you know? That is the-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Um-- difference between the WISTA and the organizations that I have worked. But I must tell you, that the WISTA had the biggest-- the Yekopo the WISTA, you know, has the biggest influence upon my life. Because I saw so much misery. I learned the-- the life as it is. 

You know, as a refugee, it was probably mostly Jews. Because every Jew, we was a spy. There wasn't any other Jews. Only spy. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, those were refugees from where? 

SUBJECT: From this-- from this-- they were near the front. We were the first nears-- I was near the front. On the-- near the front, all the Jews who were ever created. Sometimes in two hours, sometimes in an hours, sometimes in six hours. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: And if some-- some woman, or a pregnant women gave birth to the child, didn't matter at all. She was taken out because she was a spy. You see? So um, I work among this people. And that was the biggest influence of my-- of my life. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know? And when-- when they took over the whole place, of course, I was looking for another place. And the-- and again, we-- we painted it, renovated. Was ready to take. 

The military came, took it over. The third-- the third place that we found was the same story. So I got very, very excited, and very upset. And I told that I will go to the headquarter and talk to the-- uh, General in Chief. 

And I dress myself, and took my Moshe with a pferd in a carriage. A pferd, you know, a horse and a coach. And we went. And I told Moshe, don't leave me, one second, alone. Because it was very dangerous. A girl-- 

INTERVIEWER: You told the horse? 

SUBJECT: To Moshe. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, the balegule. 

SUBJECT: To balegule, to my driver. So I told him, you know Yiddish? Wonderful. You see? So I told him, don't leave me alone for a second. Always stay by my side. And after 1 hour and a 1/2-- 1 and 1/2, I don't remember-- we came to the headquarters. 

When I appear there, the assistant look me over, up and down, down and up, and tell, what can I help you? I told I would like to talk the-- for the-- the general in the-- of the staff. "He's busy." "I have time to sit down and wait." 

Half an hour later, he came back. "He's still busy." "I will wait." But then he decided he'll not get rid of me. 

So he let me in. And I came in. At the big table was sitting the General. And looked me up and down, down and up. 

And I told him, what's the matter-- matter with you? The people, as soon as we find a place and put it in order, and-- an so on, you come and take it over. Are you not in the position to-- to find yourself a place? That was a-- you know, a yiddish chutzpah, a chutzpah of the youth, to talk that way with a General and his staff, you see? I would not talk-- 

INTERVIEWER: Of the Czar's army? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Of the Army of the Czar? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I would not talk to anybody that way now, you see? But the chutzpah of the youth, you see? And I was very angry. You see? I told him, I can't understand, why you must always take what we've found and prepared? He didn't say one word. he looked me over again, up and down, down and up, and told me, "You'll get the place back." 

So I went back. And we uh, opened what we need. I found volunteers. And I found one person that was paid, a [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

And I worked there for a couple of months. And then I moved to another place to organize a center for the refugee. And so I was-- you know, I-- I-- I was wandering from one place to the other, in Russia. 

And uh, and I remember, I was working in one place, and I had to go to another-- uh, another town. Because I finished here. I found the volunteer. I found the-- the people, the cook and so on. Everything was organized. 

That is what's my job. And suddenly, somebody-- and I was always-- had, always, to do with the government, with the mayor of the city. Who, when they wanted to find something out and so on, so they-- they called me up and told that they are coming in a certain hour. 

Good. Suddenly somebody, when I was working, comes and-- and say, "The government would like to talk to you." Without calling me before and so on, I was very surprised. 

And I felt, at once, something is brewing. You know? Something dangerous. So-- so I could not tell him no, because the government, you know? And he came in. And he told me, what we are-- what we will be talking about, that is confidential. And you must not tell anybody. 

So my suspicious grow. So I told, OK. And then he told me that they expect more-- a-- a bunch-- many new refugee. So they want these refugee to evacuate to Siberian. And that was wintertime. They didn't have hot clo-- cl-- winter clothes, or something like that, and so on. So you can understand how I took the-- the news. 

And then he went away. And then, I must not tell anybody about that, when they were coming. And he ask me, how many people are in the camp? Usually that was 400 at the least. And this most, there was 700. 

So when he put to me the question, how many people are here? How many refugees, I got even more suspicious. And I told him, I could not tell you. Because I did not count them last-- lately. And that was a lie, because I knew how many people were there. You see? 

So when he went away, I thought, what to do? To tell the people or not to tell the people? So I decided-- all the chutzpah was that, you know? 

I decided I will tell-- go and tell. I went to the camp and told them, listen, who has money to rent a room? Go out at once. And keep your mouths shut that I told you that. 

Because I could put myself to death, or to Siberian, you see? And I told, don't forget to keep your mouths shut. And the next day, when he come to take the refugees to work with him, to make room for the new one, the camp was empty. But it was a very, very-- you know, that only because I was so excited that I did not think about the danger to myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: So and after, uh-- after this, I was in this work. And I organize in many, many cities and towns, and dorf, you know what is dorf, [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] you see, I organize that, and yet I went. After four years, I decided to-- I would like to-- to go to private life, you see? And the-- and the-- mm-- and I was allowed, of my work for the fatherland, you know? For the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --fatherland, who was so anti-Semitic, I could not go into any university, regardless that I had-- had a gold medal, you know? I could not come in, because there was a quota. 

So I was accepted to the University of Leningrad. That time, that it was Petrograd, you know, called. So and-- and-- and as I told you, this, my four years in this-- in this work, was the biggest influence of my-- that turn me upside down. 

So that was very-- and I think that was, perhaps, 1924 or something. I don't remember the years. I left Russia. But I had all my papers in the university. I wanted to be a lawyer. And when you come to the university, you must give all the paper, all the certificate from all the schools, the birthday certificate, everything. 

And when I left, it was summertime. The university was close. So I did not think about taking out my paper, asking for my paper. And I went out, and I went to Vienna. You see, where my fiance was. And there-- and-- and then, I married there. 

Then after a couple of years, I wanted to continue my education. And I ask for my paper. I wrote to them. They never answer a word. My sister was, then, alive in Leningrad. She went there and ask them for my paper. They did not give one paper out, because I was Jewish. Until now, I cannot show to anybody that I was, ever in my life, in a school. 

You know, and-- and-- and in the-- in the Vienna, when the Schutzbunds came, if you know what that is, the revolution, you see, that started, the-- the-- the sort of uh, husband who was a so-- socio-democratic, and a reactionary, and so on. So I started to-- to work in politics. And I worked in politics 20 years. 

INTERVIEWER: In what party? 

SUBJECT: I-- I belong to social democratic parties, left wing. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You see? Regardless of this, of that, that my husband was-- eh-- uh, um-- you know, a head chalk mines. And the real estate, on the whole, a very, uh, successful and rich man. 

INTERVIEWER: The real estate business and chalk mines? 

SUBJECT: Chalk mine, in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: In Germany. 

SUBJECT: But I lived in Vienna. So I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What part of Vienna? What apartment? What life? 

SUBJECT: But we-- I had my studio. My studio apartment, I had in Vienna. I never wanted to-- to move to Germany, you see? And my son was also to g-- g-- gymnasium in Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: But the chalk mines and so on, the-- they were in Germany, of Sassnitz. That was near the Baltic, uh, Sea, near Sweden. You see? So always, for the summer, we went there. 

Because it was a little town. There was many forests, and so on. And during the wintertime, sometimes he came to visit us in Vienna. As my husband was a very uh, you know, democratic person, he never told me, you must do that or you must do that. I want it that way, so it was-- it was that way. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in Vienna, he was in Germany. Is that-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. But he came up to-- to-- to visit us, and we came to visit him. 

INTERVIEWER: Hmm. 

SUBJECT: And so-- so that is-- that is what uh, that was. And then, when-- and then when that-- now I would like to talk about the Kristall-- Kris-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, a little bit about Vienna. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Jewish life, intellectual bohemian life. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Political life? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And uh, anti-Semitism, if any? 

SUBJECT: Of course. anti-Semitism, is-- is-- is of course-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like for Russian immigrant who live in-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, you see, and-- and especially with-- I have, always, the accent in-- in German too. You know, my Russian accent. 

[RUSTLING] 

I am sorry, I hope I did not disturb that. 

INTERVIEWER: It's fine. 

SUBJECT: OK. Yeah, so-- um, and so you see, Vienna, by itself, is a beautiful city. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Beautiful city. And has beautiful surroundings, you know? When you go by bus, one hour, you are in the country. 

That is a privilege of Vienna. And the peop-- I lived-- I had, always, the good-- so-called good luck, to be the only one Jewish family in the house. You see? The first time when I got Jewish neighbors, that was in New York. 

Always, I had-- I was the only one Jew, Jewish family in the-- in the house. And sometimes they probably did not-- did not, uh, know that I'm Jewish. And who-- and who when they-- they did some with the marks, or something like that. So I told them please, I am Jewish. "You are Jewish?" Like, oh yes, I am Jewish. 150%. And I have no horns here on my head. 

You see, and the-- all the people were very nice to me, I can say. And there was, even, under me, a woman who has three boys. And the boys was Nazi. And I know, I knew that. But they were nice to me too. And they-- the knew that I am Jewish, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: What year is it? 

SUBJECT: That was-- 

INTERVIEWER: How-- 

SUBJECT: That was in the underground, when the Nazis started. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. What year? 

SUBJECT: You see-- I don't remember, you see. The years, I don't remember, when this started. But anyway, so and the-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did they behave as Nazis? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: How did they behave as Nazis? What did they-- 

SUBJECT: That they don't-- they didn't behave openly, because it was underground. You see? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And like here, now, with the Ku Klux Klan, this is the only-- everybody said, oh what, Nazis are nothing. A little group, a little group. Nothing, nothing, nothing. And the little group grow up Hitler. Hitler was Austrian. He-- he got, then, the German citizenship. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: How was it to be a-- 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: How was it to be a political activist in the-- 

SUBJECT: Who? 

INTERVIEWER: You. 

CREW: You. 

INTERVIEWER: You were involved in politics. How was it for a Jew, to be involved in politics? 

SUBJECT: I-- I was probably then in my twen-- late twenties or something. I don't-- I don't remember. You see, that is, every thing is so much. I went through so much, that-- that the dates, I don't remember. I had, once, a very good memory for dates. But no more now. You see? 

So mm-- so and I was very active in the political life. And I was a sec-- secretary of my section. And you know? And-- and you see, and then-- and then, you know, when the Crystal Night was, I-- I was-- my-- my husband-- the Nazis already-- al-- already was-- were very, very strong. You know? The Nazis were very strong that-- that time, when I lived-- lived Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: Eh, now, if the Na-- the Einmarsch, was when-- the Anschluss was when? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER: Anschluss, the Anschluss. 

SUBJECT: Anschluss? Anschluss was after Hitler came to-- to-- to might and took over Austria. 

INTERVIEWER: But that was before the Kristallnacht. 

SUBJECT: The-- then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Or not? 

SUBJECT: Was it before or not? I think that it was before. 

INTERVIEWER: Before. 

SUBJECT: I am not sure, but I think that was before. 

INTERVIEWER: Hmm. So the Nazis were officially in power already? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So no, when-- yeah, when I applied for a visa, then that is-- already we were here. And I went out in 1938, just before the wars, Second War started out. That is what-- they were already in might. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, before the-- the Anschluss-- 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Before the Anschluss-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: --what did you sense in Austria? Is it-- how did the anti-- anti-Semitism rise? What kind of personal evidence dud you have? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. you see, before-- 

INTERVIEWER: Personal evidence? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. You see, personal evidence, that was-- the Nazis were already there. And the-- and one day-- and the first thing that I pushed out, you see, was-- was my son. Because they killed, as I told you before. The young people, they killed at once. 

And once I was sitting, I had to liquidate my apartment in Vienna, to go to-- to Germany, to live with my husband to get the visa. And uh, I was sitting at home. And suddenly, and suddenly, you know, there was a knock on my door. And I opened the door. 

And whom I see? Two Nazis. I was very, um-- very surprised. And hmm, and they told me they came for a contribution. 

And the Jews were not allowed to take-- to make contribution. You see? Because the Jewish money stinks. But to take the millions, that wasn't stinking, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Only a contribution, you see. So I looked at them and told, but I am Jewish. So they told me, "With this name, you are Jewish?" So I told him, "150%." So they apologize, and they went away. 

I have personally-- then they took away all the radios, the telephones. They did not allow you to go on the-- on the trotuar. You must go on the pavement. And if they wanted, they could spit in your-- your face. Nobody would say a word. 

INTERVIEWER: It was before the Kristallnacht? 

SUBJECT: That-- that-- that was be-- after the Crystal Night. 

INTERVIEWER: After the Crystal Night? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And before the Crystal Night, they took away the radios then, before the Crystal Night. You see? And then-- but I tell you, this Nazi family that was under me, because perhaps I knew them when the children were born and so on, they were nice to me. 

But with other people, I did not talk. Because I knew that I can bring them in trouble. For instance, I was very, very friendly with my superintendent in the house. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: They had a son and a daughter. You see? The son, they was blond. My son was dark. 

And they were-- were big friends. And the boy always came to our-- to my apart-- to our apartment, you see? And they played together, and they were friends. 

And then they give, um, an order that you cannot-- you cannot have a housemate if you have a son, 17 years old. So I have to dismiss my housemate. Because my house-- my son was this age. 

And I told-- and this superintendent had a girl, a cute little girl whom I knew from the first day. And she was always at my uh, house. I talk to her, and I-- t-- taught her to-- to read, you know? We were friend. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And we belong to the same political party. You see? So I told him-- I told him, I don't want your little girl to come to my house anymore. Because I was afraid for the girl, and for my son. So she told me, she always want to visit you, and she will come to visit you now too. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And later on, they-- they arrested this-- her husband, because he was for the-- from the Schutzbund, you know? And he disappeared. He-- we didn't know where he disappeared. You see? So that is how it-- it-- it was. And then I liquidated my-- my apartment. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Look-- 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: I-- I want to ask you why. 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: What, why? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you liquidate your apartment? Did you sense something was happening? Other p-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, I don't understand you. 

INTERVIEWER: Other people, other Jews, did not liquidate. 

SUBJECT: Because we-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you? What did you think was going to happen? 

SUBJECT: Because-- because we saw that the Nazis are big, already, here. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh-huh. 

SUBJECT: The Nazis are already here. And I applied for a visa. 

INTERVIEWER: But I'm asking the question, so many Jews-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --did not-- 

SUBJECT: You know-- 

INTERVIEWER: --apply for a visa. I-- I don't-- they did not. I would like to understand how you saw things differently? What did you expect? 

SUBJECT: You see, because many Jews didn't believe that it will come to such a end. And besides, Austria was under protection of League of Nations. Then was not United Nat-- it was the League of Nations. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, it was. 

SUBJECT: And they were under protection of League of Nations, Austria. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: But you-- you believed that something bad is going to happen? What-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, because that was already-- that was already very clear. 

INTERVIEWER: Because it was not the-- 

SUBJECT: That the Nazis were-- Hitler was already here and everything. The danger was here. But I-- we-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? Others didn't know. What convinced you? 

SUBJECT: Because they didn't believe. They believed that-- that Austria is under protection of the League of Nations. But League of Nations folded down. You know how it-- 

INTERVIEWER: So you were-- you thought differently from the other Jews? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER: You had a different idea from the other Jews? 

SUBJECT: No. I would not tell you. Many Jews applied. 

INTERVIEWER: Many Jews. 

SUBJECT: Many Jews. But many didn't apply because they believed-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: --that the League of Nations would protect them. You see? So-- and then, when I liquidated there, or when we started to liquidate the coal mines-- uh, chalk mines. 

Not coal mines, chalk mines. And all the real estate that we had, and so on and so forth. So they, of course, they, of course, they wanted to force my husband to sign a paper, that he gives everything to the government. 

And-- and he told that he-- he will-- if he-- no, that-- that was later. That was later that they forced him. That was later. But when we started to move about, then I want to-- to Germany. And then I lived in a boarding house, together with my husband. 

And my husband was, you know, always working during the day in the chalk mines. He was uh-- supervising the work of his worker. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And his worker loved him very much and respect him very much. Because he was very good to them. When they could not meet the end-- at the end of the week, he borrowed them money, or he gave them money. And they-- they loved him, you know? 

So when we-- when he could not come on time, back, he always called me up and told me that he will be later. And this day that was the Crystal Night, I was uh-- uh, waiting for him. He usually came, four o'clock. 

It was four o'clock. It was 4:30. It was five o'clock. No husband. No husband. And-- and-- and no calls. 

I could not understand. Because it wasn't he. Because he was so good to me. So he always, that I don't get upset, that I-- you see, I could not understand. 

But I could not call him up. And they couldn't I didn't know what to do. So I was waiting, nervous. I say, I don't know what. And I did not know what happened. 

Suddenly, I hear-- I hear a terrible noise. Somebody's running, that-- the steps, up. And I hear my landlady, who-- who was, of course, uh, not Jewish. "I-- I don't let-- let you in! I don't let you in! Leave her alone!" And so on, and so forth. 

And then I-- I hear a knock on the door. And I thought, my god, if I don't open the door, they will demolish the-- the house. And this, my landlady, doesn't deserve. 

So I open the door, and I see I don't know how many men. "You prostitute. You Jews. You dirty-- uh, you dirty thief" And I could not understand what or what. 

And then, "Come with us!" So I thought they will take me and throw me out the steps, and that'll be the end of me. And then I thought, my god, what happened in the world that is something like that. Something happened in the world, but I did not know what. And they-- that was in Sassnitz of Rugen. 

INTERVIEWER: Sassnitz? 

SUBJECT: Sassnitz of Rugen. Of Rugen. That is an insel. A beautiful-- a beautiful, um, place. summer vacations, it is beautiful. With-- with villas and everything, built, and so on. And he has the chalk mines he had in Sagard, also. They are not-- not far from Sassnitz. 

And I went down the steps. And they push me. I walked, you know, through all the streets, through the Main Street of this little dorf, you know? Sassnitz. And the-- and around me, they formed a circle, singing, Horst Wessel, sung. When the Jewish-- Jewish blood is fleeing, blessing, we are happy and we are joyful. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know it in German? 

SUBJECT: In German? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Actually, I don't know. See, I don't remember now, that. I try not to remember. I-- I tried not to because I cannot calm myself for weeks later. For instance, when I talk with Mr. Nukevich, before, these couple of days, I was not myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Because everything comes back. You cannot forget it. You see, someplace here, behind your head, it is always there. You see? So I understood that something happened in the world. But what? 

INTERVIEWER: They were singing around you, in a circle? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I-- the-- they-- they-- you see, they built a circle around me. Many people, all they-- like this. And they-- they always singing together. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were the only one in the middle? 

SUBJECT: I was the only one Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: You were the only Jew. 

SUBJECT: My-- my husband was there. And I was at home. You see? So-- so I thought they will go with me. And he will come to the Baltic Sea. So they will throw me into the water, and that will be the end of me. 

But I was always working. And I was thinking, what happened to my husband? Where-- if that happened to me, so something must have happened, also, to-- to him. But what? 

[NECKLACE CLICKING] 

But I was all right. I bite my-- I bite my-- you know, my tongue. And I tell not to cry. I did not want to show to them that I am afraid. You see? And I was very, very calm. But everything was torn now, because I bite everything there. 

But they did not throw me in the sea. They brought me to the jail. And they took away my-- my watch and my belt from the-- from the dress. And they close the door. 

I never was, in my life, in a jail, you see? That was a bed there, a little table, one chair. I was so exhausted, that I laid down. And I was thinking, where is my husband? What happened in the world, that something like that happened here? 

I was laying, laying, laying. I don't know how long. I did not have a watch. And I was thinking. 

And then I knocked on the door. You see, that is also something that I should not have done. You have not-- not the right to knock on the door. 

So I knocked on the door, and somebody came. And I told, where is my husband? So he-- mm-- so he-- he told me, he's here. So I told him, I would like to see him. "You cannot see him now. He's is interrogated. And when he will be through, he'll come. We will bring him to your cell." 

And they close-- they-- they lock the door. So I was waiting, waiting. I don't know how long I was waiting. Suddenly, I hear somebody o-- somebody open the door. And-- and you see, I-- and-- and-- they pushed in a man who, when I saw the man, I was scared. A monster. You see? 

Instead of eyes, it was two red spots. The mouth was that way, the lips were that way. The-- the ears were that ways. The chin was that way. I-- that was not a human being. That was something, a monster. 

You know what? I was afraid. Because I read about that newspaper. Not newspaper, but heard from the-- from the people who went through-- through these things, that when they arrested a-- say, a-- a woman or a man. So they put a man into your cell, put you both on the table to-- to force you to have sexual relationship. And they were standing around the table and laughing. 

So I thought that this is what they want to do to me. And I was scared to death, you know? Suddenly I look at this monster, and I see that this monster has the coat of my husband. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: So I thought, how this monsters cops-- comes to the coat of my husband. 

INTERVIEWER: Coat of your husband? 

SUBJECT: You see? So I-- suddenly I hear a whisper, "Hello, darling." And I looked at him. And I think, it is my husband. A husband who with whom I lived-- I lived 24 years, married. And that was him. You see? 

And when they left us alone and clo-- and locked the door. So he told me this story, how this begun. He could not-- he could not-- he came out on time, to be on time, home. But when he came on the station of Sassnitz, from the railroad, he came together with a friend who was not-- not-- not Jewish. 

See, they always go-- went together, came back together. So he-- he saw a big crowd of men. And he heard how they ask, which one is a Jew? 

That is, he told me later, when he could talk. He could not talk because all his mouth inside, was torn apart. You know? From all the-- so-- so he told me, he says, they ask, who is the Jew? And 60 man fell over him, started to beat him up. 

And he told his friend, you disappear at once. Because he could be arrested because he had to do with a Jew. you see, that was a big crime. You see? So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were-- were those men some of his acquaintances here to-- 

SUBJECT: No, he worked, then, in another place. 

INTERVIEWER: So they didn't know him? 

SUBJECT: No, but he-- I knew this man. But he-- he was a very-- a Baron, you know, from Baltic, uh, States, a Baron, a very nice, uh, lead-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, were the men who attacked your husband-- 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: Were the men who attacked your husband-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: --acquaintances? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. He has-- he has-- 

INTERVIEWER: People who knew him? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: People who he knew? 

SUBJECT: Who were-- no. 

INTERVIEWER: Those men? 

SUBJECT: That is what I want to tell you now. So later, he told me, he found out that they wanted the people from this place, from where he had the chalk mines, and his worker, that they beat him up. 

By the worker told they will not beat him up. So they brought people from other-- from other dorfs, from other places. 

INTERVIEWER: Other religions. 

SUBJECT: And that is why they did not know that he's a J-- which one is a Jew. You see? So then we-- 

INTERVIEWER: When you were-- 

SUBJECT: Hmm? Yes? 

INTERVIEWER: --talking about whether you knew any people, when you were walking in the street, when they took you to jail-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: --did you recognize any people, that-- 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. That is right. I told you before, that I look around, I see a-- a couple of people who-- whom-- whom I knew, and who me, knew. That was a director of the bank with which my husband, uh, worked, and who was very proud to have his account. That was another-- another couple of people who knew me, who always greet me. But of course, they did not greet, and they did not look at me, because they are afraid. And between these people, there was an old woman, you know, that I did not know. 

But he-- he saw how they beat up my husband. And she came home. And she told her daughter and her son-in-law that it's a terrible thing that she saw, how they beat up my husband. 

And that if the Hitler, the leader would knew about it, he would not-- he would punish the people. He would not allow that. Because Hitler make believe the people, that the Crystal Night was not organized, you see? And that the beating and so on, that it wasn't true, that it was only imagination of the Jew, you know? 

So she came home, and she told us she was terribly upset. And that is why I tell about this woman, because that has big influence of-- of my husband's de-- um, um, of-- of my husband, that they pushed him out. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I see. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. You see? So he told me that they did not want to-- mm, to beat him up. So they put people from other area there. 

And they put a big shield on him, "The dirty Jew, the thief." You know? And so a goner, you know, and everything. And he-- and they-- they pulled the string and told him to run. 

And to not to get s-- suffocated and so on, so he pushed his finger under the-- under the string. And the finger was broken later on. But that way he did not get, you know, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Suffocated. 

SUBJECT: Suffocated. You see? And when-- and when-- and when-- when he came, um, to the police, they-- they g-- at once, they put him uh, for interrogation. And he could not talk. Because everything inside there was torn up. 

And he was broken up. The-- the face and everything. And they-- and they wanted to-- to force him to give the name of all the workers. They-- they took the dirty Jew-- Jewish stinking money. 

So and-- and then they-- they-- he came to my cell. And the next morning, he had supposed to go to the concentration camp. And-- and-- and when-- and when, you know, we-- we were together in the night. And-- and you know, and the next morning, they took him away. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that night like for you? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: That night 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like for you? 

SUBJECT: You can imagine what it was like for me. 

INTERVIEWER: Will you tell me? 

SUBJECT: I was thinking that I see him for the last time in my life. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: The last time that I see, I-- I have the impression of not my kind. He was a very kind, nice person, you know? Very shy. With me he talked, you know, for hours. But with stranger, he did not talk. But everybody liked him. Because he has a manner, how to-- to approach people, how to talk to them. But he was, by nature, he was shy. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know? So-- so I was there-- think-- thinking, my god, I see him for the last time in my life. Tomorrow he's going to the concentration camp. And that is-- he would not survive one week there. Because he was in-- he was broken up, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say anything to him? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say anything to him? 

SUBJECT: No, I did not say. What could I say? What could I say? What could he say to me? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You know, so he knew what is concentration camp. And I knew too, what is concentration camp. And I know that that is the last time that I see him alive. We did not say. 

In the morning, you know, they came to take him. And they told me that I could go home. So I told them, I want an escort. I'll not go home by-- by myself, over the street. So they give me somebody to go home. And my husband was taken to the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: Which one? 

SUBJECT: That I-- that I didn't-- he did not know. And I did not know. He was taken to the railroad station, to go to the concentration camp. You know? 

So I came home. I did not know what to do. I wanted to go to Berlin, you know? Because-- because see, I had somebody there that I knew. 

Because I was all-- all alone, in my own world. But I-- only I was-- I was uh, happy that I saved my son. This is the only one thing that I have in mind. 

So I was sitting in my room, in the boarding house, and thinking, what to do now? To go to Berlin, or not to go? What to do? 

And I could not decide. And then, the telephone r-- rings. My brother-in-law, his brother, my husband's brother called up. Where is Lazar? My husband is Lazar. So I told him, he went on a trip. 

And that when you're told you went on a trip, it meant that he is on his way to the concentration camp. That was, you know, such a-- a word. So this concentration camp. So he told me, do you want me to come over to you? I told no, that is what I needed, that they should-- they should catch him too. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. 

SUBJECT: Later on, he-- he-- he perished with his wife, in concentration camp, his brother. You know? But I told, not-- I don't want you, under any-- any circumstances, to come to here. I'll go to Berlin tomorrow. And I hang up. 

And suddenly, I-- I get a call again. "May I come over?" I did not know who that was. And I say-- and a couple of minutes later, I hear a terrible commotion on the-- on the steps again. 

My landlord is crying, "I will not let you go to there! She has enough excitement!" And-- and she puts herself before the door, and told, "And you'll not go to see her!" And I could not understand what or what. 

Then I open the door. And a man stays there. A very good-looking-- you know-- man. And I-- I told, I would like to talk to you. May you close the door? 

So I ask the landlady to let him-- to let us talk. And he came in. And he told, his mother-in-law saw how they beat up your husband. 

He was there-- the-- the husband of the daughter of this woman. As I told you before, that she was an underground Nazi. He was here. And he has joined the Nazis, when he was forced to do it. Many people joined the Nazis to have the job, or something like that. So he joined that way. 

And he told me, listen, tomorrow morning they-- they will take him to the railroad train. I will come to his cell, and I will talk to him. And I will try to get him off the train by the next station. So I told him, I want to go I want to go to Berlin. He told, stay here. Don't go. 

So-- so I was here. I did not know, to believe it, not to believe it. You know, you get skeptical. And-- and I was, you know-- and the land-- the landlady was very, very nice. And later on, they took her through the street of the little-- of the littlest town, and spit in her-- in her-- in her face. "You Jewish lover." You see? 

INTERVIEWER: With a sign? Or not? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah, no. They-- they-- they talk-- talk to her. The people, were cir-- oh, there was a circle around her. Then they spit on her. So I-- I-- I stayed-- I stayed um, in the room. 

And later on, you know, my husband told me, this man, when he went on the-- on a train, this man went into the cell, introduced to him, and he told him that he wants to help him. He did not know-- did not know, what to believe him or not to believe him. Perhaps it is only a trick. You know? 

You get skeptical in such-- in such things. And-- and he talked-- and he talked to him. And next station, he took him off the train. He took him off the train. And I don't know how we came to-- to the boarding house, where-- where I was. 

And later on, when we went to another city, they visit us very often, she and he. Of course, I gave them money. She was pregnant. And I paid for the-- all the expenses. Because I had a couple of thousand dollar put away. I had it, always, in my brassiere, you see? 

So I-- I gave it, a part, for them. Because I had to have money to go to Paris, if I-- in case, in case I get a visa. You see? At that time, I did not have yet, a visa. You see? And-- and-- and my husband told me that, about that. Later on, when he came to-- into my-- into-- back, you see, that the man came, introduce himself, and told him that he wants to help him. 

So and then, I wanted to-- I never wanted to-- mm-- and this-- that way he did not go to camp. But when he was on the railroad station, they brought a not-- a notary. And with a form. And they wanted to-- to force my husband to-- to put his name, that he gives everything that he possess, he gives to the government. And he told, he'll not do it. 

So the train, it was halted half an hour. And then the notary told, I think, he will not put his signature. Let the train go. Let the train go. You see? So he did not sign the paper. 

And he-- he went with the train, you know? And that way, you see, he saved-- he saved my-- my-- mm-- my pension. Because if he would sign, that signed signature, finished. Everything is to-- belongs to them, you see? You understand what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER: Today? 

SUBJECT: No, that-- that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: That time, you see? You see? And he came home. And I-- and he was in terrible pain. The-- the finger was broken. He couldn't drink. He could not eat anything. Everything was torn down. So I wanted-- I needed a doctor. 

But every private doctor did not want to-- to see him. They was afraid, a Jew, beaten up. That it is not true, that the Jews were beaten up. They-- they were afraid to-- to-- to look at him. So finally, somebody told me that is a military doctor there. Perhaps I should go to him. 

And I went to him. I-- I went to the office. And when he's there, the secretary, saw my man, she ran out of the room. Because she was so afraid of the monster. And the doctor then came. 

And he told, what happened to you? So my husband told him, "60 people beat me up." Oh, he told, you-- "Our 60 heroes beat you up. I will help you." you see? 

But he told him, "Listen, you risk very much--" my husband told him, "--in treating me. Because I am a Jew." So he told, "I must-- I must help our heroes--" 

INTERVIEWER: Our? 

SUBJECT: "Our heroes, who beat you up." And he looked into his mouth, and so on. He was-- he-- you-- I saw, he was, you know, at the end of his-- of his force. 

INTERVIEWER: He had to treat your husband for them? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: He had to treat your husband to help them? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I-- I-- I-- I took-- took him to the-- the doctor office. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. But he said, he has to "help the heroes." 

SUBJECT: That he was laughing. 

INTERVIEWER: Laughing? 

SUBJECT: Mocking them. The-- the German heroes, 60 persons, he told, beat up-- 