MICHAEL: My name is Michael Reznik. I'm born 1911, June 23, the town in Poland, the town Wieliczka. When I was, uh, eight, seven years, this was 1918, my father die in the typhus. Later on, I was golap. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember the First World War? 

MICHAEL: I remember very little, not too much. 

DORI LAUB: What do you remember? 

MICHAEL: I remember the soldiers, how they was dressed up. He was dressed up with the, you know, the-- the-- tosen you know, this what I remember, very little, not too much. Later-- 

DORI LAUB: And what was the town like? 

MICHAEL: The town was 90% Jewish. It was very little town. People-- 

DORI LAUB: How many people? 

MICHAEL: Was about can say, about 1,200 Jewish families. The town was live-- the Jewish people was living over there in a, you know, very a poor, poor, eh, eh, life. Later when I was eight, nine years, I went to, um, the other town where mine grandfather-- 

DORI LAUB: Were there many brothers and sisters? 

MICHAEL: Yes, we was ten kids in the house. We was, eh, six brothers and four sisters. 

DORI LAUB: And you were in-- 

MICHAEL: I was in between the middle, you know. I was the fifth in the family, in the kids. Later, I went in the school, you know, the Hebrew school and to learn so I can-- 

DORI LAUB: What was father doing for a living? 

MICHAEL: My father was a, he got a farm. He got a cows, horses, eh, land. And this was the living. And we, in our house, there wasn't giving a lot, eh, to poor people. Wet Hasene gemacht, ureme kales. 

DORI LAUB: You married off, uh-- 

MICHAEL: Ye-- yeah. 

DORI LAUB: --poor brides. 

MICHAEL: [INAUDIBLE] Holz zu brennen, zureden, Kohle. My father, he give to the people so they don't get frozen in the winter time. Later, I went, eh, I was about 12 years old, I went to another town, Dzialoszyce. Over there, I went to a bakery to learn a baker. 

And I grow up over there. And I went to school, to night school to have the education. Later, in 1933, I wanna go to Israel. I went on a kibbutz. And I was in ger. You heard ger a rabe? And I was over there 2 and 1/2 years. I were impossible to get a certificate to go to Israel. 

DORI LAUB: In the hakhsharah? 

MICHAEL: In the hakhsharah. Later, I come back to the same town. And I meet my wife. And we was going-- we was, eh, ready to go to be married, although was coming the Second World War. When the Second World War was coming, then we stopped everything. And this was in September 1, 1939. 

DORI LAUB: You were a baker at that time? 

MICHAEL: I was a baker. Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Your-- You were working. Have y-- you-- 

MICHAEL: I was working. In the meantime, I stopped working because no was, eh, the flour no was. Eh, what to baking? 

DORI LAUB: Now, do you remember the day the war started? 

MICHAEL: The war? 

DORI LAUB: Where were you? What did you see? What did you hear? 

MICHAEL: Yeah. In, this was September 1st, September 2nd, the town was like a-- a cemetery. Nothing-- everything was dead. A few days later, we see it is coming, the German's tanks, the German soldiers. And the people was going out in the street to looking. 

The German's start right away to shooting. After this experience, then the people, right away, was in hiding, don't come out. When they coming in, when they took over the town, they took right away, hostages. 

DORI LAUB: Who was taken? Give-- 

MICHAEL: The Germans. 

DORI LAUB: But who did they take? 

MICHAEL: They took, eh, they went to the committee, the Jewish committee. And they say they want to have a, um-- how's the name? Uh, the work, the work, was heisst den... people what the kennen kippen, so nothing happened to the Germans. First thing they took was six people and they kill right away for nothing. 

DORI LAUB: How? Where? 

MICHAEL: How? Because they want to scare the people so nobody make, uh, something revolt to them. Later-- 

DORI LAUB: Now, how did you know of that killing? 

MICHAEL: Because-- 

DORI LAUB: What did you see? What did you hear? 

MICHAEL: What? Because we see, we know everyone in the town with the name. And we see they taken the six people on the cemetery. 

DORI LAUB: On the-- 

MICHAEL: In the-- on the Jewish cemetery-- 

DORI LAUB: Cemetery. 

MICHAEL: Yeah. And they kill them over there. 

DORI LAUB: But you saw them being taken away? 

MICHAEL: We see them taking them away. Uh, but we no see them when they kill them, who killed them. Because we cannot go and see. Then everybody was scared to go out after this. 

Later, the-- this was in, uh, about beginning the 1940, they took, they asked for people to take to work, to working on the route. And who will be working on the route be more secured not to take me away from the family. And we can stay in that-- in the-- with the family in the town. I was, eh, from the-- from these people what I went to reg-- registered to go to work. They took us-- 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe exactly-- 

MICHAEL: Yes. 

DORI LAUB: --getting up in the morning? 

MICHAEL: In the morning, we went up 6 o'clock in the morning, we went on the-- in the marketplace. And over there-- 

DORI LAUB: What did you see in the marketplace? 

MICHAEL: In the marketplace was coming the groups. And was a Jewish, eh, order man. Jewish police was ready. They get in the Jewish police. 

They took us and the bring us to the places to work on the route. We was digging by that route, near the route, rivers so the water can go, you know, so no flood the route. We was working over there about six months. Later, they took us. 

DORI LAUB: Only Jewish police? 

MICHAEL: It was police from the town to Polish police, to Polish police and Jewish. And Polish police was just to-- uh, just to show these police. Because the Jewish Ordemens they cannot carry guns. And there was a couple the police, the town police. And the Ordemens, he was that got the order what to make-- what we have to make it. This was going about six months. Six months-- 

DORI LAUB: And how were you treated in those six months? 

MICHAEL: Very bad. Who no make the job, then they beating. The Ordemens they beat the-- the working people. 

DORI LAUB: The Jewish police? 

MICHAEL: The Jewish police. Because they got orders were not to say, when the Germans coming and they kill the police. Then they treating us very bad. 

DORI LAUB: Who was-- became a Jewish policeman? How did they pick them out? 

MICHAEL: From the-- from the-- the committee, from the town. They have to get, eh, some, you know, what the kennen better organize the job into taking care on the job. And they was in with the arm bands. And they was in the Ordemens. The name was Ordemens. 

DORI LAUB: OK. 

MICHAEL: Orde? Ordeman. You heard of this, no? No? 

DORI LAUB: Now, do you remember one particular Jewish policeman? 

MICHAEL: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe him, who he was, what he was like, what he used to say? 

MICHAEL: He was like an Ordeman. They took, like they say [? [SPEAKING POLISH] ?] you know, you know what mean [? [SPEAKING POLISH]? ?] Uh, stark. 

DORI LAUB: A strong-- 

MICHAEL: Strong muscles. 

DORI LAUB: Muscle men. 

MICHAEL: Muscle men. This kind. They no look, should he be educated or-- just should be-- 

DORI LAUB: Strong. 

MICHAEL: Strong. So he can, eh, yal'e on the people. After the-- 

DORI LAUB: Describe-- well, you were going to talk about one policeman. 

MICHAEL: Yes. And, eh, the policeman, the policeman, he come. He got, eh, you know, pay from the Jewish committee. We no got paid nothing for our work, our job. 

And the police, they was, you know, strong, very discipline to us. They was like a-- like a low class people. No was educated people in this. This was the Ordeman. 

DORI LAUB: Yeah, do you remember one that and what-- can you describe one of them and what he said to you? 

MICHAEL: What he said to me? 

DORI LAUB: Or an incident with him, something that happened between you and him. 

MICHAEL: I know got nothing to doing. Because I was-- in every place where I was, I was a good worker. I was thanking with this, when I work honest, then nothing happened to me. And this was my policy. To working honest, not to start with nobody, not to have with nobody to doing. 

And I see they got other one, they beat other one. Because they was stand, they was talking, they not make the job. Then they got beat. He want to be, you know, facing by the Germans or by the Polish police. Should be strong the-- the taking care on the job. Then, eh, you know, they was strict. 

DORI LAUB: Did you watch such a beating? 

MICHAEL: I see. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe it? What it looked, what kind of day it was, where it took place? 

MICHAEL: What day? 

DORI LAUB: Just-- did-- not-- well, not a date. But-- 

MICHAEL: How was looking? 

DORI LAUB: Yeah, what did you see? You're back at the moment of the scene of the beating. What did you see? You look at it now. 

MICHAEL: They got, you know, sticks. The stick was, you know, with, uh, to holding on their hand. And when you no make the job, then he went and he beat you over the head. When no one's got beat over the head, the other one wasn't scared. You cannot complain to the Jewish committee, or to the Ordeman or to the police, the-- you got beat. 

He was happy, he no-- he no beat you more. And I contest he was a-- he was in disci-- discipline. Later, this was in 19-- eh, 40. 1940 we was working. Not in one place, you know, they change the places. Because one time they take us in a place was a-- a Sumpf. A-- 

DORI LAUB: Swamp. Swamp? 

MICHAEL: Swamps. 

DORI LAUB: Swamps. 

MICHAEL: Swamps. And we was staying until the half. And we was digging out the bottom over there. This took a long time until we clean out this place. They wanted have over there the water that goes from the river should this goes in this place, conc-- uh, uh, was concentrate the water in the-- in this place. 

DORI LAUB: In one hole. 

MICHAEL: In one hole. Yo-- 

DORI LAUB: OK, we are simply changing the tape. 

MICHAEL: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: You know, just-- 