SUBJECT: I think I must have felt like a person who was terribly seasick, who doesn't really care what happens to him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. I was totally indifferent. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even without tears, I assume. 

SUBJECT: I really don't know. I had no emotion at that time, whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And now when the English came up, you had tears [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, well, I just couldn't believe that the end would come. Nobody even dared think about these things. There was only a matter of how long we would last. Nobody wanted to die. I at least don't remember ever wanting to die. 

And that's what I meant by being an adult. It must be different for an adult and for a youngster. I don't know whether a youngster thinks in these terms-- I don't want to go through suffering, I don't want to-- I'd rather die. I don't know I don't remember ever thinking of it. But as an adult, I can very well imagine thinking of it. I don't remember having any feelings at that time. 

I remember very clearly that a week later we were listening to the radio. My friend was right next to me, still in the bed. We were having a bad case of diarrhea. Many people died of the survivors. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And I remember having-- being fed. I mean, we were absolutely ravished. We would devour anything that is edible. And we were actually given such small portions that I, I, I just couldn't understand it. I was outraged at that time. And only, well, dry things and coal, charcoal, I was given. I remember that. That was supposed to stop the diarrhea. But I never heard of such a thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Altholz, correct me if I'm not correct right here, but it's as though for many years, in order to live and to work, you had to feel nothing. 

SUBJECT: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] And when those tanks came, it was possible to begin again. Some-- 

SUBJECT: It wasn't-- for me, the tanks were, I guess, a surprise. A surprise. No one expected it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: We heard the bombardments. We had actually seen bombs falling on that factory where we were working-- Germans running all over. I remember such joy, having actually laughed. We weren't in any shelters-- we were out in the open watching these Germans run for shelter. And we had such a fun-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were just as much in danger in some way, and yet-- 

SUBJECT: Well, nobody thought of it, the danger. 

INTERVIEWER 2: mhm. 

SUBJECT: Well, I guess the feeling of fear simply disappeared. We had no feeling, at least I don't remember, personally, having been afraid. I remember being indifferent, totally different. Didn't-- didn't matter to me what happened, how it happened. I knew that at the end of the day, or three times a day, we were given food. There was a certain routine that I accepted. I didn't think beyond that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: I don't remember having hopes for surviving. I don't remember being hopeless or feeling hopeless. I don't remember at all. And, of course, we were all afraid of being beaten somehow, and we were taken care that it wouldn't happen. I guess physical pain was still different than any other kind of pain. And we tried to avoid that. 

But I thought at the time when these tanks arrived, and it couldn't have been more than 15 minutes later when these medics came right behind them with stretchers, we were taken to the field hospital I do remember-- which was just outside the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: I do remember that we were-- I want-- I don't remember how I saw it, but I do remember having, I guess it must have been right after we were released from the hospital, German civilians were rounded up by these soldiers. And they were then asked to, I think, rearrange the bodies, the corpses, taking them out from the latrines and then burying them. I remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The German citizens were asked to do that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And we were having a great time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you feel about that? 

SUBJECT: Well, I do remember that we all had to be restrained, because I don't think these German civilians would ever be allowed to do this. I think we would have ripped them apart. All the whole group of the survivors that we were there, we had such eagerness to just get our hands on them. And that's the first time, and the only time, that I remember having such an emotion. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: But, uh, and it was then, I was listening to the radio on May 8th. It was a week after-- I think it must have been around May 1st that we were liberated, that the German Army had unconditionally surrendered. And it was the end. Then of course, there was no other place to go but Berlin after we were discharged from this clinic, or whatever it was. 

We were given the usual IDs that we were former concentration camp inmates. And I asked, uh, Lutz where do we go from here? And he said, well, let's go to Berlin. I have a lot of friends in Berlin. So naturally, we went to Berlin. And it wasn't so simple to go there. 

We were given-- I remember that the-- some of-- one, one soldier took us out from this building. Or uh. I think, yeah, it was a building. It must have been a farm or something, where they set up the field business hospital. Took us out, and there was a street, and they stopped some Germans-- took away their bicycles, took away their watches. And I think they all had something else. I don't remember what. They gave these things to us, and they said you, you can-- you're free to go. 

I don't-- I wasn't aware of any particular DP camp or any particular organization that was gathering all these former inmates. But we did go to Berlin, and, uh, of course going to Berlin meant going through the English zone, going through the Russian zone, and then finally to Berlin. Soon as we hit the Russians zone, we were-- the Russians took away very promptly the watches, and the bicycles-- everything else. We finally hitchhiked our way back to Berlin. 

But they did treat us very, very well. They wouldn't believe that we are former inmates. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who was they? 

SUBJECT: The Russian soldiers. But finally, after a while, a long while, since I spoke a broken Russian, they did accept that fact. There were a lot of Volksdeutsche at that time who spoke Russian or Polish with an accent. And they were passing themselves off as former inmates. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you're moving now to the three left? 

SUBJECT: Three people. Three person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you're walking around Germany? What was that for you? And you already begin to feel certain things? 

SUBJECT: I had the time of my life-- virtually the time of my life. I had-- I was feeling like a bird. We had everything we needed. All we needed to do is go to the local military authorities and ask for it, whether it be Russians, or English, or Americans. Of course, the people were also very, very friendly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Germans? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The German people? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And the girls, too. And, uh, it took us no time at all to look like human beings. Our hair had grown back. I remember the joy of going into bed-- and that, that was with me, I think, for every night for a long, long time-- without having to scratch myself, and I was showered. And I-- I used to look up on everyone who just were able-- was able to talk to me and not scratch for five minutes. It's a very important person. Must be a very big shot, as we would call it in this country. 

That was one of the bad, bad things. And we used to be so full of lice and-- uh, used to make a joke. You know, one of us, whoever was able to squeeze as many fleas-- not fleas. Fleas you couldn't squeeze so, so badly, but lice you could squeeze. And we would have a contest of whose jacket could stand up after it being taken off you. That's how stiffened. They were able to-- starchy thing. 

It was such joy not to be able-- not to have to scratch my head, on my body. It was absolutely delightful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And how old were you at this time that you were [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: I must have been 16. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: 15 and a half. We went to Berlin-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And [INAUDIBLE] you stayed with your friend? 

SUBJECT: I stayed with my friend in Berlin. We were-- there was already a large organization of former inmates of concentration camps-- half Jews, half German communists, and whatever have you. By the way I like to just reminisce for one more second about Sachsenhausen. 

There were, as I said before, many Hungarians, Danes, Norwegians. The Danes and the Norwegians, for some strange reason, were the only prisoners, as far as I can remember, who were allowed and did receive packages of food from their homes. I guess the International Red Cross must have been delivering them and supervising the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Also, they probably were the only ones left with homes. 

SUBJECT: With homes? 

INTERVIEWER 2: They were the only ones with homes. 

SUBJECT: Oh, from their-- from homes. Right. I guess so. I never thought of it that way. They did receive packages. And I do remember that each one of them took a very small portion and had given out everything. Now this was-- this was like penicillin to a very sick person. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I mean, this is-- this could spell the difference between living and dying. We gave it all out, except for a very small portion. And I used to get salamis, and cheeses, and whatever have you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, it's many years later. What is staying with you from that time? 

SUBJECT: From that time? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, at that-- since then I have grown. I have experienced life. And, uh, well, I have a certain attitude in life that you cannot figure out the human beings. You can't figure them out. I feel that the human beings are no different in Germany than they are here or in Poland than they are here. That their emotions can be controlled, and directed, and exploited in every possible way under the proper circumstances. 

I can very well imagine that if we in this country have-- would have one or two publications or many publications they would formally enjoy a respect over their readership, such as Der Sturmer that we used to have in Germany and some other such things. And they would be, uh, fed all kinds of stories that such and such a person would rape this girl with a Jewish-sounding name, and now that the person was caught had a Jewish-sounding name, or that such and such a banker with a Jewish-sounding name would foreclose on so on so many homes, we would have the same thing here. We would have public protests and lynchings like we had there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So a fear stayed that this may happen? 

SUBJECT: Absolutely. I feel safest in this country only because of the freedom of the press to some extent and having somewhat understood-- and remember, someone of the McCarthy era, I am somehow confident that in spite of our politicians and of those that might want to exploit our system, that our system, for the foreseeable future is secure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did it take you 30 years to get in touch with Lutz More than 30 years. 

SUBJECT: That's interesting. We had, of course, many girlfriends in that time, especially after Berlin. We were given an apartment in a bombed-out building. I think there were three or four apartments left, and we had one of them. We were in touch with the Jewish community, and we were going to the Jewish synagogue. And there were not many Jews there at that time. We were particularly friendly with two girls. 

He was like a big brother to me-- really took very good care of me. In 1947, I decided-- oh, after having gone to the various weekly gatherings-- I'm just going to backtrack a little bit-- to the various meetings of our DP-- our former, former concentration camp inmates-- it wasn't DP. And we had all kinds, of course, bulletins, and the walls were plastered with names, and the people were looking for one another's families, and brothers and sisters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't? 

SUBJECT: I did. I also did. At one of these meetings I met someone whom I had recognized having been in Sachsenhausen with my father. I asked him about my father. He said, oh, yes, Sachsenhausen was eventually, as the Russians were approaching, they're-- all the prisoners were taken on the 1st March, he said. And then one or two days down the road, he had actually seen my father stumble and couldn't make it anymore. So he was shot. 

Well, I accepted that. It was expected. I, of course, was looking at that time, hopefully, for my mother and my sister, but I knew that they were not much-- because my father had told me there's not much chance for them to come back. And, um, I think months later, I went back to these meetings, because I guess there was nothing else to do than run to these meetings. I met another fella who came-- who was also at Sachsenhausen. These two guys didn't even know about each other. In the watchmaking shop he was. 

And he said that he had most definitely seen my father after liberation. This entire group was liberated by the Russians and that he was liberated. My father was liberated. He doesn't know where he is. So this is when I decided to go back to Poland. Lutz had take-- done everything he could to provide me with legal papers, which didn't work. So I had to smuggle myself out into Poland. 

And the only transportation between Poland and Germany were freight cars of coal and whatever necessities. So I somehow made it into Poland. I went from one town to another, including Krosno, which is the town where I was born, the last town I was-- and there was a small judische gemeinde then, which one of the guys didn't know me, and I didn't know him. I was much too young to remember these things. 

But he did know the family, Althotz, and he remembered my father. And he thought that he had received mail, like all the other places had gotten mail. Well, to make a long story short, it was lost in that pile of mail. And almost on the very bottom, there was a postcard with my father's name and address looking for his-- whoever he can find from his family. 

He was in the English zone. At that time, there was a readjustment of borders, apparently. Even though he was liberated by the Russians, he found himself in the English zone. With his address on it, so of course, after a couple of weeks, I went back to Berlin. He then went with me to the English zone. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who he? Lutz 

SUBJECT: Lutz Hammer. And he-- I met with my father. It was quite the reunion. I was, at that time, 17. Like a real big shot, I was smoking cigarettes, and I even had the little thing. I was sprouting a little mustache. I couldn't wait to shave. I always felt so inadequate, because some of my friends were shaving already at my age. So I picked up smoking. I wanted to make sure that I am grown up. 

Anyway, he went back, of course, after a couple of weeks to Berlin. The first thing-- and we were in communication constantly by mail. I had subsequently found out that he married this-- one of these-- this one particular girl who was a good German girl, the daughter of a very ardent communist. So as far as we were concerned, she was kosher. But as far as I'm concerned, she wasn't Jewish. 

And I had-- I had-- this was such a-- such a a shock to me that I simply, at one time neglected, and contact was all lost. It's only a few months ago that I had a-- I don't know, somehow a tremendous need to find him again. This was the only direct link, the only living direct link that I could go back to, to those days of the camps, the work camps, liberation, everything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was that in some way connected to this project? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before the project? 

SUBJECT: This was-- I had felt very bad about having lost contact with him all along, but suddenly I decided I had such an urge, and there was only two things left to me-- either go there and look for him, hoping that he still lives in Berlin, or some other way, more practical way. I decided to go to the German embassy, which promptly directed me to their-- well, you might call it a telephone exchange. And they had the telephone books from Berlin. 

There were two Lutz Hammers in West Berlin. I wrote to both of them. And I think two weeks later-- it took two weeks for this letter to get there-- I get a telegram and a telephone call, and I almost keeled over. And he couldn't believe it either because he had subsequently been in New York looking for me. And we had moved to New Jersey, and we also had an unlisted number, so he could never find me. 

I had been looking for him only, I would say, maybe a little casually. I was drafted into the US army nine months after coming here. 1949-- the war broke out in Korea. And after the initial basic training and some specialized training in the Signal Corps, I was looking forward for some action, really hoping to go to Korea. And they were taking all volunteers at that time. None was refused. 

But I imagine there was an exception-- I was the only one who was refused. And the reason for that is that when our company, which was overstrength, was split in half, one half went to Korea. The other half went to Germany. And I went to Germany because I was the only one speaking German. And I had some fight with my company commander. But nevertheless, that was it. 

And I was very, very-- at that time, my emotion was so much turned against Germany, that I just couldn't face the prospect of going back to Germany of all places. At any rate, I-- that's where I wound up. And after one of my frequent three-day passes, I went to West Berlin. I looked for him-- 1951, almost the end of '51. No, '52. '52. 

He was, at that time, in New York looking for me. We did see some mutual friends, one of whom is no longer alive. He went to East Berlin to get one of his friends out. That was before that wall went out. They were caught, and he was shot. So he told me that subsequently in the letter. And we got together, and. I intend to see him hopefully this spring. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any particular reason why you now decided to do that with his life? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I have realized the stupidity of having been influenced to such an extent of leaving such a friendship, such a meaningful relationship to some incredibly stupid emotion and idea fixed that I had because she wasn't Jewish. And I realized subsequently that so many Jews, marry non-Jews right here voluntarily. But I made a very serious mistake. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what, uh, happened with your father after the reunion? 

SUBJECT: We went together. He married again. We left together. At the time I was drafted and went into the army, he married again. And I wasn't too-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In America? 

SUBJECT: --unhappy about it. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And he came here-- 

SUBJECT: To a Polish Jewish woman. It was a most unhappy marriage-- most unhappy. And he had lived out his years-- truly physically he was fit. He died at the age of 75, I think six or seven years ago. It is absolute tragedy to realize that a man like this, after having gone through what he went through, was not able to experience happiness. 

In spite of the fact that he had one child that survived, who was happily settled with a beautiful married woman, that is my own wife, and a family, and having established himself, that he wasn't able to fully enjoy it because that woman truly poisoned him. And she was unfortunately mentally completely gone. She spent a lot of time in Auschwitz. And from what I understand, even before Auschwitz, she was-- apparently always had an unstable-- a problem of instability. I, my, my verbal talents are not really up to par. But she always had problems. And, and why my father had to get stuck with such a thing, it's-- it's a crime. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have any sense now how your experience has helped-- have affected beyond ... 

SUBJECT: How much are we doing on time? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, just perhaps one last question. How has-- have your experiences made any difference in the way you are a parent. 

SUBJECT: Yes, a great difference. A great difference. We have tried to teach our children not to hate. And whenever I-- you know, kids sometimes use this word very, very loosely. Oh, I hate the way she looked, oh, I hate the way he smokes, or whatever. I-- I try to eliminate the word from our vocabulary. I have realized that the word hatred and the very emotion is so self-destructive to the one who does the hating, as well as the one who receives the effects of it that I try to teach them, at least. There's no such thing. 

There was one-- my primary reasons for having gone back to Poland and taking them along, and I tried to teach them that there are very few things in this world that are worth dying for, unless your own safety and security or your family's is at stake. And if you feel strongly about it, it's not worth living without these-- without these qualities in life. I feel that life is totally worthless and mediocre subsistence and just an existence without having these basic, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Qualities. 

SUBJECT: Yes, qualities. This is not a quality. It is something that-- life is worth nothing unless you have someone to share the joys with. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Family ties. 

SUBJECT: Family ties. If you are lucky enough to have a family that's well, physically and mentally, and then you are lucky enough to enjoy even the simplest things, even a simple outing in the country and enjoy teaching them and enjoy the results of your teaching, the-- the-- the response to it. And we all know that a walk in the country or an experience of-- whether it's music, or art, or anything that particularly speaks to you emotionally, is-- you're cheating yourself truly of the full joy unless there's someone right next to you that you can turn to and respond. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sure. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And this I did try to teach them-- not to marry for any other reason and think twice before they marry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But for no-- nothing [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Absolutely. Absolutely. I do-- I am very envious of people who have retained or regained faith in God. Unfortunately, I have a-- a thing. I have done a valiant effort. But obviously, it was only not genuine enough to have sustained myself in it. I have unfortunately lost my faith in God. But I do try to impress upon my children that, uh, to continue learning about and continue, uh, to ensure our heritage as Jews, our-- our culture and our learning-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Culturalize them 

SUBJECT: --is the most important thing probably-- one of the most important things in life that we must never-- just because we may not have utter faith in God, that we should let a culture such as ours, full of so much learning and such a basic to our even to our civilization, to have-- to just let it be relegated to history books is-- will be unforgivable, unforgivable. I do try to stress that, and they were both exposed to it as much as-- as possible. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: I have some pictures from Plaszów which I've brought. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh. 

SUBJECT: And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: --Plaszów is one of those stops that I did in, uh-- and this doesn't have to be in tape, I know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, if you stay for a moment, the camera will-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

CREW: I'm ready. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You're ready for the [INAUDIBLE] tell something about them, just briefly. 

SUBJECT: Well, when we decided to go to Poland, of course it was 30 years ago. We went to Poland in, uh-- about five, six years ago. I wanted to make sure Poland, being a truly beautiful country, beautiful country, with a very cultured and civilized people, I wanted to see it. And my children were very eager to go, to see what-- where their parents came from. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And somehow they were too much influenced by the-- some of the jokes that are being told-- the Polish jokes. They somehow didn't have the right idea about what Eastern Europe, and Poland in particular, looks like. They-- they all thought it was very, very backward, and uncivilized, and uncouth, and perhaps even living in caves. 

Well, they had the surprise of their life. We did show them the best that Poland had to offer, including centers of education such as the Jagiellonian University in Kraków, which is one of the three oldest in Europe. I think it dates maybe 700 years back. My son was particularly-- he was, at that time, already thinking in terms of college. He was impressed when he saw the actual papers in the study where Copernicus had studied. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, that's right. Kraków. 

SUBJECT: And that was really quite an impression. Of course, after all of this, having been impressed with the elegance of some of the educated Poles, and of course their universities, and their beautiful parks, the flowers all over. We did take them to Auschwitz and show them the other side of Poland and Plaszów. And in Plaszów was actually one of the few times when I had had a difficult, uh, emotional period. But otherwise it was really much better. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you went back to Plaszów? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can we see the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: The pictures-- there are several-- there are only two monuments in Plaszów which, uh, are in existence today. The entire camp was left vacant with the exception of some landscaping, which is not too elaborate and two monuments. One of the monuments is this monument, which depicts a group of people with their heads bowed and with their arms just hanging down. And where usually a spot where it's-- which is usually reserved for the heart is left void. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm. 

SUBJECT: This is apparently the symbol of what happened to the Jewish nation in Poland. Another monument stands exactly in that little hollow where all of these atrocities were taking place. And there was an inscription on it, uh, and then my son took this picture of me at this monument. And I have a close up of it. And I have loosely translated, uh, this. I don't know whether I should read it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: It's a loose translation. Do you read-- anyone read-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not Polish. 

SUBJECT: Read any Polish? 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: All right, let me just quickly read it [INAUDIBLE] 

CREW: So hold it for the camera. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: The one with the inscription? 

CREW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. I'll hold it, and you can-- 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: The inscription very simply states. 

CREW: Yeah, [INAUDIBLE] more towards me because you're just-- no, the other way. OK. [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Uh, and I'm just going to read it as I have just-- this is written, obviously, by a poet-- very, very strong, emotionally speaking. And I am not a poet, but here it goes. 

Here on this spot, during the years of 1943 and '45, several tens of thousands of people from Poland and Hungary were tortured, murdered, and turned into ashes. Their names are unknown to us, and we can only call them by one word, Jews. 

Here on this spot, humans have perpetrated one of history's most horrible crimes. Human tongues know no of no adequate way to describe the incredible bestiality of this crime. Only one word comes to mind, Hitlerism. 

Like a last cr-- like a last scream of-- I'm sorry. I have somehow revised it on the trip back here. As their last scream of desolation, we the survivors bear witness and dedicate the silence of this Plaszów cemetery to their memory. I tried to have it translated-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: --better, but I think mine was still the best. Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

[? CREW: ?] [INAUDIBLE] 