INTERVIEWER: Just to start back a little bit, you said that you had this very special-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Now, like I said, we had to depart from the train and go through this overpass where German SS, not military, but the SS. And I don't know if you're aware what the SS is? That's the elite of the Nazis. Well, they stayed and they asked for identification. Now, I departed. I got off the train. There was no way of going back, because there were detectors there all around. That was common knowledge. And you just go, and it's a mob. You know, you go up, you practically-- you know, one of those things, you're carried practically. You're not walking. You're carried. 

And I went up the stairs. I had no choice. What's going to happen is going to happen. As I walk up the stairs-- and this here gets me very emotional. As I walk up the stairs, a woman, a girl. A young girl approaches me, puts her hand under my hand. She says in Polish to me, she says, don't say a word. Just walk with me and don't say a word. You are my brother. You're dumb and deaf, and I will get you through. 

We went through, we went to the inspection, to the officials there. She told them in German-- she knew German-- she told them, this is my brother. He's dumb and deaf. And that's the way I went through. And as soon as I started to decline on the other side to go down the stairs, I wanted to tell her thank you. She disappeared. I never saw her again. And that's how I got on the other side. 

INTERVIEWER: Was she Polish? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I didn't know who she was, and what she was. But I picture it before my eyes, and it will be all my life. But there's no question about it, she saved my life. Because many, many Jewish people got shot right there on the spot. Or they would call the dogs on you. You see, in Poland in the passport, it was identification. Your religion was stated in the passport. It was called in Polish [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which means of Jewish faith. So there's no way you could hide. You know, the minute they open my passport they could see right away that I'm a Jew. 

But that's actually what happened. Now, when I got on the other side, now I'm already in the Reich. I am in Germany. Now there is no sense in going on the train, because on the train I could be easily detected. Like I said, in the Reich it was more strict in every respect. Although at that time, the Jews were not in the ghetto yet. There was not to a ghetto yet. 

But I was afraid to get on the train. So there were horse and buggies were going back and forth from this place. It was called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a small town not too far from Lodz. And these horse and buggies, they were peasants. There were just next to the track, and they would transport people. Like they put down a cover on my face, and they put a basket with eggs, with butter and what not, on my, you know, here. And so I looked like a peasant woman more than like a man. You know, that's how we got in. The Germans hardly paid attention to those things anyway. 

So I got in to the city, and I came back home. We still lived in our apartment. But my father, like I mentioned before, was already in Warsaw. But my mother was there, and my brother. One brother was married, and he was there. And quite frankly, business with women at that time, because there was a lot of black marketeering going on. And we didn't know what awaits us. 

On April 1st, I believe, 1940 we were put in the ghetto. Now, the ghetto, this was not where the Jews lived. This was the poorest part of the city. But they picked the city, they evacuated all the Polish people from that section, and they put all the Jews in there. And as time went by, when they liquidated all the small ghettos in the small towns, the surrounding towns, they brought all these people into the ghetto in Lodz. At one time, we had about a quarter of a million people in the ghetto. 

And in the ghetto, we worked for the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. It was an autonomous government, in a sense. In other words, they came in and they appointed a Jewish man who collaborated with them. And they set up a complete autonomous government. It was a country within a country. We had no access, we had no contact with the outside world whatsoever. We could not step out of the ghetto limits under punishment of death. We had no contact with the Polish people. We had no contact with the outside world. We couldn't send letters. We did not receive any mail. We were absolutely cut off from the world. 

Our only contact was with the officials, Jewish officials. Now, what kind of contacts they had, I really am not sure. 

But in the ghetto, we lived-- that was one thing about the ghetto, that the families stayed together. But of course there was starvation. Everything was rationed. And the amount of-- you could see actually people, walking corpses, you know? And as more time went by, this obviously-- we were in the ghetto from April 1st 1940, until myself, I left the ghetto on August 29, 1944. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you live in the same place throughout that time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you end up in that particular part of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Well, the ghetto government, so to speak, they allotted so many people per room. And you could not get an apartment on your own. It had to go through the government, so to speak, or whatever you want to call it. But the ghetto council, OK? Everything, for that matter, went through them. All the problems, all the food, everything was rationed of course. And everything went through them, through the council. They gave you the ration, they gave you the-- all the means to live. 

And for the work, we received pay. We had-- they all issued their own money, which was only good within the ghetto compound, of course. But for that they had those stores so you could go in, you could buy your rations. And there were some things that you could buy also black market for gold, diamonds, and other valuables. Because the Germans tried to get all the valuables from the Jewish people. And they set up special stores where the people would bring-- they were starved, and everybody wanted to survive. So whatever was left bringing into the ghetto, hidden from the Germans, we turned it in voluntarily anyway. Because everybody wanted to survive and get a few marks. You know, the currency there was mark, m-a-r-k. Just like my name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you allowed to bring in with you from your former home? 

SUBJECT: From the ghetto, at that time they primarily did not-- well of course, it didn't make sense to take furniture or anything, because we didn't have the room for it. Most of that time there was at least six, eight people to a room where they were assigned. It was very tight quarters. You know, this was the poorest part of the city. It was dilapidated housing mostly. And they put in about a hundred-fold what the ghetto could hold. 

So subsequently, we didn't have any means to take a mover and move out. We just took the few belongings, and we just carted them in mostly by hand or so. We took into the ghetto the necessities of life, because we realized that we don't need the luxuries any more. Except the valuables we tried keep in order to sell them to survive, to buy some additional food. 

I personally worked in the ghetto in different positions. I worked in a kitchen. There were those public kitchens, where the people who worked in these shops, they received one soup daily. And I was fortunate enough to get a job there at the administration. 

In the beginning, when I came into the ghetto, I took terribly ill. I had diarrhea and I had-- I was terribly ill. I was actually in a coma. And there was no plasma, there was no blood available. So I recall that the doctor was a woman, to substitute for plasma, she substituted it with salted water. And the way this is administered is injected into your thigh. In the thigh, it doesn't dissolve like any-- there was about let's say a gallon of it. And that produces blood. Apparently it does, because I am alive. That's how I survived. 

But it's terribly painful. And you really have to have the patience of Job in order to overcome the pain. But it's a matter of survival, again. And somehow I survived without getting the blood. 

So later on, I don't know if this was a consolation for my friends, but I got first an easy job because I was very weak. Like I said, it took months before I recuperated and I could work at all. And incidentally, you have to have working papers in the ghetto. Otherwise, you know, they were constantly sending out people to working camps. Or people who did not work, did not have the rations. They did not have-- they didn't get the food. 

So you had to have working papers in order to survive. But like I said, I was fortunate enough to work in places where I have some supplemental food. So in the ghetto itself, I did not-- well, I had it just like everybody else, but I had a little more extra food because of the positions that I was working in. At one time I even worked at-- there was called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which means this was the highest control organization to combat corruption in the government. So I was appointed as one of the controllers. I mean, I don't feel this is collaboration because we tried to make sure that the people at least get their rations, what they're supposed to get. That it doesn't go out the back door and is not sold on the black market. That was my action, my function. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, when did you become aware that there were trainloads of people going to the camps? 

SUBJECT: OK. Now, for a number of years, up to about 1943, people were constantly coming into the ghetto, but they did not send out too many people from the ghetto. It was just by attrition, you know. People died in the thousands. I mean, you can see the little wagons surrounding with the corpses all day. We didn't have horses or cars in the ghetto. It was all manual. You know, people were carrying. 

So by the time 1943, the beginning of 1944, about 60,000 people were left approximately in the ghetto. They also sent out periodically people to work in different work camps. But we were not aware of any concentration camps, or of any death camps, any crematoriums. 

1944-- now, like I said, I will repeat myself what I said before. We had no contact with the outside world whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was no radio smuggled in? 

SUBJECT: If you had a radio, if you were caught with a radio, you were punished by death. A friend of mine by the name of [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]-- and I would like to have this for the record, because I didn't even know if this is recorded. I'm going to check this with the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. This man, he was very close. He was a friend of the man who was in charge of the ghetto. His name was [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Now, before the war, this Mr. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] was an ardent Zionist. However, he turned a collaborator. He collaborated with the Germans 100%, there's no question about it. 

However, there were other people who worked with him. In a sense, they collaborated with him, but they were trying to do their best to save as many Jews as they could. Now this man, this particular man, he was a friend of [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] from the olden days, before the war. He had not collaborated with. However, he had a radio hidden in the attic. And he would bring the news to us. Tell us what's going on politically. We would meet with him, like a couple of times a week and he would brief us on what's going on in the outside world. But this is only to receive, not to send. 

Well, apparently somebody must have pointed to the fact that he had a radio. And they raided his house and they found the radio. He was not at home. When he found out that they raided the house and found the radio, he was afraid if they catch him and torture him he will divulge who he gave the information to. It would have been a lot of people involved. I would say maybe hundreds. He went into a house, he had cyanide with him. He swallowed the cyanide, committed suicide. 

Now, if that is not heroism, then I don't know what a hero is. He saved hundreds and hundreds of people by committing suicide. 

Well, 1944 they started to evacuate the people. At first, they that came out-- this [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] on behalf of the German government, of course. There were leaflets. Incidentally, in the ghetto there was a cultural life. There were concerts, there was literature, there were schools. There was a newspaper. People wrote poetry, people wrote books. 

It was-- you know, after a while, sitting there for three or four years, we didn't believe it was going to be a thousand year Reich, but little by little we settled. We had to go on with our normal life. And the Jewish people, we are called the nation of the book. And we lived, we tried to have some kind of a semblance of normal life. 

Well, anyway, in 1944, they issued a proclamation that we are going to be resettled to other camps, where we're going to have better conditions than what we had in the ghetto. Families are not going to be separated. They're going to be left intact. The Russians are closing in on the front, and they want our protection so we wouldn't get caught up in the battle lines. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you learn about these plans? 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you learn about these plans? 

SUBJECT: Well, this was proclaimed. I said this was in the papers, there were leaflets, painted on the walls of the ghetto and whatnot. Now, we started to suspect that something is not right. Now, we didn't know about the concentration camps, about the crematories. Because we had no communication with the outside world whatsoever. But we had suspicions that something is not right. 

The reason for the suspicion was there was a point where they evacuated the people. What they would do, they would catch the people. You know, they would surround a neighborhood, and they would catch a number of people. First they asked the council to submit quotas of so many people to be sent out. After a while, people started to hide because we smelled that something is not right. They didn't want to go. 

So they would barricade-- they would take an area and surround it with military. And they would catch the people, just the way they were, regardless of how they were dressed, even in their sleep. Women, men, children. And they would take them to this point of departure. 

I myself, when we're talking about-- when I get to this later, when we're talking about the German people, and that not all the German people were bad. And some of the German people didn't know what's going on. I personally witnessed in the ghetto, even before I even had the smell of the concentration camp, where a captain in the army-- and I'm not talking about the SS. I'm not talking about the Nazis. I'm talking about the regular army. They participated in these raids. 

Now, parenthetically I want to add that in Germany, as well as all of Europe, you could not be an officer unless you had a college education. This is a captain in the Army. Now, I don't know what the reason was-- maybe the woman was not fast enough for him, but she had a little baby. The baby was maybe four or five months old. He took the baby, hit the baby's head against the wall. Holding it by the legs, and hit it against the wall until the brain popped out. And then he discarded the baby. And then he rushed the mother on the truck. 

You have time? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Another minute. 

SUBJECT: A time problem? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, that's good. We're gonna change tapes. 