[INTERPOSING VOICES] INTERVIEWER 1: Because the man is coming next-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: We will bring you to the point of Auschwitz, and we're going to leave that untouched. I don't want to touch it. I just want to talk about Hartford, because I've got to make this film. And then we're going to have to set up another-- 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

SUBJECT: All Zionist movement, I was on the Executive Council of all the Zionist organizations. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --that story, then go back to the life, and then go to Hartford. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Another story of tremendous courage. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's a terrific transition to show that the Jewish people were able-- 

SUBJECT: Resiliency. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's it. Boy, what a command of languages. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK, go. 

SUBJECT: OK? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Well, towards 19-- about August 1944, July 1944, we suspect that something-- like I said, I was very active in the ghetto, in the political Zionist organizations. As a matter of fact, the revisionist organization. That's the organization that is [INAUDIBLE] now in power in Israel. And I was an epicenter of this organization on that council. And at times, we even were thinking about an uprising in the ghetto. We discarded the idea because there were too many people's lives at risk. And we didn't have the means, we didn't have the contacts, we didn't have the ammunition to start it, so we discarded the idea. 

But by that time we suspected that something is afoul, and a friend of mine who worked at the deportation point, we knew that the same cars-- there were cars for cattle-- they were not passenger cars, cattle cars-- that's the way the people were transported-- that after a number of days the same cars would come back. So one of our friends was deported, and we made an agreement with him that when he comes to point of destination, he will put in a slip under a windowsill and describe just where the point of destination is, where has he arrived. 

And sure enough, several days later, I don't remember, three or four or five days later, same cars came back, and the cars always came back, they were full of litter, and [INAUDIBLE] trash, because people-- the car, there for days and days. I experienced this later myself. I understood later. But they were cleaned out by Jewish people-- they had the crew who worked at this deportation point called [INAUDIBLE]. And they found that note. 

The note said as follows. We have arrived in Oswiecim, which is the Polish name for Auschwitz. So Oswiecim was a Polish city before the war. And the people-- he didn't see much yet, but as they came into the station, angled into the station, people on the outside to work and another camp in Auschwitz, which was called Birkenau-- this was not where the crematorium was, it was a working camp-- the people told them, give us any valuables or any food you have because they are going to take it away from you anyway. They're going to separate your family, and your wife and children and the elderly people are going to go into the crematoriums. 

So we already had an idea what's going on. With that note, I went to a very high official in the ghetto, and I showed it to him, and he laughed. He said, well, that's pure-- he says, bull. He says there is no such thing. He himself went to Auschwitz and he himself went to the crematorium, and he had the means to survive if he wanted. And I asked him for help, you know, to hide out. But there's number of people hid in the ghetto. And after 29 of August the people were found in the ghetto, they were left there up until the Russians approached, and after that they were sent to a camp called Ravensbruck, but they also arrived intact with their families. A lot of them still live in Sweden, they are friends of mine. 

But we left-- the last transport, me and my brother, and he was married, and his wife, and my sister, and her husband-- he survived, she didn't, with a child-- and of course, when we came Auschwitz they were separated. They took, like we learned later the women and the children and the elderly. 

Well, you want me to switch now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: I would like-- so you were liberated when and where. 

SUBJECT: From there, I was sent-- I went to Auschwitz. I didn't stay in Auschwitz very long. In Auschwitz you were sold to the highest buyer. There were people that came, manufacturers, they had worked defense. They came, they looked you over, you had to strip completely naked, he looked you over with a doctor. You know the famous Dr. Mengele. And if you were in good health, you were sent to working camp. If you were in poor health you were sent to the oven. 

Well, apparently I looked that I was still capable of work, obviously, I was a young man, and I was sent there after being there for 10 days-- and incidentally, being in Auschwitz, we didn't have a place to sleep. We were sitting. We were sleeping, for two weeks solid, I was in a sitting position to sleep. There wasn't enough room to stretch out for the people. That's how they packed us in there in the barracks. And they gave us just about a soup a day to survive. 

Until I got to this camp, Goerlitz. In Goerlitz I worked in a factory. But there is one story that I cannot omit. I have to relate this story, because I think this is important how I survived, because I want to point out my survival. I'll make it as brief as I know how. I worked in a factory that was a big hall, and at both ends there was SS men, sitting, Nazis, were sitting and guarding us. There were mostly Jewish people working in that department. There were foreigners, POWs, Poles, Ukrainians, Belgians, Frenchmen working, but little by little, they took all the foreigners out and they wanted to be Judenrat. They wanted to be just Jews because they didn't want us to have any contact with the foreigners. 

But I worked on precision work. There was a tolerance of 2/10 of a millimeter tolerance to make this part. It was a part of the V2 that I made. So I had to have guidance. I was chosen, I told them my background, and they put me to this type of a job. It was on a lathe, but it was very, very highly precise job. And the guy who trained me was a Belgian. 

And after a few days I was capable of handling the job myself, but this Belgian said to me, Mark, he said, I want you to tell the men in charge that you cannot handle this job yet by yourself, that you need guidance. I want to stay in this department. Why? He had dealings with the SS men. How would this come about? He had a friend who was a baker. Everything was rationed in Germany. This baker, somehow, a Frenchmen, got coupons. But in order to buy, to go in and buy in the bakery a loaf of bread, you couldn't take a detached coupon. You had to bring what they called a schtumbook you had to bring the book with you. 

But he had loose coupons. How they maneuver around the owner, the German or the French, I don't know how they got these coupons. But if SS men went into the bakery with a loose coupon, nobody would dare-- even German-- would dare to ask him where is your book. So the SS men would buy the bread, would bring it to the factory. The Belgian would get the bread. In turn he would give them cigarettes and chocolate. And that's the way they were wheeling and dealing. 

What did I get out of it? I had two concessions. One, he was a heavy smoker and he gave me the butts. That was my concession. I didn't smoke. I was a smoker before the war, and I smoked after the war. But I knew that if I smoke I will not survive. But I took the tobacco, and the functionaries in the camp who collaborate with the Germans, they had enough food but they didn't have tobacco. They didn't have cigars, cigarettes. So I would sell the tobacco in turn for a piece of bread. 

And then the other concession I had, if he had a jar of marmalade or a can of marmalade, he would not, you know, scrape it down at the end. He would give me the scrapings to take out whatever is left after he finished it. For that, I stayed down for about five months. I told the men in charge that I am not capable of doing this job by myself, that I have to have the help and guidance of this Belgian. And that's primarily how I survived the concentration camp, by getting a little more supplementary food. 

OK, this went on until May 8, 1945. In the meantime, in February of 1945, the Russians came close to where our camp was. They evacuated us, they walked us for days and days on end, thousands of people died because they couldn't walk. At night they would put us in the barns where horses were, and excuse me, the lice were about the size of a cockroach. And you went outside and you cleaned yourself, and you went back in, it was cold, it was winter time. And five minutes later you were full off it again. They actually ate pieces off your body. After the war I had holes in my body for this. 

Then they took us back to the same camp, because the Russians, they halt, the front stopped at a certain point near Breslau. We were not too far, if you heard of Breslau, a very famous city in Germany. And we came back, and on May 8, 1945, that's the day of capitulation. The same day when they capitulated, they still want to take us to the woods and kill us. But we escaped because we already saw the first-- they left the camp. First they left the camp, the Germans, then they came back just to take us to the woods to shoot us. 

After May 8 we were liberated by the Russians. We went out, me and my brother took an apartment. Of course, 90% of the population of that city fled. They were afraid of the Russians. We were at liberty for 48 hours to do as we pleased. We could kill, rob, rape or whatever. But we didn't. Most of us didn't. 

Then, after-- at that time I weighed about 89 pounds soaking wet-- and we stayed there for a little while and then we started to head back to Poland. The reason why I went back to Poland is simply to find out if any of the family was left. And unfortunately, I didn't find except one brother, who was with me, he survived, and one sister who survived and was in Sweden. 

She was taken out from a concentration camp called Ravensbruck by Count Bernadotte. This is the man who was shot in Israel as a mediator of the United Nations, if you remember, in the '50s. He was from the royal family, the royal Swedish family. He made a deal with Himmler, which was the hatchet man for Hitler, to take the Jewish people out from the camps in return for trucks. She was the lucky one. He took out a couple thousand people. And she went from this camp, she was taken to Sweden. 

After the war I tried to get to Sweden, but my brother went to Sweden, and his wife, and I was denied a visa to Sweden. And that's another story that I will skip just here. Then we came to Germany, went from Poland, smuggled to Germany. I worked for what's called the Bricha, which is what the organization smuggled the Jews out of Poland. Went to Austria with fake papers as Turkish Jews. From Austria we went to Prague, from Prague we went to Germany. All smuggled, took a lot of doing. And I came to Germany in a DP camp. 

At DP camp, I was elected president of the camp. And there-- I'm very proud of the job I held, because I initiated there a kitchen for the children in that camp. My philosophy was the most important thing-- everything was rationed at the time in Germany-- I wanted to see the children get some special food, some extra food, that they could have proper nutrition and grow up to be physically fit. And it was actually, a camp that was-- 

[COUGHING] 

It was-- I'll take a drink of water. 

--visited by a lot of American dignitaries. And from there that camp, was moved because they moved that camp to another camp. I received a post with the UNRRA, United Nations Relief organization. I was in charge of a warehouse there from 1946 to 1949. 

1949, we actually were ready to go to Israel. There was one reason why I didn't go to Israel, is I belong-- like I mentioned before, to the revisionist organization, that at that time, not only were not in power, but they're-- a man, I was a very outspoken individual and I was very active also in Germany on behalf of the organization. And we had a small child, our older boy was born in 1948 in Germany. But we left in 1949, was a year and a half old. 

So it just came that within three months, I received a visa to go to the United States because I worked for the organization. And the immigration officer somehow pushed through my papers much faster than I anticipated, because I would have had the Polish quota, and some people sat for years until the Polish quota arrived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your fear about what happened in Israel? 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were you afraid was going to happen if you had gone to Israel? 

SUBJECT: Well, I thought that I would have a hard time in get a job and make a living. I did not have any money, obviously. I had a good position and we lived in Germany, considering the situation, we lived well because of my position. But I don't know. I guess it's a temptation to come to the United States. 

Now, we originally were actually supposed to go to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. While we were on the boat, a cousin of ours-- so the lady is going to be interviewed later on in the day-- name's Eva Libitzky-- they came six months ahead of us. This was my wife's cousin. She's my wife's cousin. And they turned around our papers, instead of going to Pittsburgh, to come to Hartford because they wanted to have at least some relatives. We didn't have any relatives in the United States whatsoever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Had you ever heard of Hartford before? 

SUBJECT: No. I never did. I came to Hartford and I found the thriving Jewish community and I decided to get very active in the Jewish community right away. My first job was trying. I didn't know the language. And my wife couldn't go to work. We had a small child at that time. There's only one thing that I would like to mention and put on the record, that the Jewish Family Service helped us out in the beginning. They paid a month's rent while my cousin secured an apartment for us in the south end, a [INAUDIBLE] place, which was a great help because at that time there was a shortage in housing. And they helped us buy some clothing, and even some food. 

Although the next day, after I arrived, I came to the Jewish Family Service and I said I want a job. They said, oh no, you go home. We have to provide for you. I said, I didn't come here to live on charity. I went to go to work. I even worked at tobacco, but that didn't last long. Anyway, I found a job. 

First I worked at Manchester Knitting Mills for the Rosensteins-- I don't know, you're probably not familiar with them, you might know what they are-- the job didn't last very long. But about two years later when I started-- I had a steady job, when I started to make a decent living-- the first thing I did, I called up the Jewish Family Service, I said, would you please look up the record and see how much money you spent on the Sobotka family. And at that time Jack Little was the executive director and he gave me a figure, and I sent him a check. And I said this is anonymous, and use it at your discretion to help a needy family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You paid them back, the full amount? 

SUBJECT: Yes. But I think I paid the community back more than in one way. I have been very active in the Jewish community, and I try to do my job, I'm most active in the religious organization. And I tried, but the Jewish community in Hartford has been very good to us. We've found the Jewish community to be outgoing. I remember a number of ladies would take the time to babysit with the children and teach our wives English so they could communicate with the people while we went out to work. So we had a chance to mingle and get to learn the language. 

As soon as I started to work, the first thing I did, I went back to college. I went to Hillyer College, I took a course in English, and I tried to get the command of the language. And there one, thank God, the community has been good to us, so I had a very good position. I was vice president of General Elevator Company. And where we, thank God, we made a very, very comfortable living. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was the non-Jewish community helpful? 

SUBJECT: I had hardly any contact with the non-Jewish community. Hardly at all. No, I wouldn't say this. All my contacts were primarily with the Jewish community. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you are-- what do you do for a living, sir? 

SUBJECT: I was vice president of General Elevator Company. I was in charge-- I ran the company for probably 25 years. I had a minority interest in it. I had a small partnership in the company. I retired in 1979, and am now, more or less, retired, except that I have some activities and some real estate that I own as investment. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. We're not nearly at the end, but we'll have to-- 

