MENAHEM STERN: And then what then, you know? I know from my own person-- you know, in my-- in my personal experience, for instance, this was subject that was never brought up in my father's household. Let's put it this way, OK? And-- and-- and then, because it was always-- you know, that's something you don't-- you have to forget about. It's not something that you have to talk about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's an interesting thing that the parents or the adults that receive children, or people that had the experience, would say, no, don't talk about it, when the children, or the person, needed so badly to express it. 

MENAHEM STERN: No, I don't. Well, this-- you know, this is-- this is a second stage. And let me put it this way, I didn't realize-- or, as a matter of fact, through the whole process of denial and repression. And I think that what's really significant is that for many years now, people were trying to deny that it ever happened, that it ever happened to them. Or if it did happen, it didn't afflict them in any-- in any-- in any particular way. So that, uh, it's better to forget about it. 

And then, when you bring it up, bring up all kinds of repressed emotions that never were dealt with. So you get upset. You get your nightmares back. Things are going-- you're becoming emotional, uh, sleepless, depressed, whatever. So that, uh, you just didn't deal with it. 

And it was-- you know, I think I've talked to a few of my friends lately. And it was always a thing, OK, you shouldn't be talking about, because Father will get upset. I'll get my nightmares. Mother will cry. So let's pretend it's never been. It's never happened. And, um, it's if a person is speaking [INAUDIBLE]. 

See, I was-- I was unable to read any books, for instance, OK, about the Holocaust-- I've-- until very recently, I've ne-- I didn't read one word about the Holocaust. I was never able to watch any movies about the Holocaust, OK? And I was pretending very hard that it never happened to me, you know. It-- it-- it just wasn't there. 

And oddly enough, I wasn't even able to talk about this with my children. So I realized-- and-- but I never realized it that I never talked about it. Neither with my wife, nor with my children. Think what she knew. But I mean, going into the feelings and, uh, what happened-- never. And now, you know, it's, uh, a few things have changed lately. Because I've been talking to some friends and people. 

And this is, you know, how I got. Here It was all very interesting. Now Dori's friend Emanuel Lando, you know-- you know him? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

MENAHEM STERN: OK, so Emanual is a survivor. Now I've know Emanual for years. I didn't know it. We've never talked about it. We talked about hundreds of subjects. But we've never touched on it. Then one day we were sitting in our house. And you know Alto Spiegal? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

MENAHEM STERN: Of course, everyone knows Alto. And Alto and Melba were there. And somehow, we started to talk about it. And we realized that we have this thing in common, very much in common, that we never shared. 

And then, you know, he-- he was talking about it to Dori. And then Dori suggested that I-- you know, he asked me if I'd be willing to come. And I said, no way. 

Anyway, to cut a long story short. My wife said, well, you know, you've been trying to run away for a long time too. Why don't you confront it? And a really very interesting. Psychologically interesting things have happened since. 

But the most important thing was that for this first time, there was this Holocaust, uh, movie on television. Now, it's only possible it was good, or artistically good, or whatever. So for the first time, I decided to watch it with my family. 

And, uh, it was a moving experience, OK? So at one point by the end of it, we were all crying. And my nine-year-old daughter said to me, hey, daddy, you're crying. And I said, yeah, and you're crying too. And she said, uh, yeah, but, uh, no, I cry from time to time. But I've never seen you cry. 

I said, well, you know, I'm human. I do cry from time to time. It's really not as much as you do. But you know, I can remember times when I cried. I asked her, wh-- wh-- why do you cry here? And she said, well, I-- I cry for all those poor people. Why do you cry? 

And I said, I don't know. I really cry for myself. And I said, uh, because, uh-- I said, well, what-- and she said, what do you mean, for yourself? And I said, well, you know, I was a part of it. I went through those miseries. 

And she looked, and she said, Daddy, I-- I never knew. Why didn't you tell me? You know, for once in my life I was speechless. I realized I wasn't able to tell her. And although, you know, we have very good communications. We talk about almost every thing there is. But, uh, somehow, I wasn't able so that, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think I want to keep this, to not erase it. We're going to look at it. But I-- you know, we were doing a test story. And Dr. Stern was so fantastic that I just-- he was talking about why he never talked before. It wasn't the substance of things. But he said so many things. This was just a test. We were going to erase it. But I don't want to erase it, OK? 

Rolling. 

MENAHEM STERN: My name is Menahem Stern. And, uh, I was born in, uh, Krakow, Poland in 1938, March 1938 to, uh, upper middle class family. My father was a lawyer. My grandfather was a, uh, was a merchant and dealer in precious gems-- gems. And, uh, they had a business in this country. 

As matter of fact, my family trace is-- can be traced back for more than 400 years in Krakow itself. Uh, I think that it's important, uh, to bring it up, that, uh, we belong to what's been called the Deutsche Kulturkreis the German cultural-- culturally influenced area. So that really German was a, uh, rather first language, even at this particular time before Polish was. 

And this, in part, has to do with the fate of my family because, um, when the war broke out, uh, there was still the possibility to run away. And financially speaking, probably, my family had the finances to run away. But, uh, my grandfather ruled against-- against it and being old world, patriarchal type of person. So of course, once he ruled, there was nothing to do. 

And, uh, his rationale was that he has known the Germans for all his life. He knows the culture. He knows the people. He's been trading-- dealing with the Germans all his life. And, uh, he knows that this was a honest, cultural, hard working-- uh, and the best people in the world. So he just wouldn't believe all the rumors that were spreading already at that time that, uh, there were going to be a very bad time for-- for Jews, just for the simple reason of being Jews. So that we stayed. 

Now, as a matter of fact, you have to realize one more thing, that people at the time didn't really believe. I don't think that anyone in the world believed that something like that might happen. So, uh, my father really later on-- under the German occupation, being a Zionist leader. Uh, he was trying to talk people into going into hiding, into running away, and so on and so forth. He was considered at that time-- this was around the 1940, 1941-- that he was at that time-- actually 1940s, he was considered as a, uh, madman. No one would listen. Anyway, uh, when uh, in 19-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] grandfather. 

My grandfather? No, not really. No. My first memories are, I would say, from-- not-- I don't remember anything earlier than being, say, like four. So this comes around 1942, right. I don't remember anything before that period. In 1942, we were moved, uh, to the ghetto. And this is, uh, where I start remembering, uh, until that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, we'll get to the ghetto. What part of the family came with you to the ghetto? 

MENAHEM STERN: Uh, well, at that point, we-- we moved from our apartment, which was a very big one to this place in the ghetto. And we were-- and we-- was us from my father and mother, my grandparents, and from maternal side, and my grandma-- fa-- my grandmother on the paternal side, an uncle, my father's brother, and, uh, oddly enough, a woman and her daughter who themselves were refugees from Warsaw. And at that time, people took in whoever they could. So they stayed in this period with us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any feelings that you had as a little boy during the move, leaving your home, going to the ghetto? 

MENAHEM STERN: Uh, no. I, uh, from at this point, I don't remember. I don't remember having any feelings. But, um, I'd say that it wasn't so bad in the first-- in the first time, especially for children, OK? I remember, for inst-- one thing that I do remember. 

It was very interesting that the ghetto, at one point, was to open, which means that we could go to the outer city, OK? And I remember distinctly one thing that my grandmother was very religious and, uh, very old stocks person, uh, told my mother to go out and take me with her and to buy some, uh, to buy me some ham. 

Now, ham was something that was never seen in our household, being, uh, so religious. And my grandmother said, well, you know, this is the food that you can give the child, but I don't want it in this house. So don't bring it home. I think that it registered to me because it was maybe the first double message, or kind of a double message, that I ever heard. 

And therefore, I distinctly remember, not exactly understanding why did she say it's OK to buy it, but don't bring it home. So all the years afterwards, I realized what this woman really went through, probably, uh, in order to, you know, to try to somehow supplement the diet. 

And then my, uh, first, I say, very vivid memory-- very vivid memory was around this time. This must have been the winter of 1942. And I was about four and a half years old. I was sick. I had an inflammation of the inner ear. It was in terrible pain. 

And they had to take me to the doctor. I was crying, and-- but there was a curfew at that time, for some reason. There was a curfew until four o'clock in the afternoon. So my father was very impatient to take me to the doctor to have my ear pierced-- pierced. And my drums were pierced. 

And, uh, once it was four o'clock, he took me in his arms, and we went out of the house, uh, on the sidewalk and, uh, right at the entrance, uh, we vis a vis that day. Entrance was this German soldier. And I, uh, can really see it even today. 

And, uh, he raised his rifle, and he pointed his gun at us. He raised it, you know, so in position of firing. And, you know, you could hear-- I-- I and still [INAUDIBLE] hear the click of the breach, you know, of-- of when it was loaded. And-- and I can still hear my father crying in a very high pitched voice. And Nicht schießen, Nicht schießen don't shoot, don't shoot. It's, uh, the curfew is over. 

And this guy was a German soldier. He stopped. He looked at his watch, and it was four o'clock. So he lowered the rifle. And, uh, we were allowed to go. But anyway, this is my-- as going back, this is my first vivid memory, really, of, uh, so speaking, you know, of-- of-- the voice of a child who was playing with other children of-- of any-- I don't have at all any memories of this sort. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is the first memory you have in your life? 

MENAHEM STERN: Uh, yes. Yes, I'd say this was the first vivid memory. I mean, you know, as I was saying, I have this incident of-- of-- of the ham, which was around the same period. And I don't really know whether this was the first one or-- but the vivid, you know, like in a-- like seeing a picture before my eyes, you know, the doorway, the-- the half sunny street, uh, the-- the-- uh, the soldier, the rifle, my father calling-- I mean, the whole situation is very vivid to this very day. 

Uh, then, uh, in, uh, beginning of 1943, the ghetto was closed up. And, uh, we were moved to a concentration camp in, uh, Plaszow, which is nearby Krakow. It's, uh, like a sub of Krakow. And this was a labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember being moved-- 

MENAHEM STERN: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- how you went? 

MENAHEM STERN: Yeah, I was carried. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you describe some of-- 

MENAHEM STERN: Well, I mean, the move itself-- I didn't really know at that point where we were going. But we were going. I suppose that it didn't really-- you know, it wasn't really nothing out of the ordinary. Because I can think about it. Because see, people move all the time. And-- and-- and the fact that I don't have any vivid memories means that there was nothing in particular in it, OK? You lived in kind of a tension, everyday tension. But I do have a very vivid memory of arriving there, OK? That's, uh, this-- once again, this is like, you know, looking at a picture. 

And this, uh-- once again, because this was in a total contrast. It was not moving from a, let's say six bedroom apartment to a two bedroom or one bedroom apartment. It was like moving from two different planets. And, you know, we were living, as you must have, uh, seen in photographs, or movies, or whatever. In those-- what do you call them-- huts or-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Barracks? 

MENAHEM STERN: Barracks. And, um, living on, kind of, uh, platforms, I don't know, maybe 20, 25 inches of head, uh, space-- I should say body space. So we really had to crawl in, OK? And, uh, this is very vivid. 

Now, you could take with yourself only what you can carry. So you didn't carry bedspreads, or pillows, or things like that. So my-- once again, this very vivid recollection is of my uncle, uh, negotiating, talking to people-- maybe someone has a pillow for the child. 

And eventually, he got, uh, hold of a pillow, which was partially torn and then, you know, I can see the down kind of breaking away, flying all around. But it was a pillow. It was a luxury. It was great thing. So I had this kind of a pillow for, uh, to put my-- to put myself on. It was a great thing. 

Um, at, uh, that point, we didn't know what was going to happen. And, uh, this is how, uh, there were, I suppose, several thousand children in-- a couple of thousand children in this camp. I've had various accounts between-- anywhere between 2,000 to 4,000 children. 

And, uh, at one point, uh, in March 1943, my parents decided that, uh, it's not, uh-- it doesn't look too good for me to have any chance of survival by staying in the camp. There were already rumors at that time that they are going to evacuate the children so we might have known that to all kinds of,uh, vacation resorts of, uh, where they will be able, you know, to take care of the children. 

But when my father, who at that time had already established some contact with the Polish underground, and he was sending reports out to them from the camp and getting some help, uh, for the people in the camp. And he-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] underground. 

MENAHEM STERN: Uh, the-- well, we didn't know at that point. We only discovered that. That's a whole different story because we've only discovered, uh, after the war that it was a Communist, uh, underworld with-- so at that time, there were the only people who would have Jews, maybe because of the whole Communist movement in Poland was [INAUDIBLE], that same dominated by-- by-- by Jews. 

So the old guard was-- many of them were Jewish. But see, the-- then there was a common cause, the common cause being that, uh, you know, being kind of Poland, whatever. Anyway, so they held a kind of a family discussion of what to do. And they decided that I stand better chances in getting out, trying to be on my own. 

And there were-- there was a practical problem of, first of all, how are they going to break the-- the news to me, OK? Now the interesting thing was that, you know, like in so many families in every day time that we don't argue before the children, OK? You just whisper, as if, um, all then-- they don't hear, or they-- you assume that they are asleep. But I, as a matter of fact, overheard the whole thing. 

So one point was how do you, uh, get him out. And, uh, the other thing is how do you, uh, tell him? So at one point, I decided, with the advice of a famous neurologist and psychiatrist, 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who happened to be in the camp at that time? 

MENAHEM STERN: Yes, yes. Well, you know Dr. Bornstein old friend of the family, and, uh, a leader in the Zionist movement. Ah. So anyway, he decided that the best way would be to try to find some kind of contact with a Polish family or someone and to put me to sleep and carry me out. 

I think this was OK, but where do you find a family? And, uh, so this was, uh, non-existent that not so many Poles at the time were particularly keen on helping Jews. But anyway, a friend of my father's, who was also a lawyer, came up with an idea. 

And the idea was that about three miles from this camp was a, uh, well known brothel, what's called an American whorehouse. And, uh, as many Polish gentlemen of the upper classes and some Jews who were trying to get simulated to this particular gentleman was a customer of good standing in this particular organization. 

So he said, well, why don't we bring him to this, uh, place, and, probably, you know, they will take care of him. At this point, people who were living on the verge of society-- what kind of help will to one another. And being Jewish meant automatically be included on the marginal side of society. So if this was worked out and the third part was how do you get him through the-- the barbed wire? 

So there was a boy at the time who was, at the time, 14, by the name of Pemper And, uh, he was very unusual for a Jew, because he loved horses instead of going to school. I met him after the war. 

As a matter of fact, he died three-- a year and a half ago. And this watch that I'm working here is the last present that I got from him. And, uh, so this particular guy was the black sheep of his family because instead of going to school, he used to horse around with horses. 

But, um, during the war, he became the groom for the horses of the Commandant, which gave him a very important position in life. Because he was the one who could-- who could get in and get out all the time. Nobody knew him. So he was really helping many people by doing what he did. 

And, uh, so it was decided at one point that he-- that they would put me to sleep with the aid of barbituates supplied by Professor Bonstein, and he'd carry me in a sack. Uh, but it didn't work, of trying. Anyway, so at this point, they had to break the news to me. 

And this I remember very vividly. Because they told me that, at uh, the times being what they were-- I have to go. We have to part. And they have promised me that, uh, when the war would end, they would come and look for me, no matter where I'll be. And I'd say I didn't cry. 

It was-- as a matter of fact, as I was saying, I-- I-- I overheard this whole discussion, OK? It was going for a couple of nights. So I knew what's coming. So my reaction was very, very calm, as a matter of fact. And they have put a scarf on my head. It was kind of the most little scarf, red. You know, this, uh, kind of a woven [INAUDIBLE]. And they tied it. 

And they say, well, that's it. And, um, well, we'll-- you'll take, uh, your, uh, tablets. Just tablets. Well, you'll wake in another place. Then they gave me, you know, the tablets. I had three tablets. But I didn't go to sleep. 

So, uh-- well, they didn't know at that time the barbiturates acts on children in a totally different way than they act on adults. That's a pretty recent discovery. So that instead of putting them to sleep, it makes them more and more agitated. So the whole idea of going in a sack and whatever was abandoned. 

And, uh, they decided to try it again next night. But this time, I was supposed-- this guy Pemper was supposed to start-- to start a diversion at the gate. They're trying to pull the guard's, uh, attention away with a bottle of vodka, which he somehow got. And at that time, they gave me the address. 

And they decided that-- it was a pretty straight walk. So I was supposed to walk out. And once again, we had this parting talk. They tied the scarf on me. 

And my mother gave me-- which, speaking logically, it was a stupid thing to do. But to me, it meant, really, everything. My mother gave me her student ID, high school ID with a picture in it. She says, you keep my picture. So when we meet again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you meet again, what did that mean to you? 

MENAHEM STERN: Well, they said to me that when the war is going to end-- they made a promise-- when the war is going to end, I'm going to come for you. And I realized, after many, many years, how much-- what does it mean for me to promise something? When you promise something, no matter what happens-- catastrophes, what hardships you have to overcome-- what does it mean to you if you give your word, if you promise something? 

You have to do it. There is no way out. And this is what I believed. And this way, to me, it was-- this-- if they say that they are coming for me, they will come. And this is something that kept me going. And I'll tell you why I'm emphasizing this point. 

Anyway, this-- so I walked-- I practically walked out. And I started walking with this avarice. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember that walk? 

MENAHEM STERN: No, I don't remember the walk particularly. I remember the place that I got to. Now, I didn't know at that point that it was a whole house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you had to remember some of the walk because you were alone. No one could tell you about it. 

MENAHEM STERN: Well, no. You see, at this point, you already were alone all day. You were-- you see, in the ghetto, we were alone. People were going out. And my-- in the times that we were living in the camp, we were alone. We were working. Everybody was working. We were left with no recreational facilities. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Other children? 

MENAHEM STERN: I don't remember any other children from this period, so probably there was no interaction. And by the time I got there-- and then there is one more thing that I think is one more reason. It was night. It was dark. And everything was through. But the memory that I have of arriving in this particular house is in such a contrast to the black night. Because my memory is white. OK? 

And until some time after the war, I was somehow made under the impression that I was in a hospital. Because what happened was that I rang the door of this place, and I met some people around it from showing this address. And they told me this is the household of them. 

But I remember someone, a woman, opening the door. I remember only women. To me, they were all dressed in white, and everything in this house was white. And only later I realized why. Because when I got in, they gave me a glass of milk. And this was how-- this milk colored everything white. 

So after the war, when we were trying to retrace the ordeal, where I went and so forth, I said, well, this was a hospital. And my parents kind of laughed. And only years afterwards when I was sometimes mentioning the hospital-- and I was considered already grown up. So they said now that they told me the real story, that it was really a whorehouse. 

I stayed there for about three months. And after three months, it was folded down by the Germans, who took the women to work for them in their army installations like they used to. And at that point, I was left alone. 

And to say left alone is not-- it's not exactly true, because I wasn't alone. Because there were other children-- orphans, displaced, roaming the streets. And, you know, [INAUDIBLE]-- you ganged up with other kids. And you leave the calling to the laws of nature. 

No one was there to tell us that it's unproper to steal, that it's not becoming to beg. And this is how we made our living. Someone stole a potato, another one got a bowl of soup, and begging someone, or people would throw this and that at you. We would look in the garbage. There were enough ruins so that we could sneak in and try to find a shelter for the night. 

I was really lucky because I was blonde. I was a straw blonde. So I didn't really resemble a Jew. Yes. One more point was that my parents told me that no matter what happens, don't let your pants down. Don't let your pants down. And I had this sense of being different-- of being Jewish, as a matter of fact. 

So anyway-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you were roaming the street with gangs of children and there were little boys, how could you not reveal your difference? 

MENAHEM STERN: Well, this was one thing that I've never participated in. Well, later on, I distinctly remember the anxiety when-- this was already by the end of the war. By the time, I was in the village, which I'll come to. But then the guys were having those peeing competitions, who can pee farther. I never, ever participated in this. I used to run away. Whenever thing came up, I knew that's not the place for me to be. And I would disappear. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were told by your parents not to say you were Jewish, not to mention it? 

MENAHEM STERN: Probably. I don't remember it distinctly if I was. The [INAUDIBLE] with the pants was enough for me. I think that this was something-- being Jewish, I knew that I was different. And I knew that it has something to do with religion. 

And it was church. I wouldn't say religion. It was more abstract. It was church. Because later on, when I was-- later, I was supposed to go to church. I was supposed to say prayers after I was adopted by a Polish lady. So at one point, I rebelled. I did some other things. But this was later on. Maybe [INAUDIBLE]. 

Anyway-- so this was 1943. I escaped in March. And then it was the summer, which we were on the streets. And I suppose then came the time in which-- it was beginning to be cold, and I had the good luck-- I was begging one day, and a Polish woman took me in. She had two daughters. And they took me on. And they took me in their house. And I lived with them through the winter of 1943. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So for how long did you live with them? 

MENAHEM STERN: Through the winter of 1943, probably until spring. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you explain where your parents were, why you were alone? Did you have to explain to them why you were alone? 

MENAHEM STERN: No. You see, this was-- there were many children like that. Now, you have to realize two things. First of all, there were many children that were displaced. The second thing was that I wasn't considered a child. So probably, I wouldn't understand. They didn't go into asking me questions. I wondered about it, why people didn't try to ask more questions and to find out. 

Because I was just a little four, five-year-old child. So he can't understand why that's the common idea, as I'm saying today. It sounds as a joke, but I say it. To me, it's serious, although it's something I can joke. And at that point, I was like 70 years old. I was a real old man. I was short, but I was old. 

And the whole responsibility of the whole world for myself. This was-- I knew that this is what I have to finally rely upon, is myself. And somehow, the husband of this woman got involved in some black market activities or whatever it was, and they got arrested. Once they got arrested, I was again on my own. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they know, do you think, that you were a Jew? 

MENAHEM STERN: Probably they did, yes. Probably they did. They probably did. Because I know for sure that the next lady that I found a couple of-- once again, around the winter of 1944-- well, it was autumn, 1944, and once again being on the streets. It was an old lady who lived in a cellar. It's an underground apartment, small apartment. 

And she picked me up. Once again, I met her. She brought me to her house. And it turned out that she was living with a grandson, and her son being-- doing some forced labor in Germany. And the grandson died a couple of weeks before she met me. So she was still in the grieving process. And I though that this helped me in the way that she wanted someone to live with. 

And first of all, it was the first time that I had papers. How they used to bury the child was not making it legal, probably thinking about selling the papers or whatever. The papers at the time were worth the-- probably their weight in-- or their size in diamonds, not in gold. So I was given his papers. 

And I had a name. Until this point, I didn't have a name. I didn't have a name. Because my name is Menahem Stern. Now, Menahem, this is a Jewish name. I never had a name other than that, Menahem. And so I didn't have a name, which was OK. Because once again, a little child doesn't have a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How would they call you, the family? 

MENAHEM STERN: Who? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The families you stayed with before when they-- 

MENAHEM STERN: Oh, all kinds-- all kinds of names. Well, you know, what's your name? I just wouldn't answer. I wasn't a good-- a big speaker at that time at all. OK? But then, you know, I-- Menahem wasn't the name that I was supposed to-- this-- probably, once again, I was told not to-- I was told, probably, not to use this name. But I remember not having a name. 

So my first name was [INAUDIBLE], which is a purely Polish name. It has a great sound. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you say it again? 

MENAHEM STERN: [INAUDIBLE]. That's [INAUDIBLE] rainbow. And this was also-- but this time, I was kind of semi-- already-- my autonomy was curbed in this time because I became this woman's grandson. So I had to do a few things which I didn't know how to do, is to pray. I have to learn the prayers. And I had to go to church. 

The prayers, I found I-- I didn't like-- I didn't like to do prayers. I wouldn't say that it was out of the sense of my Jewishness that I didn't like to recite our father and whatever. But I didn't like it. 

And as primitive as this lady was, I'd say that she had a wonderful sense of what's important and what's not important. And by that time, I revealed to her that I have a treasure. And this is the picture of my mother's. 

So she agreed that every night before bedtime, I will pray, like I suggested, to the picture of my mother rather than to the crucifix, you know, the picture of Jesus and whatever it was. I used to put this picture on to pray-- God, make this war end. And please let my mother come back and get me. 

By that time, it got-- you know, it got very hot in this area where we were living in Krakow. And they were searching for Jews. Now, they did search-- when I was with the first family, they also did search for Jews. And they searched for Jews when I was with the-- in this whorehouse, too. So we used to hide. I used to-- in closets and all kinds of things, in the cellars. And they used to have those cellars, and there was coal. I used to crawl under the coal and stuff like that. 

But it was the winter of 1944. It was very cold. And life was rather miserable. At that time, we didn't have enough to eat, and life was very hard at that time. So it turned out that this woman had a sister who was living in a village nearby, not very far from Krakow. And she sent me to her sister right away. The sister was hiding a woman, a Jewish woman and her daughter too. They were-- this woman had a daughter. She was older than I was. 

And the interesting thing was that the sister that I came with didn't know that this-- that her sister is hiding Jews. OK? So of course, she didn't tell her sister that I'm not her grandson or that I'm a Jew that she's hiding. OK? So for a couple of months, I was living there, not knowing that in the same house, two more people are hiding. 

Because to this woman, I was legal. I was the grandson. She never knew. Only later on-- already in the spring, I think-- it somehow that-- the war was already by the end. And-- and those two sisters revealed to each other, you know, that I'm not the grandson. And these two women came out of the hiding. 

So-- so this was-- this was-- this was the best times I had living in this, although there wasn't food. This guy wasn't a farmer himself. He was the-- he was an official of the village. He was the official street sweeper, both illiterate people. But to me, they-- they were the best. 

And at that point, for some unexplained reason, I rebelled. Yes, it was a whole ritual on Sundays going to church. And I rebelled at one point. And I must say that they didn't not force me to go. This was already when they knew that I was a Jew. They never-- they did not force me to go to church, which was very-- a good thing. 

Now, it was-- and we were hungry at that time. It was-- more frightening was that one of these-- the house that we were staying in was destroyed by-- I think it was either a bomb or artillery. I don't know. But the funniest thing about it is-- the funniest is that this old-- the woman that I was staying in her house, one night said to her husband, tonight, we're not going to sleep at home. We're going to the neighbor's. 

And then he said, you crazy, woman? What do you mean? She said, well, I had this dream, which my mother came to me, so she says. And she said that this house is unsafe. We are now in this primitive Polish setting. Once a mother or a father appear in dream, it's-- it's a command. So you can't do anything about it. 

So we left everything, and we went to sleep with the neighbors. And the house was destroyed by a bomb or artillery shell fell on it, and it was whacked out. So it kind of makes you wonder. It only makes things more difficult when you ask yourself the questions-- you know, why? Why did I survive? 

Out of-- as I was saying, it was between 2,000 or 4,000 children in this particular camp, and only two survived. And I was one. I ran away. And the other one was hidden by his father in the latrines, and later on was carried tied to his father's shoulders all the way to Buchenwald. And in Buchenwald, the communists have hidden him once again. So he survived. 

How do I know this story? Because I met this guys. I met him when I was in high school in Israel. And one day, you know, a new boy comes in, and kind of started to talk. And it turned out that he's Polish and he's from Krakow. I ask him his name, and he said it's Mike. And I said, you know, I'm from Krakow too. And I said, my name is Stern. And we went home. 

And I asked my father, do you know someone by the name of [INAUDIBLE]? And he asked his father, do you know someone by the name of Stern? It turned out they were both lawyers, classmates, and so on and so forth. He says, by the way, this must be the boy that survived in Buchenwald. So we got together, and it was-- but then it was a whole tragedy what happened to him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? How did you find your parents? 

MENAHEM STERN: Oh, that's-- well, the war ended. And-- and these people-- see, we had an agreement that when to war ends, we are going to take the buggy, the horse buggy, to ride to town to try and inquire about my parents. So this is what we did. 

There were all kinds of agencies at that point that were-- that were doing all kinds of inquiries, and they could look for relatives, and so on and so forth. At the same time, my parents-- a little later on, they were pushing towards Krakow again, trying to get to Krakow to look for me. This was the place-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where had they been? 

MENAHEM STERN: Oh, they have a very interesting story. Well, they have been transferred from Plaszow to work in another working camp in Czechoslovakia. Now, at that point, my grandparents were already sent to Auschwitz, and they disappeared in Auschwitz. 

My-- they were separated at this point. So the men were taken to Czechoslovakia, and the women were sent to Auschwitz. It was a whole story about this. But anyway, the interesting part of it-- and it's documented in the Yad Vashem so I suppose you have heard about this. This was a munition factory in Czechoslovakia that worked for the German army. 

And my uncle, who was a very resourceful person, and probably had a lot of Jewish chutzpah-- when they were separated from the women, he-- he went to the commander. He went to the owner of the factory, the guy who was commanding the place. And he said to him, you know how men are? 

Men-- in order to produce, to be productive and to do good work and this important work, so men need their women. So if you want us to work and to produce, you should bring us back our women. 

And this guy fell for it. And 1,000 women were taken out of Auschwitz. It's a unique-- it's a unique thing. It's the only time it happened. Now every man got their rights to take one woman. So my father has chosen his wife, my mother. My uncle was not married, and my grandmother was-- 