SUBJECT 1: You must speak with my husband. He has a very interesting story. 

SUBJECT 2: One party. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Just have him to be quiet and wait. OK. 

CREW: Rolling 

INTERVIEWER: Take 28. 

CREW: 29. 

INTERVIEWER: 29. Take 29. 

SUBJECT 1: So in '42, as the war began to be stronger and the army-- we know when the Russia army will begin to go forth, this will be very bad for us. And then one day the ghetto was closed. They didn't allow us to go out to the work or to people we walk out of the ghetto. And eh-- it was very dangerous for people when you were in ghetto to be without work. Without work, it-- eh-- it is death. So you must be something-- to do something. So eh-- my father decided to go out from the ghetto to the Christian woman to hide himself for such of a practical time. And eh-- I went to some family to another camp. It was built an Nazi camp. A small camp, 4,500 people. Eh-- eh-- just a-- just a moment-- I must remember. No. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother, she stayed in the camp? 

SUBJECT 1: And my mother stayed. I went to visit family as their daughter. So they changed my name. It's very easy to do because we have no photos and no so on. And for a short time-- and my father and my mother believed that when it was built another camp where we will work. My father will take me from that camp, my mother from the ghetto and we'll stay together. 

But it was only a plan. You know, during war I learned one thing and that went after me even in the normal life. I never more-- when we survived, I never allowed myself to be depart from my father. It was summer time on the way here to the country. We stay in Marcel and I was pregnant. And they decided because I was pregnant, it was in a-- not a normal area. It was half-- it was English there still. It was before '48. 

So they want to send me and my father to stay in the camp and after. I tell no more. Because I learn one thing. You know, during the war, the first time when I went from the ghetto, I told you, I went very easily. But when they came back, it was a difficult time. And many action and many people were killed. And many people were taken and family was broken, pack after pack, because they broke us practically. 

So you have one way, you know, or two to survive alone. Because with all family it was impossible. It was impossible. So some people had decided to go on their way or they-- they have luck and they survive or not. But all family, all family, three, four people you have very, very, seldom survive together. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother was still in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 1: My mother was in the ghetto. And I went to that camp. And during one week, it was a liquidation of the ghetto. So I stay in the camp. My father out with a Christian woman. He go out like this only for a short time. And my mother was taken. I even didn't know. But I remember that they hold them. It was a terrible rain, perhaps three or four days. And they know that some people, they took where-- I don't know where. They hold them on the-- near the cemetery. 

INTERVIEWER: You went there? 

SUBJECT 1: Out on the street, they crowded. 

INTERVIEWER: But you went to see? 

SUBJECT 1: I know I can't. I was closed in a camp. So I remember only that a few days I terribly cried because I really understand that I will never see more my mother. 

INTERVIEWER: When was the last time you saw her? 

SUBJECT 1: That was when we left-- when we left to the-- to the camp. She told me even-- she pushed me to go to to the visit because it-- it was-- it was parents of my good friend and they have the papers. So they decided it was for a short time to be sure for me to go because I was without work. It was not good to be visible. And my mother was working. We don't know that will be a liquidation of the ghetto. 

But after all when I was survived and I was in Lourdes, so one person said Carol Kim what they told you was that she was the pact together. And she told me that my mother was alive for a year more after '44. That was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember when you last saw your mother? What-- what memory do you have of her? 

SUBJECT 1: What memory? I will tell you, she was a very strong women. And she understand-- she understood what is going to be with all the Jewish population. But she has not enough strongness to go out and to fight for-- for the life, you know. That eh-- you must be a special-- eh-- I don't know how to understand how all of this came. But when I think about all that time what many thing happened, it is only a small part what I'm telling you here. It is even not in the 1% what happened during the day. 

But she decided what will be this-- all the Jewish population will be with her. And eh-- really I-- I-- she wanted-- she want one thing-- she believed-- she thought-- she believed that I will be survive because she believed that I look like no Jewish. And I all have-- always lots of people wanted to help me. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she say goodbye to you, no? 

SUBJECT 1: No, because when I say to her goodbye, I didn't understand that I am going-- I went to the camp. So I thought perhaps a week or more, I will see her back. So I never saw-- saw her back. 

This is one of the things we have only today. We have pictures eh-- what they made. They have some eh-- memories. They made some. I have not here this. I have for my father. He died four years ago. He was here together with me. And from her, I have some picture, a special medal long necklace, because I have never-- not-- not the grave and not the place, nothing for them. So that is eh-- that is eh-- it's not only for her, because even she has many sisters and brothers and they have cousins and no-- no one from them survived. No one from them survived. 

So somebody you look-- you think about how it happens that you really survive. It is-- I don't know. I don't think that we were cleverer than the other people. Because some very clever people, intelligent people lost their life. It was very difficult to know how to-- what to do and how to-- to-- how to do it because it came every hour-- came another another-- another low, another thing that you take out from the low. 

I remember I cried some one day when I was between the nuns. Some girl took from me many things that my father brought out from the ghetto because he thought that I'm in a very good place that he believes that I will stay here and I will be sure there. And she knows that I am-- she knew that I was Jewish because the other didn't know. 

So one day I stayed with my Christian friend in the town. It was very late. She told me you cannot go to the-- out of the town. It is very risk to go out, because even the Polish were afraid to go. And she told me you can stay one night here. When I didn't came back, they were sure that I was arrested. And tomorrow it was some police came. But it wasn't as a reason because of me. 

So she was in the place. She took all that I had, some material and I had some good things. So she took all these things. And when I came back and I saw that-- So the first time I was-- I cried so much, not because of the things I lost. I understand one thing, that I feel that I am without law. Everyone, even a small girl can do with you what you want. That was something would break, you know, inside. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with? What are you left with? What feeling do you keep from this terrible time? 

SUBJECT 1: For the terrible time? I will tell you. And after we survived, not from that camp, if I stay in the concentration camp-- it was not Auschwitz, but a small camp-- I even didn't survive. Because eh-- I have-- I came to that camp with a family. And I have a very good contact with a Christian women and some help. And my father was still outside. 

So we decided to build-- to build eh-- a place for-- to be sure-- because you can not stay in the flat. You know, some neighbors came. And everyone has what to-- what to do. So I eh-- organized. I go out and organize eh-- um-- the place. She took a special flat in a special region where it is possibility to close one room. 

And my father wrote-- eh-- signed a special eh-- library-- like a library, you know to put-- but it was from the kitchen. And not to put eh-- a-- from the kitchen sink. But it was closed over the door. It was a room out of that door. So how we go in. When somebody knocked on the door, it was a special opening like this. So we were like cats or like dogs on the moment. We pushed here and we close it. 

And it was only one bed. It was a very, very small room we were sitting four people there. I took with me-- my father was there. When I went-- when I disappear from that camp-- I took with me a girl from 12. It was a sister for my friend. And I want to have also her mother. But she decided at the last moment to stay with her husband. So she was killed on the-- in that camp on the cart. And he-- the man disappear. They-- after that, they went to United States because the girl was-- noticed there was a girl. 

But we stayed three and half months in such a closed place. So she must be very careful, even from the neighbor, even with the food, -- even with it-- it was no-- even no-- eh-- um-- toilet. Some small thing. So four people to help at home. You want-- but I was only 16 and 17. I hold a very regime there, because I understand one-- understood one thing, when we-- because my father was very broken. He even-- it was a time he-- what he had with him some stalk-- how do you say? He wanted to hang him. He was very broken. He didn't-- he didn't believe that he will survive one day. 

But when I came into the place-- so-- one thing, I ask of many books because we were closed to write. One other thing, I knit a lot. I have a feeling that I must do something, otherwise, something will happen to me. And I-- I-- I have some hobby. I-- I-- knit. I knit. I sew. You know, I do many things. And even in the evening, you know, I have regimes that we have to wash, because otherwise we would be very dirty, you know. 

And I even I-- I hold them all to be-- to be nice and close not-- not to-- not on to block yourself, you know, not to-- even when I was in the-- and after 3 and 1/2 months, so sitting close without air and without anything, without contact with people, only by news something happened on the front here or not. 

One day the army-- Russia army came near to the town. And then we have a week of battle in the town. So it was we-- we were without water and without eh-- electricity. And all the population ran away from that town because it was street after street they bombed and so on. But she was terribly afraid, the Christian women. But she knows she has four people. She has to care on us. So stay with us. So all the neighbors thought that she is a very hero. But she was not a hero. It was the situation brought her to stay with us together. So it was a first Russia soldier when we saw, you know, from such a point. So we even want to go out and to give him a kiss because it was really not too unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was liberation for you. 

SUBJECT 1: And that was liberation. 

CREW: Please. Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling. 

CREW: It's rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: Ah, run. 