[OFF-AIR BEEP] SUBJECT: Thing. What do you really, what do you care for? What is the loss? 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have heard from everybody? OK. Now, please, this happens. In the beginning, you might be little bit aware of the cameras. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We try an image, which is you're in a living room, and you're opening an old photo album. You know the brown photos. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The covers of the album are a little bit faded. And you open it, and you begin looking, and this is a living room. 

SUBJECT: You know what, I do. I say, oy, and I close it in the rug. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right, OK. And it's a living room, and we drink coffee, and now we begin, OK? John, are you rolling? OK. 

SUBJECT: My name is Johanna Carl. I was born in Munich in 1919. My first awareness of the Nazi situation-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were born in Munich? 

SUBJECT: Yes, Munich, Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, who were the parents, and what were they doing, and-- 

SUBJECT: My parents was a merchant. My mother was an artist when she was young. She gave it up when she got married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: An artist? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

SUBJECT: She worked for Hanfstaengl, it's a famous company that made very good reproductions of originals of classics, Rembrandt and so forth. And these things were copper etchings and had to be painted by hand, and she did that. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: She was a painter, then. 

SUBJECT: Yes, she was not a very good original painter. I don't think that she was a bad one, but she didn't have the self-confidence. But she certainly was good in her field. She made a good living. And I was the only child. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Her background? 

SUBJECT: Her background, my grandparents, you know, I know so little about my grandparents. They were shadowy figures. On my mother's side, they were Catholics, and they were of peasant stock. The grandparents must have come to the city, to the big city, to make their way at quite an early time. I don't know. I had very little contact with them. My father's parents were Orthodox Jews from the Rhineland, which are the Jews that came at one time or another, usually during the fourth century, with the Romans, doing the, well, colonization of the Rhineland. That's why my name is spelled with a C. That were Caroli, they did, brought into the Roman families. 

Both my grandparents on my father's side were dead by the time I was born, so they are also shadowy figures. Not very, from what I later on gathered, rather dour people, not very jolly, as you would expect from the Rhineland, as otherwise my father was. An only son, too, he left early. He was independent, and became quite well to do, didn't have any trouble at all. As a matter of fact, if I think back now, the kind of household help my mother had, I'd drool with envy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- do you remember the house? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. We had an apartment in Schwabing, which is the Quartier Latin of Munich. It was a relatively small apartment with six rooms, but we had a full-time maid, a laundry woman, my father had a chauffeur. We had a man who did the work that neither the chauffeur nor the maid would do. And from time to time, somebody came in to help. Don't ask me what. At the same time, it was impressed on me that my mother was a terribly hard worker. It took me a long time to figure out that it simply couldn't have been that way. 

Anyhow, I left a-- I had a very happy childhood. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, your father was in what business? 

SUBJECT: He was a sales representative for a chemical firm. And he was quite-- well, he must have been quite successful, because he certainly made every penny we had himself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the story or the anecdote about your Orthodox Jewish father marrying a Catholic girl? How-- 

SUBJECT: Oh my god, it was the usual tragedy, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, what's the nice story about-- how did-- 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's the love-- the story behind that? Not trying-- 

SUBJECT: He fell in love with my mother at the Masked Ball in Munich during the Carnival season. And the-- well, my grandmother, of course, my paternal grandmother had a fit, because this was a goy. And she refused to see my mother. And I said to my father, shame he didn't have guts enough to marry my mother. He had to wait until his mother died, and then he married her. Took 10 years. 10 years they more or less lived together. 

But there was no question of marriage, because of course, the mother had said, you know, the usual thing, I'll kill myself if you marry that girl, and so forth. And my father [INAUDIBLE]. As suspected, my father was very much dominated by my grandmother. She must have been a woman with an iron will. So they didn't get married until 10 years after they met. So that is the background. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A little bit more about how-- what was your father like, your mother, the-- 

SUBJECT: My father-- yeah. I'm not going to gloss things over. My father was a highly, highly neurotic person. He was also a weak person. He was a mixture of weakness and cruelty. He was wonderful to me, as long as I was a child. But when I became an adolescent, all hell broke loose. If anybody ever had an Electra complex, if there is such a thing, my father had it. He was-- he made life miserable for me. I couldn't look at the boy. He got furious. He was of a Puritanism in respect to me, which totally, of course, belied his own behavior towards my mother. 

I was not supposed to go out. I was not supposed to go to the movies with boys. I was not supposed to do anything, which of course, in me created a tremendous rebellion. And I did many things as a youngster which I wouldn't have done if he had only gotten off my back. I broke with him, I hated him. It took me a long time to get over that and make my peace of him. I did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What sort of things did you do that otherwise you wouldn't have? 

SUBJECT: Oh, stayed out half of the night and had fun, had boyfriends. Also, both my parents were terribly concerned with reputation in the narrowest sense. What would the neighbors say? If a young man picked me up by car, my father had a fit, because what would the neighbors say? Why can't he let you out along the corner, and you walk home? That sort of thing. Very narrow, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: By car in the mid '30s? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, yeah. We had a car. We had an imported Buick as big as a-- as big as a barn. I still remember that thing with hatred, because I always got carsick. Of course now I know it was psychological. I didn't want to go on Sunday rides. And it got to the point that as soon as I smelled a car, it had to me a peculiar odor. I would whoops. And then my mother, in order to drown out the smell of the car so I couldn't puke all over the car, used to hand me a handkerchief with a certain kind of cologne. So soon I shifted, and I started whoopsing when I smelled the cologne. I didn't even have to see the car. Give me the cologne, and I whoops. I hated those excursions with my parents. I only tolerated them because I was in love with the chauffeur. I fell in love with him when I was 5, and he was 18. And I proposed marriage to him, but at that time, he thought it was a little premature, and asked me to come again in about 20 years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What in the Sunday rides were-- can you describe them? 

SUBJECT: Awful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where would you go? What-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, one would go to-- out someplace, and then one would invariably wind up in a restaurant or a biergarten outdoors. And there I was. What the heck was I going to do? Also, I usually had to get dressed up. I was a tomboy. So I did all kinds of things I shouldn't have done, such just taking the dregs from my father's schnapps glass and feeding it to the chickens. Therefore chickens got drunk, fell down on their beaks and made a general nuisance out of myself. After all, you've got to do something. 

I was much happier at home left to my own devices. I didn't mind being alone, you see. I did mind being forced into company where I would get bored. So that was my-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I guess, who were your family's friends? Were they Jewish, not Jewish? 

SUBJECT: My parents were loaners. Very strange. I really grew up in a weird, in a weird family. For instance, we never had guests at the house. Well, of course, that is not as usual in Europe as it is here, anyway, especially not in Germany. You would-- when you had guests, you would take them to a restaurant. You do that even now, to a large extent. But I cannot remember at all any parties in our house except an occasional relative, usually the spinster cousin of my mother's showing up. My parents' social life was outside. They had-- in the summer we went to a biergarten every evening. And there the other families and friends would come and gather and spend the evening in discussion. There I didn't mind to come along, because there were lots of other children, and there was a place where we could raise hell without being in anybody's way. 

But this never came to the house. It just moved from the biergarten into a restaurant, you see, or into a wine locale as they call it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were a Jewish? 

SUBJECT: They were both, but they were, usually they were people who worked for newspapers and artists and professional people. My father was an intellectual, there was no doubt about that. They discussed politics and whatnot. And some of them were Jewish, some of them were not. It didn't matter in that crowd, you see. It just didn't matter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a crowd of intellectuals and artists, and you're talking about 1930-- 

SUBJECT: In the 1920s until the advent of Hitler. Yes. But really, you didn't ask. It didn't-- was not relevant. Oh yes, my father had his prejudice against the eastern Jews, of course. One of his famous dictates started, "I am not prejudiced, but." And then, don't you come home and marry an eastern Jew, an eastern Jew or something like that. I don't want a Polack in my house. But it always started out with, "I'm not prejudiced, but." OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The term is different, but worse than a hippie He'd be in those days around the German-- 

SUBJECT: Oh no, these people were everything but. They were very solid citizens. They wore ties. If you know what I mean, I'm speaking metaphorically now. Oh no, these were not hand-by-mouth people. They were all very solid citizens, including the others. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And nevertheless, there was no difference about religion? 

SUBJECT: No. Absolutely not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who were you supposed to marry? 

SUBJECT: Oh, a nice German Jewish boy, of course. Preferably one with a lot of money. So that was-- I escaped that. As a matter of fact-- hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why a German Jewish boy? 

SUBJECT: Because that is-- my father, as a completely integrated German Jew, could on the one hand not tolerate the idea that I would marry an eastern Jew. That would have been breaking caste, if you would. On the other hand, he was a Jew. He did not deny his Jewishness. And he would not have been happy had I married a non-Jew, at least not at that time. So it had to be somebody of our own milieu. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You think your mother went along with this? 

SUBJECT: My mother gave up her religion. It that didn't mean anything to her anyway, so there was no conflict. She gave it up. I was raised without religion. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any observance of any holiday? 

SUBJECT: Two. Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah. Then we trotted off, that is, my father trotted off and I trotted along to synagogue, because after, he'd got to be seen. It had nothing to do with religion. For me, he'd make a new suit, a new hat. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the synagogue? 

SUBJECT: Yes, very distinctly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: It was not very big, but it was quite old. I think it came from sometime of the 18th century. It was a, of course, it was what you could call here a-- what is the middle one between the Orthodox and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Conservative. 

SUBJECT: And the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Conservative? 

SUBJECT: Conservative. It was reformed. It was in the middle, huh? It was not an Orthodox. We had so few really Orthodox Jews. They had a school somewhere where they would go. But this was a reformed synagogue, would come close to it I would think. And the-- yeah, it looked a little bit like a church. If I remember correctly, it had stained glass windows. And it had-- the women were upstairs, the men were downstairs. And I remember the chief rabbi, but strangely enough I suppressed his name. I don't know why. He was very bright. It would probably come back if I thought about it. 

And I used to sit up there for the services. I even fasted on Yom Kippur, was another thing. And then of course, one would meet with one's friends and one would wait until one was safely out of sight before one would get into a car. At least make a pretense of walking, yeah, during those holidays. Then come home, we'd eat a lot. That was the whole content of the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any moment of the prayers left an impression with you? 

SUBJECT: I think I was-- yes, I was impressed at the beginning. There was a feeling of, which one might call a religious feeling. But it couldn't be sustained very long, because I couldn't read Hebrew. You can't listen to a religious ceremony for too long, unless you can enter into the spirit through the Word. After all, this is important. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were the friends? 

SUBJECT: What friends? 

INTERVIEWER 1: One's friends. 

SUBJECT: My friends? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: You mean my personal friends? They had nothing to do with my parents? Well, first of all, my school chums. When I was very small, before I went into gymnasium, there were the kids who lived around the neighborhood. They were a mixed bag, and usually they were working class kids. For a very simple reason, I was simply too rough and too wild to take to the kids of our own class, who always well-behaved and didn't play any love games. I couldn't tolerate that. And also, I prefer playing with boys, which is a result of I constantly got beaten up or had to beat somebody up. I was a tomboy. I was-- I don't think I was a nice kid. I also was a very ugly child, terribly ugly. That upset my mother terribly. I was all bones and long arms like a junior monkey. 

And there, of course, the Jewish question didn't enter at all. That was at a very young age. The break with those friends came when I entered gymnasium. I think you're aware that in Germany, the gymnasium, the best gymnasium, the best secondary schools are those run by the state. And you have that-- or had that gruesome entrance exam that lasted a day and a half. At the age of 10, that was when your fate was decided. Would you or wouldn't you get into a certain channel? 

I passed that without any difficulties. I was a bright kid. As a matter of fact, I was a little too bright for my own good, because I never did a stroke of work while I was in grammar school. As a matter of fact, one year I didn't go at all. I had a touch of TB. So I came. I had no trouble getting into gymnasium, but I didn't know how to study. And all of a sudden, I was supposed to study. There were all the kids were just as bright as I was. I wasn't used to that. And I was a miserable student, except in those subjects which interested me. So I had always the best and the lowest grades, but nothing in between. 

And with-- and with the entrance to the gymnasium coincided with the rise of Nazism. I got into the gymnasium, I think it was '30 or '31. And my father, even at that time, was concerned. But he felt quite secure, because he had been a front line, of sorts, during the first World War, and he figured that that would make him and his daughter safe. 

But from then on, I became increasingly aware what it meant to be Jewish, that I was different. Oh yes, my little pals, they were-- they very often made anti-Semitic remarks. Of course they came from anti-Semitic environments, and they would say, oh that dirty Jew, whereupon I would haul off and clap them in the snout, and that was the end of it. You know, you could handle those things at that time. But this was no longer possible. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You could handle it before the gymnasium. 

SUBJECT: Yes, that was simply anti-Semitic remarks would automatically elicit from me a physical attack. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were eight. 

SUBJECT: But they weren't even-- it wasn't really-- it wasn't really meant-- you know, dirty Jew was a word like damn Yankee. But once I got into the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like what? 

SUBJECT: Damn Yankee. It's one word, damn Yankee is. The emotional-- I mean, the emotional content of that word was minimal actually at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You say when you entered gymnasium, things changed. What did you notice? 

SUBJECT: Well, first of all, that was when Hitler came to power, you see, and anti-Semitism became a policy, a state policy. And also, this time, I was older. Many of the classmates had parents who were about to make their career as Nazis. And their children were imbued with the spirit that belonged to the youth movement long before it was almost mandatory. 

I remember one time-- this is very interesting-- I was a tremendous athlete by that time. I could swim, I could run, and whatnot. And there was a kid in class. She was as good as I was. We were rivals. And we had in that class, there were one, two-- two full Jewish girls, class of about 30 or 35. And two half Jews, one me and one my friend who was nominally Catholic, but that of course didn't matter later on. No, three full Jews, yeah, and two half Jews. And one-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In all-girl class. 

SUBJECT: Mhm, oh yes, of course, at that time. And one of the Jewish girls, she was a very close friend of mine, I sort of protected her. She was soft. Everything about her was soft. She was helpless, she was defenseless. And I took her under my wing. And at one time, as children, we were still children at 11, 12, we vied for the privilege of holding the door open for a teacher on which we all had a crush. And she had gotten there first. When this other kid, this Helga, came, her father by that time was already a Sturmbannführer. She was always in uniform. And gave-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: She-- the little girl was in uniform? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. The youth uniform. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She would-- 

SUBJECT: BDM, Bund Deutscher Madchen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you describe it? 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? Would I describe it? Well, there-- she had a dark skirt, and she wore black knee socks. And they had white blouses, and they had sort of a knot. You know, similar to a Boy Scout knot. And the scarf and the insignia. Later on that was exchanged for a brown uniform. They wore brown skirts, white blouses, and brown jackets over it But I think at this time, she still wore the white and black. Anyhow, she pushed that kid away. She pushed my Jewish friend away and said, "Dirty Jews don't hold doors," whereupon my little friend burst into tears. Whereupon I descended on this girl, and before you knew it, there was a fight the kinds of which you have never seen. We were ready to murder each other. In the course of which I hit her in the nose, and she got a nose bleed. She hit me in the stomach, it took me almost an hour to get my wind back. 

Then the teacher came. And as soon as the teacher came-- somebody gave him warning right we were back into our seats. Now there's something very strange. I knew she would not betray me. She could have gotten up. When the teacher came in, of course, she looked around, she's not stupid. She sees two kids with their hair in all directions, with one with a nose bleed. And she said, what happened here? And she addressed the other girl. The girl said nothing. She said well, you're bleeding. Yes, I have a nose bleed. She looked at me, she didn't ask me anything. 

It was quite interesting. And that kid, strangely enough, she never carried it over. She never-- she was never hostile towards me afterwards. We competed in sports, but when it came to choosing teammates, I was always the first she chose. And she was quite, quite interesting psychology behind that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you understand that? 

SUBJECT: Well you see, I'd-- I would have to-- I would have to guess now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Then how did you understand that? 

SUBJECT: I don't think I analyzed it. You don't analyze when you are-- when you are that age. I knew that there were certain kids I could trust and others I couldn't. And I know that I had been snitched on. But it was by the mealy mouthed goody goodies, and not by this vile little Nazi bitch. Her I could trust, strangely enough. Very strange, I think maybe-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was she a Nazi? 

SUBJECT: How could she have failed to be? Her father advanced very far in the party. He became a real big shot. Well, of course, it may be that the whole thing was a career for him and that he wasn't an anti-Semite at all. This is-- I mean, not an anti-Semite by conviction, but one by opportunism, as many were, of course. That's quite possible. I don't know. You never can quite tell. Or you could not tell at that time what was opportunism, what was conviction. Because the people themselves were not aware of it. They were not aware of their opportunism. They took for conviction what was simply, well, expedient. 

So that was one of the early encounters. And then things became tough. Because we had a director, a little swine. He changed his party allegiance with the government. It has been said, and I think it was true, that by the time the Nazis came to power, he was on his third party vote. He was a Social Democrat after the First World War. So he-- and then he became a member of the Centre Party when it turned out that the Social Democrats were not carrying any weight in the German academic field, which they didn't. He became what we call [INAUDIBLE] Centre Party. And then when the Nazis came, quite and early he changed over to the Nazis. 

And had he lived, he would have become a communist if it had been necessary. Completely without any moral stamina, a vicious person. And he was going to purify his school, jews were going to go out And he did get us out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? What daily things happened? 

SUBJECT: Oh, well, for instance, I-- well, of course, I committed a lot of pranks in my life. I was not a model student, to be sure. But then after a while, everything that happened was laid at my door. I was the instigator. I was the instigator of rebellious behavior. I didn't fit in. And the same thing was said about my friend, my friends, my other Jewish friends, who were certainly very well behaved compared to me. I may have provoked. That is quite possible. But I cannot remember any provocation by anybody else, except this one other one, one of the half Jews. 

But he decided at one point that he had to get rid of the Jews. And life was made so impossible for us that we left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? What were the daily occurrences? 

SUBJECT: We know this, he must have put-- he must put pressure on the teachers, because suddenly, we were ignored or we were jeered that. Those teachers who were not Nazis ignored us. That was playing it safe without hurting us. The ones who were with animus, you know how a teacher can make a kid's life miserable. And then we got called into the professor-- into the director's office. Frequently we were accused of lying. We were accused of rebelliousness, even when we weren't. It was a harassment. We saw the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: With-- it was not spelled out clearly-- 

SUBJECT: Oh no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --that you were the Jewish-- 

SUBJECT: Oh no. It was not spelled out, no. It was very interesting. It was not spelled out. We knew it, and he knew that we knew it. There was no-- there was no-- there was no doubt about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was there one teacher who remained loyal to his pupils, [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we had a couple of decent ones, especially one woman with tremendous-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you describe her? 

SUBJECT: Yes, that was the one [INAUDIBLE] with the Nazis too. She was just that kind of personality. She had a marvelous way of getting around the whole thing. As soon as the Nazis came to power and she was supposed to join the women's corps or whatever, she developed an ailment. I had-- I talked to her after the war. We suspected even then that there was nothing wrong with her. But the ailment was there. She must have had a doctor who confirmed it. 

And then when the official order came that when you greeted somebody, you said "Heil Hitler," she did it. She never failed. But in a way which was simply marvelous. She said (FLIPPANTLY) "Heil Hitler." It was an insult. But she just kept it so that nobody could say, now wait a minute, she's making fun of us. She knew exactly where to draw the line. If somebody had said you don't greet correctly, she would have opened up wide her blue eyes and said, "who, me?" And she never, never harassed a kid. Oh yes, she made life hell for you if you didn't do your lab assignment, but not on any other basis. And she was-- she was very courageous. She never joined the Frauenschaft, the Nazi organization for women. She stayed out of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And continued teaching? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And continued teaching? 

SUBJECT: Yes, oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing happened? 

SUBJECT: No, no. She continued. She always, you know, she always skirted. She was very clever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there changes in friendships in previous friendships with other children [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yes and no. In my case, it so happened-- well, it so happened in quotation marks-- that my friends were the Jewish ones anyway, including one girl who was one quarter Jewish and ironically suffered more than the rest of us, because she stayed in Germany. The rest of us emigrated. And she had a tough life, although it was only one grandmother who was Jewish. I had no intimate friendships at that time with the non-Jewish girls, so it didn't come up. 

But I had a boyfriend, a great love at the age of 10. And he just didn't want to understand that I couldn't hang around with him all the time anymore. His father was a municipal state employee, medium high bracket of an official, a very decent person. But I knew that if I hung around with that kid, sooner or later, somebody was going to say, hey, wait a minute, how come that little Jew is in your house all the time? And we were inseparable. So I broke this friendship. The young boy was very upset about it. He didn't know why I didn't want to go to the movie set with him. I didn't want to do that. Why don't we go the way-- what happened, all of a sudden, he wanted to know? 

And I said, listen, you can't do that. I'm Jewish. He said oh, who cares? And he came in his little Nazi uniform. Of course he was in the youth organization. He had to. His father was an official. So he came in his little Nazi uniform, wanted to take me to the movies. Complete, as far as he was concerned, this didn't matter, you see. So I had to cut that friendship off. And ironically enough, he emigrated too after the war. He had enough of Germany. So there the friendship ended. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the biergarten outings, which were mixed with Christians and [INAUDIBLE]-- 

SUBJECT: They continued. They continued. None of those people were Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER 1: On Sundays, evenings, family-- Jewish and other families could still mix in restaurants and talk to each other? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Oh yeah. Absolutely. The kind of people my parents associated with, they had courage. And they also were not-- they were not government officials. They were not municipal officials. In other words, their livelihood did not depend on their towing the mark, the Party mark. They were more independent than the run-of-the-mill. And so that didn't occur. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I understand that there was one stream of life that continued to be semi-normal. But in the meantime, something else was growing. 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you observe on the streets and on holidays and meeting places? What as a child did you see? 

SUBJECT: Well, our gymnasium was very close to the central railroad station. And whenever Hitler arrived, there was a spontaneous reception. And that was a pain in the neck. Because where do you get a spontaneous reception? You go over to the gymnasium and you yank out a couple of hundred kids. And we were lined up. Of course, Hitler was always photographed with little girls. Do you remember? You see his picture with all these pretty kids. And then he yanked out the blond ones, and the blond ones were put in front. Well, naturally, there I was with the blond ones. And I would say, hey, I'm Jewish. And, shut up, stand still. 

Which meant that I was in the front row-- I had to greet to Hitler with the Hitler salute. I stood right next to that other girl whom I had such a fight with, who was also blond. We stood there side by side, and there wasn't a damn thing you could do. I usually managed to sort of, you know, wiggle my way backward and disappear in the crowd just as the Fuhrer would come along. But sometimes we would stand there for hours and wait for that spontaneous reception. So that was one aspect. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one such reception where you saw him personally? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, sure, he came by with his crowd. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe? 

SUBJECT: He was in uniform. He was rather sour-faced. He was always surrounded by brass. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're talking of Hitler? 

SUBJECT: I talk of Hitler, because I said these are not official-- these were not official receptions. He just happened to arrive by train from somewhere. And he goes out to his limousine and is driven to somewhere else. He lived in Munich, as you know. So this was in the early times when he still went by train. I don't know what happened later. It seemed to me I do not remember any of those arrivals after '34. They must have been at the earlier time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any thoughts you had at that time? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I would have liked to kill him. I wondered what would happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you imagine thinking about it, fantasizing it? 

SUBJECT: I fantasized about killing him when I was standing there waiting. Otherwise I fantasized about somebody else doing it for me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Killing him how? 

SUBJECT: Oh, in shooting him. I was realistic, I know you couldn't get close enough to do anything else. So this was the earliest, the earliest part. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What else did you observe in the streets? Rallies, [INAUDIBLE] edicts? 

SUBJECT: Well, you see, I didn't, because I avoided them like the plague. We all did. Whenever there was a rally, we didn't go near it. And when there was something on the radio, we turned it off. So the only time we saw it, I think, was when we went to the movies, because German movies have news reels. And that's when we saw them. But otherwise, uh-uh, no ways. After I left the gymnasium, the state gymnasium, I finished the first six years and then I went to a private gymnasium, which was academically miserable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was what year? 

SUBJECT: That was 1935-36. It was miserable academically, and I didn't learn anything. But I had at least other success. And there, by that time I was a very good swimmer. I was in a swimming club run by a woman who came from a very prominent Munich patrician family. She had founded the club and the club to which she belonged to and [INAUDIBLE] turn out the Jews. She founded the club. She had tremendous courage. For those who didn't fit in with the public. 

And she took in all the Jews. And there was a strange mixture. Munich has a large number of old aristocracy and patricians. And they were not Nazis. No ways. They were-- they had been anti-Semitic in the matter-of-fact anti-Semitism that you can expect in Germany or could expect, not really [INAUDIBLE], but the Jews were not quite-- you didn't invite the Jews to dinner, you see. 

And all of a sudden, out of sheer protest against the Nazis, they sided with the Jews. And to my great surprise, all of a sudden, I was invited when I was a youngster to the guests-- to be a guest at those houses, which would have been totally closed to me before. The-- as a pro-- it was a protest on the part of these people. And we were in that swimming club, and I had the junior championship in Breisach. And at this time, there was a drive on to gather new talent, young talent, to be called for the Olympics. And I was among those who got a special pass signed by Baldur von Schirach, the youth-- the head of the youth movement in Germany-- that whenever I felt it necessary to train, to go swimming, I was to be excused from school. 

In that school, there was another guy, not a Jewish boy, who also had that pass. It was also [INAUDIBLE]. You can't imagine how often I went to school. I have always felt the need to train. I nearly became a waterfowl. So it was very peculiar, because I made no bones about the fact that I was half Jewish. And at this time, of course, this was the famous expression of Goebbels, where "Wer Judisch ist, beschliesse ich." I decide who is Jewish. And evidently, when it came to somebody who was potential material for a gold medal, it didn't matter if the grandmother was on the wrong side of the Aryan-- proof of Aryan descent. 

And let's see, what happened then? After that, I had decided I would emigrate. My father still thought that this was a madness that would blow over. After all, he said, we are a civilized country. This can't last. At first he thought it would blow over in six months. Then he extended it to a year. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What made you decide to emigrate? 

SUBJECT: Quite early. As a matter of fact, I always wanted to come to America to get away from my parents. I had planned it long, but it was a dream, you know, a kid's dream, to get out. To go to America at that time was still a big deal. But now I'd had a much more practical aspect, and I knew I was not staying in Germany if I could possibly get out. 

After the gymnasium, I went to art school. And this is quite interesting. This was also a state institution. But the director of the art school simply wouldn't knuckle under. He took anybody who passed a rather strict examination. And if they could draw enough, could paint well enough, they went in, and he didn't care whether they were black, white, or polka dot, or Jewish or Christian or whatnot. So I got in. I was not a very good artist. I was good enough to get into art school, but I would not have gotten that far as an artist. And I didn't even aim for that. I wanted to become a fashion designer, because I figured if I got out of Germany, I had to make my own living. There was nobody to support me. It better be a non-verbal skill, because I didn't know where I would wind up. Chances were that I didn't speak the language. So this would see me through. 

I was there a year. I took a year's course. And then I went to a fashion academy where I did some more drawing and also learned sewing and pattern-making, all kinds of skills. I went there for a year. And then, by that time, I was 16, and that was the year I got arrested for the first time. And it is strange, because I repressed that experience quite formally. It didn't even come out completely under analysis. [INAUDIBLE]. A version came out, which is contradicted by that of an aunt of mine, who was material in getting me off the hook. 

I only know up to a certain point it's very clear. I only know that I was in the trolley going to school. I was standing on the platform, and there were a couple of SS men in uniform. And they came up to me. And of course, I was-- at that time, I had lost my ugliness. I was quite attractive, and I was used to being accosted. And I tried to get out of the way, and they sort of-- it must have been two or three of them, because I feel-- still have the feeling of being sort of hemmed in. 

And they started asking me questions. And the next thing I know for sure is that one of them said, "You go with me to the police department, to the police headquarters." Now my aunt later on claimed that I had-- I'd smacked the guy right in the face. He'd gotten fresh in the head that I had hauled out and smacked him. It's quite possible. It's the sort of thing I would do. But I had-- it's interesting that I had forgotten that. I only know-- see myself talking along. He got up in Sendlinger Tor Platz. I remember it. I can see the way that they took towards the police department. It was the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, that I describe. It was a beautiful day. It was a Thursday morning. How do I know that? I don't know. And it was a beautiful morning. It was around, oh, shortly before 8:00, because school started at 8:00. Sun was shining. It must have been spring. I was not formally dressed, so early summer. And I remember walking next to that SS man and looking at the streets and saying, my god, with a little bit of bad luck, this is the last time I see that. And looking, just looking, trying to get as many visual impressions stored up, because I knew there was no way telling what will happen now. Would I be released in an hour? In a week? In a month? Would I go a concentration camp? Would I be tortured? Would I come out alive? I knew at this moment I had to be prepared for the worst, so as not to crack down. 

And we came to the police department. I was made to wait. Somebody took my name and address and so forth. And the question that was repeated, which of course at this time seemed strange to me, is are you Jewish? And I said no, I'm not Jewish. My father is Jewish, but I am not. I am freireligios, which means without any religious affiliation. And they harped on that. They harped on that. 

Do I know any Jews? I said yes, of course I do. Do I associate with them? I said yes, the Christians wouldn't associate with me. By that time I belonged to a Jewish sport clubs-- sports club. And after a while, and of course the usual threats, what would happen to me if I lie, and so forth and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were interrogated where? 

SUBJECT: In the police-- at the police department? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did it look? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was just a plain office. There was nothing frightening about that. Wooden desk, and I sat on a wooden chair, and the guy sat at his desk shooting people going in and out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did he look like? What impression as a human being did he make on you? 

SUBJECT: He was sort of smallish, of course, in uniform, fat. Somebody, the kind of person I could have no possible contact with on any level. As if a creature from another world, not even cruel, but completely, well, might have been from Mars as far as I was concerned. I knew I could not impress that man with anything I had to say. He wasn't insensate, as far as I was concerned. 

So he asked me questions for a while. And I asked, could I make a telephone call? No I couldn't. And then somebody took me down into the jail itself, through corridors. I'm sure it wasn't that many corridors, but to me this seemed endless, the cells. And he opened Cell #10 and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: People in cells? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: People in cells? 

SUBJECT: Well, there certainly was one in the one I was in. It was quite obvious a little street girl whom they had picked up. As soon as the cell was open, she let lose a stream of abuse to the guy who brought me in. And she was yanked out and put in somewhere else, and I was there, and the door was locked behind me, and that was it. I was 16 at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what was the cell like? 

SUBJECT: I had made up my mind that I was not going to go to pieces. I took stock of the situation and decided the worst that can happen to me is that I will be tortured and then I will go to a concentration and then I'll die. And that was that. And then I decided this-- I knew, of course, that one way of softening up people is to keep them in a cell until they go stir-crazy. So I decided uh-uh. That way you can't get me. And I stretched out on that so-called bed and went to sleep. Didn't wake up until they got me again. Now they wanted to feed me first, but I refused the food. I decided there's no sense in-- if they keep me, there's no sense in prolonging the agony. I'll stop eating right away. And if they don't keep me, I won't starve to death. 

And I went back to sleep until they got me again. I don't know how many hours had passed. But I slept, of course, this was a psychological safeguard. My unconscious worked up to protect me from going mad, from becoming frightened. And then they interrogated me again. Again the same questions, was I Jewish? Whom did I see? And so forth. I later realized that the whole thing had nothing to do with me. It had to do with one of the young men with whom I went out and associated with. Somebody wanted his father's business, and they were trying to get him through me. 

At this time, there was still that pretext of legality. You had to do something in order to be appropriated or something like that. And they wanted to get him on the Rassenschande bit. And if I were Christian or if I were Aryan, they could get him by associating him-- by associating with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Going out with you. 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Going out, dating you? 

SUBJECT: Well, I mean, they would say that I slept with him. Who can prove I didn't? You can't prove a negative, you know? So that was it. But I didn't know. I only know that they harped on my being Jewish. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had been seen with him, obviously. 

SUBJECT: Yes of course, I made no bones about it. Of course we were seen. There was-- we were in the same sports club and skiing together. By then, I had no contact with anybody outside the Jewish circle. You see, while all this was going on, we could still go out together. We could still go dancing. You know, all these things which seem so frivolous were still part of our lives. It was a sort of a schizophrenic world. On the one hand, there was this-- a tense, perhaps, but nevertheless real world of young people having fun. On the other hand, there was this knowledge that we were dancing on very thin ice. And we knew it. But somehow we could enjoy ourselves nevertheless. 

My father couldn't understand that. It made him furious. He thought I was frivolous. How can you, in times like this, think about what you're going to wear to a ball? Yes you can. And you can go to the ball, you can have a good time. Especially at that period, because you don't know whether it is going to be your last one. I was released that time, and I immediately went to my aunt, who had-- my mother's sister, who had a store nearby, a jewelry store, and told her about it. And she made me tell her as much as I knew, who interrogated me and so forth. There's a story with that, too. 

My father set her up in business. She bought the store from her Jewish employer. I'll tell that story later, because that's a funny one. That belongs in there. You should interview her. Anyhow, she had connections. I also called one of my Jewish girlfriends who was in class with me, who also went to the other school with me. Her father was a very prominent lawyer in Munich. And he was a representative of the representative city in legal cases. And at that time, that must have been '35, he was not, of course, representing the city anymore but he still was a very respected personality. And I told him about it, and he made the mistake of going next, going to the Polizeiprasidium protesting of having a young girl like me arrested. And of course he abruptly got thrown out. 

My aunt wasn't successful at that time either, but she was successful later. I got out of jail. Now the question was where to go? My parents must not under any circumstances find out. Although I hated my father's guts, I knew he would break down. He would have a nervous breakdown on the spot if he heard about that. He couldn't take it. So he must not know. So what to do? 

I went to a friend, a Jewish friend, who lived with her parents, her brothers. And there when I came to her, I told her-- of course I couldn't tell anything over the telephone either. I knew about telephones being bugged. And I went to her house, and I came to her, and she saw me, and she said, what's the matter with you? And then I broke down and I cried. And her mother came, she looked at me. She said, what's the matter with her? And my girlfriend told her. She was an older woman, that girlfriend, about 10 years older than I. And she told her the whole truth. [INAUDIBLE] said, that's what she's making such a fuss about? And she meant it. Because at that time she had two sons in a concentration camp. 

And she meant it when she said, that's what she was making such a fuss about? You see, everything is relative. So from her I got no sympathy. And I got home at an ungodly time. And of course, my father was furious. Where were you? It must have been the middle of the night or in in the morning. And I decided to let his lurid imagination have it's one. I just refused to answer. He probably thought I was shacking up with somebody or something like that. I decided, hell with that. Rather he believes that than he finds out the truth. He must not find out that I was arrested. He never did. 

Never until he came to this country, and then I told him, and you know what? He didn't believe me. He thought I made it up. And then I was picked up again, interrogated again, but this time not put into jail. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How soon? 

SUBJECT: A couple of weeks later. And again they harped on this bit of are you Jewish or are you not Jewish? And then I had an idea. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know why, at this time, that they were interrogating you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, by that time. I didn't really know, but I began to suspect, since the name of that young man was mentioned that time and again, and reappeared. Of course, they tried to hide it under others, but I-- first of all, he was the closest one of that group to me. And then I began to suspect that they didn't have anything to do with me. It must have had something to do with him. And then I had an idea. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We're changing the reel. 