SUBJECT: Going to-- That we really, I really believed that we will meet again. 

INTERVIEWER: And talk at the camera. Are you ready? 

SUBJECT: At this moment-- at this moment when they separated us, it was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did the guards say that to you? 

SUBJECT: The guards, they were the guards. They were, they were with, with the satisfaction they were shouting it out. We just couldn't believe that such things-- it was like, like a nightmare, like a dream, like a nightmare. We couldn't believed that everything was happening so fast. 

And then, we just didn't feel any-- I didn't feel anything. I was just like in a trance. I just didn't feel anything. They pushed me into a bed. They stripped me. They shaved my head. They took-- stripped me off my clothes. They just gave me a little rag. I got just a little blouse that covered my front. The back was ripped. The rest was naked. And I was just pushed like a, in that trance. I didn't care. 

And then they took a whole group, and we were taken to-- we were lucky. We were taking two to Birkenau. Birkenau was the better part of Auschwitz, where all the thieves, the gypsies. All the worst elements were taken to Birkenau because this was also at that camp. We didn't even get a number. 

There weren't even tattoos that got numbers. They were meant to go to work. We didn't even get numbers because we were meant for dead. The only thing was that all of us were going to crematoriums and gas ovens were becoming so full blast that they absolutely had not enough time. We had to wait a day until our turn comes for the gas ovens. 

So it means we were pushed in day. But in the meantime, broke disease-- typhoid fever and dysentery broke out. And we were just quarantined there, and we stayed there for-- for two months. But at first when they took us over there into those barracks, I still remember, the barrack number 25. And they said-- we came into that barn that looked like a cow, like a big cow barn. 

They put in 500 women there. It was just a dirt mat on the ground. And they told us here, you're going to stay. Here, you're going to sleep. And here you're to behave yourself. If you won't behave yourself-- so she was going around right in the middle, that the SS Oberscharfuhrer with a big stick-- and if you're not going to behave yourself, I'm going to beat you to death. So you weren't even supposed to let a beep, peep, or a scream, or a cry out. 

You just stayed there, and you said, my God, is this possible? Is this human? This is absolutely impossible. And I wanted to die there. I said, I'm not-- that's impossible. I'm not going to live there even through one night. It's absolutely impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: You were frightened? 

SUBJECT: Not only frightened-- disgusted, tired, and I just didn't want to live anymore. I had enough. That girl that was so brave before, I had enough. But we were, we were assigned to be five. In Auschwitz, you had to do everything in five. You had to come out to be counted early in the morning, during the night in five. You went to the outhouse in five. You-- everything you had to do in five. 

And we were assigned-- the five girls that we were assigned, we were best-- we were good friends from before. We knew each other. And we swore to each other. We started encouraging each other. We said, we are going to live this through. It's going to be one for all and all for one. We're going to live this through, and we're going to help one another. 

And we encouraged, and we said no such thing. We are going to live, and we started building hatred-- hatred in all kinds of ideas, what we were going to do to the Germans when we live through this. And that hatred made us survive and made us live. 

The thoughts that we had and the ideas that we fed ourselves were sickening. What we were going to do to the Germans what we lived through. We're going to cut them-- you've got to live through to take revenge. And that's what made us go on and made us live. And we said we're going to cut them into pieces. We're going put salt on them. We're going to tie them to two horses and let the horses run, the most horrible, horrible things that could come to a mind, we fed ourselves with hatred, and that made us go. And then we promised ourselves solve whatever we're going to organize in food, it's going to be one for all and all for one. And that's how we did. 

First of all, we assigned ourselves-- we're getting one soup a day in Auschwitz. So we assigned ourselves-- there had to be fives to carry the soup. We assigned ourselves. We going to carry the soup every day. Even so, it was very hard to do, but we knew if we carried the soup, we will help ourselves. So we found a can someplace. And one of the girls that had a longer garment, she tied the can between her legs, and we figured when we are going to carry the soup, one will steal a can of soup. Edith, quick, drink it out quickly. Then, Pesta can, and the other, and so on, and that's-- that's how we did. And that's how we-- every day, we carried the soup, and we stole a little bit of soup, so we could have a little bit more. 

And then after the quarantine and that Dr. Mengele came in and started segregating, and started taking out people. They needed apparently people. The war was coming, becoming a little bit sour, and they needed people in Germany for hard work for labor, for ammunition factories, and so on. So he was staking out groups of younger, a little bit, young people that didn't look ready to die already, picked out groups to send. I was lucky. Between 200 women were taken out, and I was between them, taken to Germany. That was already late November. 

INTERVIEWER: The other five. 

SUBJECT: Well, it was only four already left, because one managed to get away. One of our friends managed to get away, and she went to the electric wire, and hung herself on the wire, was electrocuted immediately. She couldn't take it anymore. We didn't know. Otherwise, we would have saved her, but she did it during the night. We found her dead when we came out to stay in the appeal to be counted in the morning. We found her hanging from the wire dead. 

INTERVIEWER: She hadn't said a word about it? 

SUBJECT: No. We never expected it. 

INTERVIEWER: What was she like? 

SUBJECT: Oh, she was such a beautiful girl. She was such a wonderful person from a very fine home, and she just couldn't take it. She was very depressed, but we thought-- that we never thought that she was going to do it, but she did. So we had to have assigned somebody else. It was another fifth one, and we were marching. 

I will never forget that march from Auschwitz to the railroad station, where the trains were going. It was maybe, I don't know, maybe 50 kilometers or 100 kilometers to march. It was cold at that march. That we had to go to the railroad station. Here, I was barefoot, was freezing rain, wet snow and freezing rain. It was unbearable cold. 

And we marched through a day into the night. I don't know for how many miles. I was barefoot with just a little blouse covering my front. The back was ripped. And then, already, I could not take it anymore. I felt that the cold is squeezing me inside. My heart just stopping. My feet were frostbitten. My hands were frostbitten. 

I just couldn't, and I knew if I will stop, I will lay down. They're going to shoot me, and that will be the end. And I couldn't-- I didn't care anymore. At this time, I didn't care anymore. I wanted to die. I cannot take it anymore. And I laid down. 

But my friends picked me up, and they swept me. And they took me in between themselves. And with their body, they started warming me. And they said no, you don't. You came so far. You're going to go on. And they made me go. They dragged me, and they warmed me with their bodies. And they made me go, and I made it to the railroad station. 

And then, we came to the railroad station. And that's too-- you can see how human beings are like animals. There was one pail. We came to the warmer room, and everybody got sick with diarrhea, with the runs. And there was that the one pail also in the middle of the floor. And everybody was fighting to get to it first. It was it just like a bunch of animals. 

But then, they gave us a bed, which was a luxury by itself. And they gave us new clothes, new rags, to put on. This time, I was very lucky because I got a rag that was 10 sizes too big on me. It was long and big, and that was wonderful because I could cut off a piece and have a piece to cover my head. So it was really wonderful. 

And they took us to on the trains to Germany. The camp that I was in was Oederah, was near Driesen. It was an ammunition camp, where they were making bombs, the V-1 bombs. We were drilling holes. 

INTERVIEWER: Getting into Germany, what did you feel? This was Germany now. 

SUBJECT: I felt that-- I-- first of all, the hope that's going to end soon. We constantly you lived with that hope it's going to end another few weeks, maybe another month. It's going to end. It's going to come soon. It has to come soon. Everybody invented some kind of news. If they didn't hear any, everybody invented some kind of news just to give us the moral support between ourselves. We invented news that it's going to end. 

And going to Germany seemed-- well, anything is going to be better than Auschwitz, probably. It was the hope that anything will be better than being there in Auschwitz. So that was the hope. And it was better, only better because, at least, it was warmer. The barracks that we were in, we had-- had bunk beds. We didn't lay in the dirt. It was a little bit better than it was in Auschwitz. But it was the same hunger. It was hard work. We worked like 18, 16, 18, and 20 hours a day in the ammunition factories cranking machines. We all hand cranking machines. No electrical machines. Cranking the machines. It was murder, the work. 

But also, there was-- like I had in the factory I had a foreman, and all the German men, which was a wonderful man. And he, too-- he was not allowed-- Germans were not allowed in the factory to talk to us, to the prisoners. 

If they were caught talking to us, they were sent away. They were taken out. I don' know where, but they were taken out. So this German, he was very careful. He was afraid, but every time he came, he so-called, he is going to clean the machine or the shaving. And he always talked to me, says to hold on. It's going to end pretty soon. Don't worry. Just hold on. 

And every time he threw a little sandwich into the shavings. He says my wife sent something for you. There, you will find it later. So I had a little sandwich there. Every day, he came to the machine, and he pretended that he was cleaning the machine or whatever, and he was giving me that hope. It's going to end soon. And don't worry. Just hold on, and hold on. 

And I wish I could have found him later to thank him for all that he did. So that sandwich-- every day, I had a little sandwich, and I was bringing i back to the barrack with me. I had a very close friend that we are here together too. And we always, also, the two of us, we two managed from Auschwitz to be together, come to the same camp together, and we promised ourselves whatever we will have extra, we will share. So whenever I got that sandwich, we shared between each other. And that's how we survived. 

And then, by, I think it was April, March or April, it was coming to an end already. And we heard that artillery shots, and the world was coming to an end. It was burning, and fires, and shots, and we knew it's coming closer and closer. And even so, we had the bombardment, we weren't afraid that we might get bombed. We just knew it's coming closer to an end, but the Germans did not intend us to, to, to live to see the end because they did not want any survivors. 

So they managed to get us out. That was in March or April. They were going to take us and dispose of us. So they loaded us up on a open coal, coal wagon. It was already-- transportation was very poor. The war was coming to an end. They were surrounded by-- they were surrounded already by the Allies all around. And the war was coming to an end, so they loaded us up on the open coal wagons and tried to take us someplace. 

So this was also like a nightmare. It was 70 in each wagon, with no open wagons, with no food. It was raining. All to drink we had was the rain water. We were passing by farms and begging and pleading. Please, give us something to eat, so they were throwing the farmers-- some had mercy, although there were animals. 

And they threw up a potato, a beet, or a carrot, and we were all fighting like animals, whether going to catch it and eat it. And we were going back and forth, and back and forth for three weeks like this. And there was no place that they can let us off because everything was already surrounded-- the Russians, England, American, Allies, they all were surrounded already. 

Finally-- finally, they let us off at Theresienstadt. It was in Slovakia. Theresienstadt has also well known crematoriums and ovens. And there, they intended to dispose of us so there won't be any survivors left. But by then the Red Cross already set up a Red Cross barracks in Theresienstadt for temporary barracks to put the people in because the disease was terrible. People were dying by the thousands, by the hundreds, by the thousands every day. All the transports from all the concentration camps were coming in to tell Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: I think you were liberated in Theresienstadt. 

SUBJECT: I was liberated in Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me, what was-- Number one, what's living with you today from all this? And was it like to begin again here? 

SUBJECT: Well, you want to know when the war ended? 

INTERVIEWER: No. I want to know what today, what memories, dreams, important things. You went back to that reunion. And I want to hear about your life in Hartford. 

SUBJECT: Well, it's funny. But the older I get, the more memories are haunting me. I keep on asking myself, why? What is it? Is it fate that I am here? Of a whole family, of a whole wonderful culture, only I am here from my whole family. I wasn't a strong person, or I wasn't the big hero. Is it fate? Was it meant for me to be? 

And I constantly ask. I keep on asking myself the question. The nights that I am up, and I cannot sleep, I try to see my parents. It's kind of like so many years, and the picture is fading away. And I want to remember them. Comes the holiday, I try to copy and remember how it was at home. I can have a copy, but I try to remember. 

It's getting hard. It's getting worse with age. I sit, and I work, and I think about things that I went through. And I wonder, how is it possible that I was able to live through this? Is it possible? How can anybody-- how can I tell anybody that story that will believe if I, myself, cannot believe that I was there, and I was able to live through a horror like this, and yet come here to this country, and have a family, and live a normal life, more or less a normal life, and bring up my children a normal way? 

And I wonder. And I lay awake. And when I lay awake, I relive a lot of things. I think when I was younger, it was easier because I was occupied with the children. I was busy with them. And I tried. I tried to push away those thoughts. But now, they come more often. And it kind of like haunts me. 

INTERVIEWER: And when the thoughts come, you do not belong here? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I belong here, yes. This is my home. I'm very happy to be in the United States. And I cannot complain about my life in the United States. I feel I belong here, yes. But I sometimes I feel like guilt. Why am I the one that I am here? I don't know. It's hard to explain. It's-- sometimes, it's like a guilt that I'm the one, that I'm here, and the rest of my family is not. 

INTERVIEWER: Maybe you belong here, and that's never happened what you're telling me. Is that the thought? 

SUBJECT: I know it happened, yeah. I know what happened. I never-- I can never push it away. I can never chase it away. 

INTERVIEWER: You're not sure, but you are sometimes not convinced that it will happen. Is hat correct? 

SUBJECT: I cannot believe. I cannot believe that I was part of all this, that I was able-- 

INTERVIEWER: It happened to somebody else, perhaps? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, not to me. It was somebody else. It was not me-- that I was able-- that's why I never liked to talk to anybody. If people asked me to tell the story, and I refuse because I don't believe. I-- just, I myself, I lived through. And my imagination cannot absorb it that I was able to live through such a horror. Now, how can somebody, an outsider, visualize and believe that a human being is able to go through this. Six years of such horror. Six years, which everyday was a lifetime of horror, of the worst terrible horror. 

INTERVIEWER: Must be hard. 

SUBJECT: Only hard. Only pain. And only the fight of survival. The fight of survival. How could anybody believe that this is possible? If I myself been through cannot absorb that it's possible for a human being to survive in such conditions, and to be here? I was only 15 years old when all this started. And throughout my teenage years, was the ghetto, was Auschwitz, was concentration camp. Those were my teenage years. And yet, I can say that I'm a pretty stable-- 