CREW: Meeting schedules starts between 6:00 and 6:30, so yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How can they stole my car, that's the whole-- 

Why would anyone steal your car? 

CREW: No. It's an old car, 80 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The year you were born, and the place, town and country, OK? Just once when we begin. Second, as when you speak, try to speak from your own memories, not general information, because that's available. Like, I-- when the Germans came in, this is how I saw it the first day. This is what happened. OK? 

SUBJECT: Yep. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you can, when you're talking about an event, give the year and the month. This happened in March '41 and so forth. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And before we begin, after you've said your name, where you were born, and when you were born, just assume that you're looking at photographs and beginning describing your little bit about the background-- the town, the people, the parents, the family, and particularities. So whenever it's a good family, we know that. Father was doing this, mother was like that-- a little more specific. We would like more to meet the person and the experience of the person rather than the historical event. OK, do you want to? 

CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Can you tell me your name and where you were born and when? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your name. 

SUBJECT: Name or-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, both-- 

SUBJECT: Serena Vogel and now Serena Lohman born in Poprad, Czechoslovakia in 1927. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the town you were born in, can you tell me something about your life there, your family, your life in the town? 

SUBJECT: Well, the town was a very small town, maybe around 1,200 people and about 12 Jewish families. It was-- I had a very happy childhood in it, as my family was very close, and my parents were very caring. My mother was a wonderful mother, and I felt that I had generally, a good life in school. And out of school, summers seemed to be spent at my grandfather's place in the mountains, which was very joyful just to be together with our cousins. My mother would be there, and of course by age-- I think by age 10 in 1938, all this came to an end sort of. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, let's go back and get more of a picture of-- 

SUBJECT: Of the childhood? 

INTERVIEWER 2: --what things were like then. There was you, and you had brothers and sisters. 

SUBJECT: I was the oldest one of six children, but my mother had children before me. And most-- and four more children, specifically, they all died in infancy, except one sister who was maybe around three or four-- tuberculosis was then the illness that killed a lot of people, and my mother's mother died of it. My father's mother died of it and so did many-- and so did this child. So she particularly was very not only concerned but-- but an anxious mother, and she-- and I was very thin and a little bit sickly too, so she took particular care of all of us but specifically with me because I was next. 

She used to grow her own vegetables-- things that other people didn't even know about at the time like spinach, cauliflower-- and she was very health conscious. If anybody gave her a recipe that was supposed to be good for your children or healthy, then she would grow it herself, cook it, and even if she had to eat it herself-- because most of those things were unfamiliar to us, so we didn't like it. 

She would make, let's say, fresh butter practically every day that her children should-- should be malnourished, or everybody made his own, you know, jam and preserves, but she did more in a way. And people who remembered my mother, always remember her as being a very devoted and hardworking mother-- or she, in another way too, we always used to have help in the house, but she never trusted the children with her help. For instance, when they were infants, and they were too little to sit up by themselves. And the reason was that she was always afraid that help wouldn't hold the child securely, and the child would fall back and break something. So this is-- this was my mother. 

And my father was a very, very kind-- very good humored person. And he knew-- he told stories very well, and he had a lot of patience. He had more patience with us than my mother, because my mother was so occupied with all the children. But he had a lot of patience to tell stories, and these stories mainly took place Friday nights and Saturday. And because all week he was away in business, in Friday night, he devoted his entire evening telling us of the events during the week, and he never tired of our questions. And we just loved those Friday nights. 

Also if we needed help with schoolwork, he always ready during the week. My father had a lot of the business in a different town, so he used to come home at 7:00 in the evening. And many people from the town used to wait for him for different reasons. These were peasants who had very little money, and if they bought something, then they would pay it back $1 at the time, maybe a monthly down payment of as little as they had. 

And they liked to come. They had nothing else to do. They were farmers. So they would come before my father arrived home, and sit around, and talk. And they were very proud and sensitive people, so no one would ever say no, don't come or don't sit-- you know, he would come home, and after he got through with all of them-- and we were patiently waiting to ask for his help, he was still there, and he did it. 

He was particularly very good with math, and I was terribly proud at the-- if there was a math problem that even the teacher had difficulties with, I would say to the teacher that I will take it home to my father. And sure enough, my father knew the math problem in two seconds, not the method that was taught in school perhaps but-- but he knew it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He knew how to find the solution. 

SUBJECT: He knew how to find a solution. So this was mainly my whole life, and-- and I remember all the holidays that were so wonderful-- Passover and Shavu'ot and all, and we were religious, very orthodox. But my father wasn't a an extreme fanatic. He was very well educated in Judaism, but he was a businessman. So he-- he-- and also was a very, very neatly dressed person, so to him that mattered a great deal. 

And as far as-- and he was a very ethical person and very, very honest. His standards were so high that most of the time he taught us that rather than what you are allowed and not allowed to do religiously, it was more important to him, the combination of being honest and not hurting other people, than doing something that may have violated the religious code, so to speak. I mean, that was taken for granted, but this was terribly important to him. 

So I feel that, you know, we had very-- a very good example in the house, and it carried me through life. Because I always think about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm- I'm curious. You said to the summers, you used to go away. It used to be your-- your family and your cousins would go up to your grandparents-- 

SUBJECT: Well, my grandfather used to live, and he was born and came from a mountainous area. And he had a lot of wealth there, property, and a stone quarry, and almost the entire town, the entire village, worked in his-- in his business one way or another. And he's lost his first wife, and the second wife couldn't adjust to that place. 

So eventually, he moved away, but they never sold the house. And they never sold anything, and it was very beautiful. And-- and we lived-- and my father and my mother settled and got married. It was not mountainous. It was straight, flat, and so for the summers, my mother as well as anyone in the family-- sisters who wanted a nice vacation-- would just go there automatically, because the house was available. 

And there was one son, my grandfather's son, who lived there permanently, but not in the same house. He had his house. And this is where I spent all my summers every summer, and I used to love it. When I think back now, I always think of that place much more than I think of where I lived and actually was born, because it was a nicer place. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did these good memories begin to change in terms of when things began to change around you? What did you begin to see happening? 

SUBJECT: Well, in 1938, when the Hungarians-- this place was Czechoslovakia, and then it was taken over by Hungary because Hungary was a-- they chase-- they chased down the Czechs, and Hungarians were friends of the Germans. So everything began to change. First of all, we went to Czech schools until then. Almost, I think, 100%-- all the Jewish children went to Czech rather than to Hungarian schools. We had both. 

And at that point, we had to transfer to Hungarian schools, and it was a terribly big change for us. Because not only were they Hungarian, but they were also religious schools. And when I reached-- I reached I think maybe the fifth grade, this school was called the three former church, not Catholic-- Protestant Church. And the whole school had to go to church-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Including you? 

SUBJECT: Including me. Of course, I wouldn't dare to say that I didn't want to go to church. And until then I was used to religious freedom because of Czechoslovakia, it was different. It was a democratic country, so that in itself was a very big change for us. And of course, the Hungarians were anti-Semitic basically, and they-- and they also-- they had a better, I think under the Czechoslovakia regime, but they were quite happy when the Hungarians came. 

They felt that these were their people, and they felt at home with them. And so, they wanted to-- they felt liberated enough to show that anti-Semitism more towards the Jews, and it was in style. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they show it to you and your family? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Well, very simply that they didn't hesitate, let's say. A boy next door or a girl next door didn't hesitate to threaten me with Hitler, and I had no idea who Hitler who was at that age. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Saying what? 

SUBJECT: He would say, oh, watch out. Hitler is coming. Hitler will come and take care of you. And I'd run in and ask my parents, who is Hitler? But he knew, and he was a peasant boy. And I didn't know, so apparently it came from the home. 

And little by little, we started to be on guard. There's Hitler, and there is-- and calling us a Jew. And of course, and my father, for instance-- we had a very big garden, and the garden was fenced in with trees, fruit trees. And these children would come, and break the fence, and steal the fruit. And-- and my father, at that point, decided-- he did it so many times. He rebuilt his fence so many times that he decided enough. 

It didn't pay for him to go to court and to take his neighbors, and these people-- we were beginning to have problems years before, he would not have hesitated to do it. But as these things started it wasn't worthwhile to take a gentile to court, because they were-- that was an anti-Jewish business. So he let his whole garden go, and he said to my mother, it's easier to buy fruit than to bother with this. 

And they-- and we were afraid to say it was a boy who stole our food-- to-- to stand up to him, but he wasn't afraid to tell me, you are a Jew. Or let's say, I had a little brother [Sound Breaks] who didn't know, and somebody called him a dirty Jew. He was maybe six or seven years old, and he called him back a dirty Hungarian. And there was a whole to do about this in school that the teacher wanted to know, who told you this? Did your parents tell you this? 

And then he came home, so we set him down. And we tried to talk to him. You must never ever say that, and he could not understand why he can't say that. Because another child called him a dirty Jew, but for things like that, if let's say, a principal or a teacher was anti-Semitic as well, and they had reported it to the police, it was a good excuse to take my father away. And this is what we were scared of. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So at that time, people's fathers were being taken away-- other children's fathers, or you knew about people being taken away? 

SUBJECT: Well, nobody was taken away in my town, but we heard of people being taken away. We knew of people being taken away, and they didn't come back for a few months. And when they did come back, they were too sick to practically live. They used to be beaten for different reasons, you know. 

They take-- sometimes they found a reason. For instance, my father had this business, and when the Hungarians came and occupied us, anyone that wanted a Jewish business could just simply apply for it. In the beginning, they-- it was a business transaction. So I think about two years after this happened, maybe 1940, somebody came from Hungary and applied for my father's business, and he got it. 

And he paid my father money for it, but my father could not refuse to sell it to him. He had to. So from that time on, now if you-- now let's say from that time on, he had no way of making a living except somehow in an illegal way. In other words, not even illegal, he wasn't allowed to have a business, and he wasn't allowed to do anything that wasn't proper. But how could he make a living? 

So he used to-- first of all, I don't even know today, how-- how he managed for so many years without the business with six children. One-- one way was it-- we did have some fields, and my father never paid much attention to it. Until then, he used to have people either-- what do you call it when you give it up-- a share? Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Lease it? 

SUBJECT: Lease it. Yes, lease it. But from then on, he took more-- a more active part in it. We had our own cows, so we had milk. My grandfather had a flour mill, so naturally we had that and always enough to eat-- plentiful. Never, never-- even till the last minute, we never missed anything. So my father had money for his business, and he did some-- something on the side. 

And we were always worried that they shouldn't catch him. He would go, for instance, it wasn't anything, god forbid, you know, illegal, but in their eyes, it might have been to take out a customer, and sell him a tree in the forest, and make money on it that way because he understood to it-- or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The pictures that you have, are they from that time, or are they later? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they are pictures from that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you show us the pictures? 

SUBJECT: Somebody just found a picture-- a gypsy family as a matter of fact. In our attic, on the floor at home, and I don't know where I found the others. But a few-- very few. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold them up in front of you-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --to show them out? Yes, that's right. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like so, yes, very good. 

SUBJECT: This is my mother-- this-- this I. My brother, he was a year younger-- and my sister, who you interviewed, as a baby. Now this picture here is a family picture, and a family picture of my grandfather's family. And my father happens to be also there, because his business was in this town where my grandfather lived-- where he just one-- a bystander. 

These are my grandparents, which I got a copy for my aunt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother's? 

SUBJECT: My mother's parents, yes. Now this is the sister whom you interviewed, and this was a younger sister. And this was a cousin, and this-- this was the place in the mountains where we spent our vacations, where she lived. And this here is of my two little brothers and myself. 

And this is so little that nobody can see, but it's in front of the schoolhouse, where I went to school. And my sister and I had on it the two bows on us. So this is about all. That's all I have. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So your father lost his business, and how did things continue from that time forward? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were-- 

SUBJECT: I was then to school-- to middle school still. It was-- it was becoming very difficult for a Jew to go to school, but in those days they still didn't have a quota system. And if you made an exam, entrance examination, and if you did well, then you had a chance to go. So I did that, and I did very well, and I got in. And the school situation was very bad. 

It was in the-- in the town of Munkacs, which was a bigger city. And I lived with my uncle there. I was a little bit worried. My father used to give me a certain amount of money with my mother for spending money, and generally I came back almost with the same amount. Because even though they-- they didn't say anything, but I felt that it would-- that my father wasn't working actually. And the money probably was scarce, but they didn't tell me. 

And in school, the situation was not anti-Semitic really, but all the male teachers practically were gone. The young ones drafted into the army. And they took all these old, old teachers to teach, so it wasn't terribly good. And after a while, maybe a year and a half later or so, I just-- the law came out against the Jewish children going to school. 

And things were so hectic and so bad that I just stopped going to school altogether. I didn't go, so I was I was home, and I was in the mountains. And I was-- I started to learn how to sew a little bit-- that maybe the time will come-- my mother thought maybe the time will come where I might have to make a living that way. I should know how to do it. But that didn't last very long either. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was that now? 

SUBJECT: I think that was in about 1941, 1942, 1943. That was-- these were the years when it happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So 1943, you stopped going to school? 

SUBJECT: It was at 1942 already. After 1942, I didn't go to school as far as I can remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you are 15 years old? 

SUBJECT: Right. And-- no, I still went. 1943, I didn't go anymore. 1942, I still went, because I remember, at 16, still being there. And then I went back home, and I felt-- and I was very-- I wasn't happy being home anymore, because it-- after being in the bigger city, I felt the need for a little bit more caution and a little bit-- I loved to read, for instance. 

I didn't find things around me too much. The friends were not the same as I made in the city. And of course, the biggest worry was that they suddenly called in my father. They took him into a working camp, and my mother remained with us alone. 

And at that point, there was a lot of army, Hungarian army, in our-- in our town. And there was a curfew. We couldn't go out. And we-- my-- I think my mother worried plenty, but she didn't let us know. She didn't want to worry us a lot. 

But we didn't hear from my father very often, and he worked in-- they-- they-- first of all, they took off his beard, and I never knew my father without a beard. And that was a terrible shock when I saw him, and he came home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When he came back the first time? 

SUBJECT: When he came home the first time, I just sat and cried, because this wasn't my father. I didn't know him that way. And then-- and he worked in a stone quarry. There were people who worked even harder than he did on hard labor. Somehow he had such a pleasant disposition, and he was also very smart-- that he knew how to get out of things. And he managed to get even food somehow from others. 

So at one point, he met a cousin there accidentally who was adopted, and he came home. And as usual, he was always in such-- smiled. And he was-- he was always on the happy side when he told a story even if it wasn't a happy story-- that he told us how interesting it was-- that he report he found that suddenly. 

No, he reported sick. He was supposed to do something. And he came in front of the doctor, and he was-- who was a doctor but his own cousin, and the cousin said, well, you're in. 