[HIGH-PITCHED SOUND] INTERVIEWER: That's what I would like you to comment-- when I would-- when I'm just talking. 

WILSON: Well, another thing-- thousands upon thousands of families in this country had been overseas. And they were concerned about that. And that occupied their thoughts a good bit, how-- how were they making out. 

And I don't-- I don't know how these days-- or even in those days-- one finds time to daily think about all the horrors that are going on. Look what we found in the papers yesterday, that Liberia situation where the churches were the one channel where one could expect people who sat in that church atmosphere to have an emotional response. And they did, they responded very nobly amidst all their day-to-day concerns, I think. 

And that was the reason that the minute it was safe to get off the continent, we were the first group allowed to go in and visit various parks and projects that had been set up for relief. And what was I going to tell you about? 

INTERVIEWER: Going into the situations? 

WILSON: And that-- that was when we saw the after-- aftermath of-- of-- of war and the-- the terrific needs. 

And you talk about people not appreciating what was going on, of course. In Dachau the Germans claimed they didn't know what was going on right in their own area. And when we went there it was after the horrors had stopped, but it wasn't so very long after the horrors had stopped. And here was a peaceful countryside, these well-kept buildings with a fence around them to be sure. 

And there was no nearby farm. There were some buildings off in the distance. And if they didn't want to know what was going on there, I could see how they could close their eyes to it. But horrible things-- horrible things were going on there. You know how it was done there, don't you? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. I was there this fall. 

WILSON: Mhm. The elevators business. 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

WILSON: No? 

INTERVIEWER: What elevators? What elevators business? 

WILSON: Why, they-- they gassed-- the way people were gassed. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, oh, I'm sorry. I thought you said elevators and I thought maybe there was something I didn't know. 

WILSON: They were crowded into these things, taken down one floor. By the time they got down to the bottom floor, they were dead. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I didn't see that. I don't know that. 

WILSON: I think-- I think they hush up some of these sort of thing now. 

And then they were-- their clothes were taken off of them and taken off and put in barns. There was a barn where there was supposed to be 3,000 pairs of shoes that had been taken off people who had been gassed. 

And when we came back on a plane in-- '48, was it-- we-- Harsch, who was a correspondent of the Christian Science Monitor-- 

MARIANNE: Joseph C Harsch. 

WILSON: Joseph C Harsch, very famous correspondent was on the same plane. And he told us of being there the day the American troops liberated Dachau and going in and seeing these piles of naked bodies outside around the buildings. And that's-- that was-- at least the gassing was a fairly merciful death for the people in Dachau. The-- the scientific atrocities, I think, were more at Auschwitz and some of the other concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Two things. One is these elevators. This is the first time I've heard about elevators. I-- I thought they were gassed in what seemed to be shower chambers. What is this elevator? 

WILSON: It was, just as you walk into any store, these enormous elevators. And they crowded the people into them, turned on the gas, sent the elevators down below. And the people finished their lives in those elevators. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this peculiar to Dachau? 

WILSON: I can't tell you about the others. I-- I-- I think that some of the horrors upon people-- the experimentation-- went on more in-- Auschwitz is the one I know where that was done. But it-- I might throw in here that I was criticized for having a young woman with me on the day we went there. And that isn't my point of view at all. I think that the younger generation has to know. 

INTERVIEWER: Marianne, what was it like for you? And why did you go? And how did your mother happen to take you on a trip of that nature in 1947? 

MARIANNE: I went-- my visit to Dachau was in '48. 

INTERVIEWER: '48. 

MARIANNE: I was in-- in '47 I was at Chambon while my mother-- both summers my mother was responsible for taking a representative group of congregational ministers from churches all across the country who were men, sensitive-- at that time, men sensitive-- to war relief concerns. 

These representative groups traveled into Western farther-- into Eastern Europe, I should say, farther in '47 than in '48, actually. And during mother's trip in '47 I went to Chambon with a group of Smith girls. My mother was responsible for that organization also, getting a friend of hers at Smith to recruit some girls at Smith to help in the reconstruction-- or the construction-- of some facilities at the school in Chambon. So I spent some time there. We also traveled a little bit in Holland and in France. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was Chambon selected? What was-- what was Chambon about? What-- was that town? 

MARIANNE: We knew it was a-- I don't know what my mother knew about it. At that time, I knew that it was a small-- the-- the major concentration of French protestantism, that it had been a community which had harbored refugees during the war. And we were more acquainted with Monsieur Their than with-- with Pastor Trocme. And actually we spent enough time just hacking away building a playing field that we didn't have much contact with the community of the Chambonnais or however they are referring to. 

I don't know what Mother knew about the community that I didn't at that time. 

WILSON: No-- 

MARIANNE: We knew that the school was intended to be a haven for young people of a pacifist-- that's not really so much a-- I guess a pacifist orientation. And it was an effort for reconciliation among young people of different races. They were very anxious to have a work camp that involved people from all parts of the world. It would give young people an opportunity to become reconciled to one another after this horror of the war. 

INTERVIEWER: The following summer you went to-- 

MARIANNE: The following summer I was with my mother and with a different group of ministers when we traveled into West Germany and were at Dachau. I've been unable to find the movie of that. I only found two slide of our-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who took movies? 

MARIANNE: One of the ministers who was with us. I don't remember which one on that trip. But I haven't come-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did they see at that time? Were they still people there? 

MARIANNE: No, there were no bodies there. It was all cleaned-up. It wasn't-- were not a lot of signs outside, goodness knows. I-- I remember the sense of the shower room more than I remember-- I'm not clear about the elevator part. 

There was also the-- the area outside of which we have a picture of where the pit where people had been buried-- was just covered over en masse, the pile where the body-- piles of bodies that were found when they liberated the camp were-- had been buried. That was a-- 

WILSON: We had a-- we had a driver on that trip that had been rescued by our relief group who just got on that, down to 65 pounds, a great strapping chap got down to 65 pounds the day the-- the American soldiers went into Dachau. And he could fill us in with some of the unpleasant details of what went on there. 

INTERVIEWER: Two questions come to mind. When you came back to this country did you have trouble-- either of you-- getting other people to believe what you had seen and therefore understood? 

WILSON: Well, you see, she-- Marianne spoke of taking groups in. As a matter of fact, they were very small groups, only six or seven people. But they went equipped with film. And they went back to churches where they were able to preach and tell what they had seen. 

And that way we spread the word I think probably more wisely-- widely and more accurately than-- than the media was able to do. I don't recall that-- that we ran into any reporters or any-- on any of those trips. We were very early in-- on the-- on the continent. 

And one-- one interesting thing was we were trying to get into Germany on the second trip. And our material didn't come through, our visas didn't come through. And we were on a plane. And the plane had been charted. Where would we go? We were in the air and where would we land? We couldn't go to Germany. 

Well, we went and landed in Warsaw. And we were the first group of European-- of Americans that-- that had landed that-- civilians that had landed in-- in Warsaw. And the American government had-- had the-- the berries to set up in the-- in the way of representatives there-- we came down in the-- in the airport and were put in this small room. And immediately-- 

MARIANNE: This was '47 

WILSON: --a solider-- a soldier appeared with his musket and patrolled up and down in front of the room where we were while somebody telephoned to these-- this little American government representative group. And somebody came dashing out to-- to rescue us. 

And we were taken to a hotel which-- there was-- there was nothing standing in Warsaw whole. The whole city was-- did you go to Warsaw [INAUDIBLE]? It was utterly laid low. A few buildings had-- that had-- had been skyscrapers, perhaps, were sort of gauntly standing up there in the air. But the whole thing was ruined. 

But the American government had-- was in the process of re-- of rebuilding one place where we spent the night. And it was only-- it was only partly done. We looked out the window on more-- more ruins. 

And we came out of that building the next day and looked across this great expanse where the Warsaw ghetto had been. Everything completely leveled there. Just-- I thought I had a picture of that, but I haven't found it yet. And the whole scene was just-- just desolation. 

We managed to be-- bed fed and-- through the agency of our government. But we didn't stay long. There was-- there was no point in our-- their having to take care of us. 

But then we did get in to Berlin a little later. And again, it was the same picture of-- of utter desolation. We have some-- some footage of ruined buildings, miles of ruined buildings. Berlin wasn't quite as bad as-- as Warsaw. 

And, strangely enough, Franz Schoenberner whom I mentioned, who had been rescued in this country, I-- I was able to run down where the remainder of his family were staying and exchange greetings with them-- greetings of a sort, because I didn't know any German. But somehow you-- you can communicate. 

And I knew that his niece and his sister had been in the hands of the Nazis further east in Europe and had been-- suffered in many ways and had gotten back in very bad shape somehow, were living along. And that was a rather tough visit to make. So there it was. 

INTERVIEWER: When you saw the remains of the Warsaw ghetto, what were your associations at the time? Do you remember? Did you know what had happened there? Did you-- 

WILSON: Yes, the news I think had been out. And I had been in touch with some Polish refugees in England. And England got I think more Poles than any other nationality-- no, not very many got out. That was-- I-- what have I missed? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, one-- 

MARIANNE: I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: --one thing I'd like to go back to in Dachau-- you saw the, you know, placid countryside and the fact that this place was removed from the little town. Nevertheless, it was there, a walled compound. Do you think that the population really could not have known anything about what was going inside-- on inside there? 

WILSON: Did you-- did you learn how many people had passed through Dachau? Is there any-- 

INTERVIEWER: I don't know how many thousands. I do know that at one time it held 50,000, supposedly. I don't know-- 

WILSON: Well, it's-- it's hard to see how they couldn't have known. There's constant movement of people in that neighborhood. How they couldn't have known-- I think that-- I think that they just shut their minds to it. How could they otherwise survive if they didn't just close their minds to-- to the horrors that were going on in their neighborhood? 

It's-- it's been on my mind the last couple days that there was 11,000 people crowded into that one embassy in Havana. I can see there have already been some gas babies. Imagine it though-- 11,000 people in one-- 50,000 people in Dachau? That would be conceivable. 

And how they got-- I don't imagine-- they didn't feed them much. They didn't-- there was no getting in of-- of nutritional or-- or clothes to them. They were stripped of what they had and starved till their turn came to go down in the gas chamber. So. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear that there were smells, screams? I mean, there must have been something that the native population would have been assaulted with just through the atmosphere. 

WILSON: We didn't meet any of the native population. We only talked with our relief workers who had come in after it was all over. 

INTERVIEWER: But in your opinion, having seen what you saw at the time that you saw it-- which was fairly fresh after things had-- after the-- the experience itself, the happening itself-- would you in your opinion think it would be possible for the surrounding population not to know that something very dismal was happening? 

WILSON: They certainly knew that something was happening. I don't know about smells. There was no place crowding up upon it. It was a wide space around it when we were there. I-- I don't know. I am very mistrustful, of course. 

I do know through Franz Schoenberner and many other refugees from Germany that the total population was in no way committed to this Nazi movement. There were many thousands who would have none of it but who didn't know how to get out from under it. Their lives were in danger often if they protested too much. 

And I suppose it's a natural human tendency to try to avoid getting involved in something you don't approve of. Very few leaders emerge who will fight against things sometimes. And I make no brief for them on-- on those moral grounds, to be sure. But it's the way people are. 

And so often when we visited the camps, they'd say, oh, we're going to be on your side next time, these-- those local one says we won't go along with those-- the-- that crowd the next time. We're going to be on your side the next time. 

INTERVIEWER: Marianne, what was your reaction to what you saw at Dachau? What did it leave you with? What-- what kind of interaction did you have with people in this country relating-- in relating those experiences? What did you think about your mother exposing you? 

MARIANNE: It was I think really a part of a continuum, Laurel And I don't-- I wasn't that mature that I was at the time seeing it this way. But I retrospectively think I-- both of us and-- or I derivatively from my mother's work had developed quite a build-up of emotion and sense of involvement, because I've discovered I tend to avoid pictures of camps and things like that because I know I've already seen them. 

And my mother started work on this business of-- this project of war relief and services for the congregational churches in September of 1940. And I was-- I've been looking through the records of that. And I could talk about that some point if you want. 

I found it fascinating-- I was looking at it-- at them this morning-- how early some church people were involved in the ref-- in this business of getting refugees sponsors in this country. And I suppose it's possible that the initial assumptions were that these were poli-- primarily political refugees. It was-- began to be a cumulative thing that correlated with what was in Mein Kampf that also the political refugees were either Jewish, or had Jewish forebears so many of them, or were married to Jews. 

And the context in which the refugees were helped and the context in which money was directed by this-- these church groups in this country was not in terms of any category of people. I think there was a belief in helping children. And a lot of the money went through the Friends service committee to buy powdered milk for the internment camps in France-- southern France-- if I read the-- the newsletters correctly. And the refugees were not defined as being one kind of person or another except that they were people who were at risk of losing their lives that were escaping from a totalitarian regime. 

And it comes out in conversations with mother about particular people who-- who-- whose names appear in the newsletter that, yes, one or the other of a couple was Jewish. Mostly not both Jewish-- many of the people who were saved through this Unitarian system were people who were both intellectuals worthwhile in particular to be saved-- from that strange way of looking at things-- but also people who were perhaps of mixed marriages or who had one grandparent or another. It was-- 

WILSON: We-- we had to face it that the intellectuals were most often Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: If I interpret you correctly, what you're saying is that there was a very slow recognition of the nefariousness of the Hitlerian scheme, that it was only when you put together the philosophy that he was espousing as-- as depicted in Mein Kampf with the fact that political prisoners were often considered politically-- political dissidents because of a-- of an accident of birth. Is that what you're saying, that it was a slow recognition of that-- 

MARIANNE: I think I'm not so much saying recognition as internalization. Because it's sort of unbelievable that one-- that anybody would set out to eliminate a race, exterminate. That was inconceivable at that time and never will be again. But the evidence just accumulated. 

And people coming to this country out of camps and talking about what it was like-- Franz was in one camp in France and Nora was in another. And they had both of-- his wife had stories to tell about those camps and also who else was in them, and in fact that-- that-- 99% were Jewish and what-- the fact that people who were then shipped from the internment camps to the Eastern-- Eastern Europe were never seen or heard of again. 

This was-- there are references to that in Mr. Haley's book, of course, that when Trocme and others went to the-- were in the internment camps that had they stayed, they would have actually been shipped east and disappeared. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in college. You went back. You spoke to your friends. What did they say when this-- this recognition, as you put it, that for the first time that you became aware that an entire race of people was-- was-- was designated for extermination? 

MARIANNE: When I was in college it was-- I went to Chambon between my junior and senior year. And to-- on the trip when we went to Germany was in-- after I graduated. And after that, I was in New York City and went to work for the World Council of Churches public information office, which I suppose had-- maybe there was something to that, because they were one of the instruments of-- of war relief. 

I don't-- it did not make me an advocate. It was something I-- that was part of my personal experience. But there was no environment with-- in which I would have been trying to persuade people of it other than to report my own experience. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you encounter people now who don't believe that it ever happened or could have happened or in some ways ascribe this to fiction? 

MARIANNE: No. I-- I don't. I do encounter-- and have recently encountered-- sort of a simple ignorance among some church people I have asked about since we-- I heard about this project. I've asked several in different denominations with whom I am acquainted whether they remember any involvement on the part of their pastors or-- depending on what generation they're in-- in helping to save refugees out of Europe. And most of them do not remember that anything specific was done by the churches. 

And perhaps part of the reason for that is that no labels were put on this effort other than the-- by-- certainly by the congregational war relief effort-- other than the label of saving lives. A film-- a film made by the US government of The Cummington Story, which I may have mentioned to you on the phone, refers to the fact that these refugees were Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish-- and they were, except that in any family there was usually one Jew. But this-- this was not something that was being advertised. It was-- we were-- from what my mother was promoting, the saving human life. 

So it's a-- in some respects it's like the problem of racial identification that we've gone through in the civil rights movement. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, I meant even disbelief that the atrocities, that the deprivation had occurred, not to any particular race or-- or-- or ethnic group of people, but the fact that the atrocities didn't happen. Have you run into that? 

MARIANNE: I don't know that kind of people, I guess, and I think I'm better off for that. I know they exist. I know they exist. 

WILSON: I-- I haven't run into that. 

INTERVIEWER: In the early days when you were-- 

WILSON: Well, I think people might have said that it was exaggerated, just as we'd say now about certain situations that they're exaggerated. But I didn't run into any disbelief. 

And certainly we had to know, people-- our public at large had to know that people were being eliminated, that a whole race was being-- an effort was being made to crush it out. I can't-- can't believe that. 

But Perhaps my situation is-- is very unusual. But I-- I-- I worked with people who understood that. And they were my associates and friends. And I can't speak for the public at large very much. 

MARIANNE: I found a-- a something I felt really happy about this morning. My mother has not remembered in the letter-- this newsletter was published every two months from 1941 until '40-- the end of '48. 

The latter half of that period approximately, money was being funneled-- among other things-- to Children For-- to Palestine, a committee which I did not remember, didn't know that such a committee existed. But something over $22,000 went in that direction to get children out of the continent of Europe to Palestine. And I really felt pleased that there was that kind of a-- of a listing, because to confirm my impressions. 

WILSON: Of course the-- the idea was to-- to-- to save the children if-- if possible and get rid of-- and could-- they could be trained into good Nazi citizens. And their parents were eliminated by children were saved, though under not very pleasant conditions often. They were herded into groups and taken care of after a fashion. 

So that-- that was a very strong movement, the Children to Palestine movement, when it got under way. And as I said, that was our theory always, to work through existing well-set-up channels rather than starting things of our own. 

INTERVIEWER: Your antennae are obviously always up for injustice, Mrs. Wilson. And your your-- your several references to Cambodia, to Liberia, to Cuba, et cetera, are indicators of the kind of concerns that you have. However, I must pose the question to you of whether you think that people can learn, behavior can be altered as a result of this kind of-- of knowledge of previous atrocities, or discriminations, or? 

WILSON: That has to depend on the individual to a great extent and the education to which the individual is subjected. So as you know, some people are pretty callous, others are pretty sensitive. And whether we learn a lesson, I don't know at this point-- I mean as a country, as a people. I just-- I just don't know. I sometimes have my doubts. I'm bound to be a little bit cynical after years of experience of all kinds under all conditions. 

Does that sound like too big a statement? But I-- I'm not sure that we have the right kind of-- of leadership. I'm not sure that we have the right kind of people. I'm not sure but what-- who are the voice of the media often. How-- how few things can-- can we pick up these days that present what you or I would call a thoroughly ethical, moral reaction to events that are going on? 

I don't think too highly of born again people. I-- that's a phrase that's going around a lot now. 

I think there's-- there's-- we have no great leaders as of the moment. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to ask you one last question unless there's something else you want to tell me. This is reaching back and for my historical knowledge, which is skimpy at best. But in 1947 and 1948 there were-- there was an appeal through the Anglo-American Committee, and then the Grady-Morrison Report, and so forth-- if you remember all of those various commissions that were established-- to save 100,000 displaced persons, as they were called at that time. And Truman was confronting Bevin about the 100,000-- let out the 100,000; let them go to Israel, or Palestine as it was then. 

Now you had-- you had personally seen the displaced persons and dealt with the displaced persons. Can you give us any insights as to the obstructionist behavior of some people here, and there, and whatnot. After all, we knew then-- everyone knew then-- about the camps, the atrocities, the extermination policy. Everyone knew. It was all out then. And yet there were these 100,000 whose fates and fortunes were left to grabs by the politics. I don't want to go onto a polemic myself. I want to know what you knew, what you thought, what you heard. 

WILSON: I don't seem to remember the 100,000. Wasn't that clear. 

INTERVIEWER: It was a figure that was bandied about of let-- of a-- of a-- of a sort of an accommodation between England and the United States about letting a certain number of people out in order to satisfy-- 

MARIANNE: That's just when you were there. That's just when-- I-- I'm-- 

WILSON: Do you remember? 

MARIANNE: I remember a lot of dispute about whether, and how many, and who was going to get them. And because we looked at them recently, I remember what we have a lot of footage of, which is pictures of those camps in Austria was it, Western Germany, where there were maps on the wall of South American countries so as to give the people waiting there some concept of where they were going on the face of the globe, you know. 

WILSON: Oh, this comes back, I think. 

MARIANNE: Yeah. I remember much more of that process and-- the-- the-- the tremendous impact of those camps. 

I do not associate the camps exclusively with Jews, though undoubtedly most of them were. But they were-- that's sort of a different phase from those refugees who came in from Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what I'm looking for is your personal reactions to the fact that here were people who had been ravaged by the war and by the-- the government of Germany and wherever-- the other Axis nations. Now they are languishing in a camp. You are seeing them. They don't know where they're going to go, how they're going to get there, who will take them. 

WILSON: This-- this recalls to me a little bit. They all wanted to come to the United States. But it was too difficult to come to the United States. So they were all going to Argentina, for example, which welcomed them, poor things. And how they-- how they made out I-- I-- I don't know. But it was acknowledged that it was very difficult to come to the United States. 

MARIANNE: Did one still have to have a sponsor, an individual sponsor? 

WILSON: And the sponsor had to-- had to agree to-- what was it-- five years, two years, three years, five years maintenance of whoever they might bring to this country. They had to be responsible for them. That was true of-- Franz Schoenberner 

MARIANNE: Oh, well that was-- you know that was earlier. 

WILSON: That was earlier, but-- 

MARIANNE: They never relaxed those rules? 

WILSON: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: What I'm really referring to is that it's hard for young people today to believe that in the face of what we knew after World War II that we still let these wrecks of human beings languish in situations which were very little better than the-- the intolerable situations they had been in for several years-- months-- afterwards. And your reaction to that? 

WILSON: Well, that was-- that was the law. And I-- some of the ones that I knew and-- I was sorry to see them going to Argentina, for instance. I thought how much more I would have liked to have them come here. I would have thought-- expected them to fit in here. But they said that's impossible because they were-- they were people without sponsors here. 

I-- I, for instance, couldn't-- couldn't sponsor a single individual of my own circumstances. Having a daughter to educate and working every day myself, I couldn't undertake to sponsor another individual for whatever number-- number of years it was. I think it was three, or five, or something or other. And I didn't have enough to share with-- with anybody. I-- I don't-- can't-- certainly can't defend that policy, except this fear of letting in the wrong people again. If they had a highly reputable sponsor and were provided for, the economic point of view for a number of years, it was safe to let them come in. But. 

MARIANNE: I remember-- my recollection is not so much in my head as in my emotional reactions that-- that the support and involvement in taking care of those people in the DP camps was sort of over against this hopeless situation that we couldn't get them into this country, that at least we-- clothes were sent to them and food was sent into those camps. And the YW and the YM were providing summer camp facilities in Germany for kids out of the DP camps, take them out for a week or so and-- you know-- feed them up, and give them some fun and games, and then them back into those old barracks. 

It was awful. But my-- my sense is that we were doing that because there was nothing else that-- that could be done politically-- nothing that could be done politically to bring them in-- in-- in large numbers. 

WILSON: I-- I want-- want to tell you-- this is an aside really, but it made a great impression on me. I mentioned the heifers being shipped over to provide milk for the children. Well, when we were in Warsaw, the person-- only person in charge of directing any relief that went in there was a man who happened to be Jewish. There were no other Protestants about. And we wanted to know what had happened to what we'd been able to get through. 

And so he got an old truck and put some planks in it for seats and we all got in his truck and went many miles further east across the Vistula to a camp that had been set up for children-- needy children-- by the funds that we'd been sent there-- had sent there. And we went into that camp. And here were these children who of course did not look well, but they were at least out in that country, fresh air and sunshine. 

And as we walked through the kitchen, they had got hold of some cooking utensils that were hanging on nails on the wall. And those were so thick with flies that you couldn't put your hand down any place. It was just-- they hadn't been able to make things sterile or clean them up for these poor kids that were out there. 

Then we were led out to a shack outside to see the heifer that had managed to get there. And here stood this poor patient beast simply thick with flies. So there you are. You learn-- learn-- 

INTERVIEWER: That even relief can go astray. 

WILSON: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Thank you very, very much for a very important experience for me. I think that you ought to have a copy of this tape some day for your children and your grandchildren. 

MARIANNE: Be nice to have it. 

INTERVIEWER: You're a remarkable woman, Mrs. Wilson, and I think it's a privilege to have known you. 

WILSON: Oh, don't say a word. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I feel that way. I feel-- my own mother happens to be a woman of your disposition and caliber. And she was one of the-- I was weaned on the same, I suppose, principles that Marianne obviously was of involvement. 

CREW: Something else [INAUDIBLE] 

