INTERVIEWER: It's like you're opening an old picture album, and-- 

EDITH: I start. 

INTERVIEWER: You come to the pages and flipping the pages, and there are brown faded pictures there-- photos there. 

EDITH: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: All right? 

EDITH: OK. I'm Edith Hallo, and I was born on the 28th-- of the 27th of May, 1928, in Leeuwarden, the Netherlands. I lived all my life in Leeuwarden, and all my memories are happy memories from that period. As a child, I used to go to the seashore with my family, and we would go to Zandvoort, which is on the sea in a kind of two and a half, three hours from my hometown. 

We always went with my mother's sister and her family and our family. We would split the whole summer up in a summer house, and the two families would get together for the summer. My father would come on weekends, and if he took his vacation, he and my uncle would come then during this part of the summer. 

I remember very vividly how we always played. I had my nephew, who is exactly the same age as I was, and how he and I were both along the sea shore in a wooden wagon. And the two of us would sit next to each other because that's the way our childhood started, playing in the sand. We did this for-- 

INTERVIEWER: What do you see? What's the picture? 

EDITH: The picture is a beautiful boulevard with sand and dunes and a gorgeous ocean. Unfortunately, Holland has lots of rain, so it wasn't a secure sea shore, secure sunshine, but when it was there, it was gorgeous. And this, we did for 10 years until the war came. 

INTERVIEWER: And lor-- Leeuwarden? 

EDITH: Is in the very northern part of Holland. 

INTERVIEWER: What's it like? 

EDITH: It's in Friesland. It's-- as you know, Holland is exceedingly flat, especially in the northern part, and it is the milk country, dairy country. Lots of flatland, farms, cows, beautiful, and it has a very picturesque kind of feeling when you drive through it. It's kind of serene, actually. 

And the memories are very fond memories that I have because that's where I lived. My grandparents lived in the same town as-- my mother's parents lived in the same town as we did, and so I had a very close relationship with my grandparents. My grandfather died when I was eight at the age of 64, and then my grandmother stayed in the same house for quite a few years. And then she became ill, and that was the beginning, before the war, that the rumbling started that Hitler was coming in '39 and so on. And then she moved later away. 

But let me tell you a little more about my childhood. Maybe that gives you a background. We were a very close knit family. I had a sister. Her name was Rene, and-- well, we-- she was also in the same hometown, of course, and we went to high school. She finished in gymnasium before the war, and I only finished one year of high school before the war started. 

INTERVIEWER: She was how much older? 

EDITH: She was almost four years older than I was. So we went every summer with our parents on vacation. One summer, my sister and I and my father went to Belgium, to Luxembourg. We took a whole trip through the beautiful countryside and then ended up in Conoco, which is also seashore in Holland, and that's where we spend the summer. That was in 1938, and just before the 28th of August, my mother called us. 

INTERVIEWER: This was -- before the-- what is the town like? 

EDITH: The town I lived in? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

EDITH: An interesting town. It is-- it was the capital of Friesland in Holland. That is a small-- 

INTERVIEWER: What pictures do you remember? 

EDITH: Pictures of very beautiful old buildings, canals, lots of canals, beautiful homes, green, flowers. This time of year, everything would be full of beautiful tulips and daffodils and hyacinths and-- very beautiful kind of area. Some fairly small town-ish idea. 

INTERVIEWER: How big? 

EDITH: I don't know. Maybe 100,000, 120,000. 

INTERVIEWER: And how-- what the Jewish population? 

EDITH: The Jewish population was fairly large at that time. I don't know the figures. I mean, very few were left. My father owned a factory, and I remember, for example, when I went to high school in Holland, you always bicycle, of course. You never get driven by car or anything. 

And the only thing I remember, that when the rainy-- very rainy days, my father would send one of his men and say, you can pick up Edith from high school. It is such bad weather. She doesn't have to take the bike. So that was a very luxurious kind of thing, that I was picked up by car in the rain and could be driven home, and I wasn't soaking wet always when I would come from the high school. 

INTERVIEWER: You otherwise had to bicycle on principle? 

EDITH: Always. I bicycled hours. I mean, that was-- I mean, we lived fairly far from the high school, but that must be after the war, actually, the high school. I mean, my-- before the war, of course, we bicycled or we walked. We walked endlessly to our elementary school that were-- long distance, but we walked. 

INTERVIEWER: How long? How far? 

EDITH: Oh, about a mile and a half. And our schools-- days were much longer, of course. They started a quarter of 9:00 to a quarter of 12:00, and then you went home for lunch. And you came back at a quarter of 2:00 to a quarter of 4:00. You either had Wednesday morning school or Wednesday afternoon, the whole day, or you had Saturday morning school. There was no such things as a long weekend. It didn't exist. 

INTERVIEWER: So a day of walking paths of six miles. 

EDITH: Yeah, that was-- was nothing. It was perfectly healthy. We were all very healthy people. We never had colds. I mean, it was a very different thing. I was a very sporty person. I used to play tennis. I was a very ardent swimmer, and ice skating, of course, on the canals. That was one of my favorite sports. 

INTERVIEWER: As a child? 

EDITH: As a child. I always-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember ice skating? 

EDITH: Oh, very vividly. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe a scene? 

EDITH: Beautiful. Little-- how do you call these-- little tents where you could have hot chocolate, for example, where you could eat something. You went with groups of people ice skating over the canal. 

My father was a very, very good ice skater, long distance ice skater on these long runners. Norin, you called them. And one winter, I remembered it was so cold that all the 11 lakes had frozen over, and father and I took a trip together ice skating over these 11 canals, an all day trip. 

And it used to start at 5 o'clock in the morning. It was the-- they called it the 11 Cities Tour, and it was a national-- international thing. It was enormous because how long does it usually freeze in Holland? Very short, so it has to be a very strong, intensive freezing period. And when you had the 11 Cities Tour, that was the big event, and so everybody would get up then at 5 o'clock in the morning and skate until 4 o'clock in the afternoon, until you had the finish line. So one year, father and I did part of that trip together, and it was fantastic. 

And I did a lot of skating with friends. I mean, it was-- we belonged to a skating rink in our neighborhood, and so when-- when it was cold, you would get free from school to go skating. And the same was, in the summer, when it was 70 degrees, it was hot, so you get the summer afternoon off to play tennis. So when I was 11, I used to belong to a tennis club. We had a class-- a group of 12 kids, and we had a trainer, a man from England who would train us and teach us how to play tennis. 

And so there was another group. We had a little group of 11 and 12-year-olds just before we went to high school, and then later on one year that I was still in high school, we had a group, and it was lovely. I can only say that I had the most beautiful childhood. 

INTERVIEWER: You lived in what, an apartment, a house? 

EDITH: No, no, always in a home. 

INTERVIEWER: In a house? What was the house like? 

EDITH: Well, my first house, that was before the war, we lived in a house that was-- the factory was next door. It was in a very huge house, but my father's factory was next door. 

INTERVIEWER: Factory of what-- producing what? 

EDITH: Tires, and he-- so we lived next door. And it was a very huge house. It-- it was about 12 rooms , ten, twelve rooms, all big, and it was very, very nice. 

I grew up with several, of course, household help. It was a normal thing in those days, and I only remember two, what they called maids, because my mother kept them for 10, 12 years until they married, and then we would change. So we still used to have contact with them after they married and brought their children, and so on and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: Any particular person, out, worked for you that you remember? 

EDITH: Oh, yeah, I remembered them all. Yanka, [INAUDIBLE], the real typical Dutch names. And one was so good, that she helped my father go into hiding at one point. But it was, you know, in the '40s, when the war started. But-- so in 19-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was a day like? For you? 

EDITH: For me? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

EDITH: Well, 7 o'clock-- get up, get dressed, go have lunch-- breakfast. Go to school-- walk to school. Stay in school for the day. Come back for lunch. Play in the afternoon and go swimming or have piano lessons or whatever my activities were that particular period. We would-- you know, like life is here, basically. Very structured. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any flashes of being in the classroom there in elementary school, one in particular? 

EDITH: Yes, I can remember one in sixth grade. My sister-- my mother went to the same school that Renee, my sister, and I went. When my mother went, it was strictly a private girls school. When Renee and I went, it was already coeducational. 

And I remember, when I was in the sixth grade, I happened to have the principal. She was the sixth grade teacher. She was an incredible, horrible woman, and we had singing lessons. 

And she would say, I don't-- Edith, I don't want to hear you sing. You sing just as horrible as your sister did. Get into the corner. Things like that. So I would stay in the corner, and you know, stand there until singing hour was over, and then I was allowed to go back into the classroom. 

But things like that, and it was very nice. I finished seven years of elementary school. My sister did only six because she went to the gymnasium, and I went seven because I went to the-- what do you call it-- economic high school. It was a different high school. 

INTERVIEWER: Social life of your parents? Meet other people? Gathering? 

EDITH: Very much so. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you-- what flashes? What-- 

EDITH: Very many family groups. We always had family affairs with other families, doing things together. 

INTERVIEWER: Like one particular that you-- can you describe one? 

EDITH: Not holidays. I mean, that was not-- not the strength in that community at all. While my grandparents were living, yes, but otherwise no. My mother and father did observe Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, of course, but I mean, there was not going into temples or-- I mean, it was all-- that was already in the war. It was all very strange at that time. 

Lots of social life, yeah, but different-- more as a family social life. You would go for parties, after dinner parties. Dinner parties were barely given. You didn't do that. My mother entertained a lot for my father professionally, and she was excep-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have the-- one such memory of a social gathering with a circle of friends or family? 

EDITH: Oh, yeah, my-- well, that is much further. That's my sister's engagement. That was much later. 

INTERVIEWER: Before-- 

EDITH: You mean earlier in life. 

INTERVIEWER: Before the war. 

EDITH: No, not really that much before the war. That-- I don't remember that as much. I do remember that my parents went out a lot. 

I went to my grandparents to sleep. Even though we had a living-in maid, we always had to sleep with my grandparents because of my mother found it more relaxing. And they lived very close. It was great fun. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they like, your grandparents? 

EDITH: Very interesting. My grandmother was called Queen Elizabeth. The great-- great Queen Mary, sorry. Not mar-- the mother of Queen Elizabeth. Queen Mary. 

She was a very, what do you call it-- beautiful woman. OK. Call it statuesque? She was very family oriented. 

She was not a giving person to strangers. It was a very strange way. She-- she was a very interesting woman, but very much giving to her family. Very capsulated, actually, and she was very adventurous. She would take us on trips, boating trips, rowing trips. 

We always, in the summer, would go outside where there was a-- a swimming pool out. you had to go about seven, eight miles out of my hometown. And my grandmother would take us because that-- that was a thing she liked. And so I have a very little memory of that because I was basically too small when she died, when she got sick. So all these little things, you know, I still remember. And my sister and I did a lot of things together-- swimming, tennis-- 

INTERVIEWER: She was a statuesque woman? What else? What was she like? 

EDITH: She was a really-- she was not an intellectual or anything like that. I mean, in those years, I think it was all very different. She read a lot, and she belonged to ladies groups, and so on. But it was a different-- in my hometown, it wasn't-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember talking to her about certain things? 

EDITH: No. 

INTERVIEWER: What did she say? 

EDITH: No, not really. No. 

INTERVIEWER: Your grandfather? 

EDITH: No, he was a very quiet-- and he died when I was eight, so I don't remember anything about him. I only remember that he was very young, that he would sit in the chair and stare. He was-- had a very-- his mental capacities-- he was arterial-- we called arteriosclerosis. He had it at a very early age, and at the age of 64, he died. 

So I don't really remember him at all. I mean, I remember him, but not really as an active participant, not at all. So-- and my father's grandparents lived actually quite far for Dutch standards, and I would see them once or twice a year for birthdays and things like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Any such birthday that you remember, a celebration that you could describe? 

EDITH: No, because we didn't-- it was all very strange. We never got these-- the family togetherness like you have here. That, we didn't really have, big birthdays, and at that time, there were no big birthdays, which were-- everybody was fairly young. So it was not that kind of, you know your 60s or your 70s. 

That didn't exist because nobody had reached that age group yet, so we didn't have that at all. I don't remember anything of that. It's completely blank in my-- my thought process. 

INTERVIEWER: A separation from other sort? Anniversary? 

EDITH: Don't forget-- the war started already when I was 11. I mean, it-- it was built up. First, we had the-- what do you call it-- the mobilization. 

INTERVIEWER: So yeah, you were in 1938? 

EDITH: That was in 1938. 

MALE SPEAKER: Sir? I need to do some adjustment for the microphone. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

EDITH: OK. [INAUDIBLE] down. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- are you-- 

MALE SPEAKER: We're rolling again. 

EDITH: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you begin with that particular vacation, in 38', how it started? 

EDITH: OK. In 1938, my mother, for some reason that I still don't know, and it's not very important, did not go with us on vacation. And father and Rene and I went by car to the southern part of Luxembourg and stayed there for a few days and traveled all the way through Luxembourg and then went back to Belgium, [INAUDIBLE] and to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember scenes from that-- 

EDITH: Beautiful mountains, gorgeous trees, gorgeous, absolutely magnificent, but we all-- always like the seashore. So we felt we had to see the mountains, but after we had done that, we wanted to go back to the seashore. And so were in [INAUDIBLE], which is a place in the coast in Belgium, and it was almost the 28th of August. It happened to be my mother's birthday also, and I think it was 27th when she called and said, I think it's time that you go home. Mother said, I can't say much, but you better come home right away. 

So we came home right away, and the reason, my mother had found out Rene, my sister, was dating a young man who was drafted in the army and on a very high level as a lieutenant. And he called my mother and said, I think it's a good idea that you get Rene and father and Edith back because we're going to have mobilization. So that's the way we found out, one day before, that things were rumbling. 

So we came back in '38, back to Holland, and indeed, the mobilization started. It was in '38, and then of course, all the invasion of Poland, and everything started, Czechoslovakia, Slovakia. And nothing really happened with us we went to school normally, and then in 1940-- 

INTERVIEWER: Now, the Dutch are mobilized? 

EDITH: Mm-hmm, very strongly. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it your army at the moment-- at that time? 

EDITH: It was our army-- our Dutch army had to mobilize, yes. All the Dutch had to mobilize, yes indeed. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: But-- 

EDITH: They-- they were all afraid of invasion. I mean, Germany was rumbling already so much, so they were preparing themselves. 

INTERVIEWER: Is it--, as Jews there, did you very-- feel very much that this was-- 

EDITH: No. I think one thing I should really set straight very much, I was never felt that I was a Jew in Holland until the war came. 

INTERVIEWER: So at that time, it was our army. 

EDITH: That had nothing to do with the army. It was completely the army, and it nothing to do with the Jews or Germany or anything. It was really-- living in Holland was not that you had any anti-Semitism. I'm sure it was maybe a little bit occasionally, but it was not a part of society. 

Many of the people didn't know who was Jewish or who was not Jewish. That did not manifest itself until we started wearing the David star. And then people said, oh, you were Jewish? You're wearing a star? 

Never heard about you. Never thought of it. My sister, who looked very un-Jewish, People were absolutely gassed. It was not a part of our culture. 

I mean, many things that you have heard over and over again, I'm sure, from all the people who have given their talk does not apply to the Dutch Jew. The Dutch Jew was a very different person. Our lifestyle was different. 

We were completely-- our-- we were assimilated into the culture. I mean, I never thought that I was Jewish. I was Dutch. 

INTERVIEWER: And your country was at war. 

EDITH: Not still. 

INTERVIEWER: Not yet, but-- 

EDITH: Not-- not-- not yet. Then in-- due to the fact, so I went from-- I had finished grammar school, so I went to high school for one year to a women's-- a girl's high school. It was especially same for girls. 

INTERVIEWER: Again, I want to sa-- at that time, was there any sense that there was particular danger for Jews before the world broke out? 

EDITH: , Yes I was going to come to that. Right. ' 

INTERVIEWER: '38? 

EDITH: '38. And particularly my fam-- my family was very aware of it because my father had several cousins in Germany who would come periodically, visit us, and would say, Jacques, I think it's time for you and your family to disappear. Hitler will come to Holland, too, and my father would say, ugh, you're crazy. It won't happen here. 

And that was-- you know, that built up and built up. My father's cousin went to South America, and he would come back, and he said, why don't you go with me to South America? And my father said, no, I won't do that. 

So all of a sudden, it became quite apparent that there was going to be trouble, and my parents decided, yes, they were going to think of going to America, and then it was too late because one could not get a visa anymore. It was just before the war, and visas weren't handed out anymore. That was it. So due to the fact that we knew that there was a lot of, you know, agitation, that something could happen, we were aware, and we had kind of some-- my parents were aware, but had made no really decisions to leave. 

INTERVIEWER: As a child, a child of 10 or 11, how much did you know of what was going on in Germany? 

EDITH: Lots. 

INTERVIEWER: What you-- can you remember what you knew? 

EDITH: Sure, I remember that Crystal Night, and I remember all these things that people had to leave Germany. And we were-- had many people who were leaving Germany to come to Holland, young people-- 

INTERVIEWER: Particular incident? 

EDITH: Particular incidents, I don't have. I don't-- I mean, I remember. I mean, it was not-- we were not sheltered because, in the first place, my mother was always very vehement we read the newspaper for education and especially the foreign section, that we know what was going on in for-- in-- in the other countries. So we were aware. We-- we talked at the dinner table. There was-- you know, what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember an article you read or a discussion you had, what was said? 

EDITH: No, I don't remember, but I remember reading that there was a lot of, you know, question, what was going on, and nobody really was prepared. Everybody's-- it won't happen to Holland. It's happening in Germany, but it won't happen here. 

INTERVIEWER: What is it? Even if you allow yourself to imagine, what is it? 

EDITH: It-- that German-- that if Hitler comes into-- takes over the Netherlands, and if he crosses the border and takes care of the Jews the way he started taking care of the Jews in Germany. It won't happen here. 

INTERVIEWER: How did he-- to a girl of 10 or 11, what did he do to the Jews in Germany? What did she think? 

EDITH: That's a good question. What did she think? Well, their lives were-- you know, your lifestyle was hampered. You were inhibited in your movement. 

INTERVIEWER: What's that, yes. 

EDITH: And you couldn't go to the-- the theater. You couldn't go to whatever. And at-- in the next year, it all happened to us. I mean, I was still in high school when it all happened. Then on 10th of May, 1940, we woke up at 7 o'clock or 6 o'clock-- 

INTERVIEWER: Anything between '38 and '40, when you? 

EDITH: Well, no. There was-- I mean, one-- one lived from day to day and wondering, and I guess, at that time, I wasn't that aware, until one morning we woke up, that really the airplanes were zooming over our house, and the invasion had taken place. That was at 7 o'clock, and my mother had gotten several calls from her family that, indeed, this has happened. Germany had invaded the Netherlands at-- early in the morning. So my father and my mother got us together, Renee and me, and we stepped into the car. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the sounds? 

EDITH: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- 

EDITH: [IMITATING A PLANE ENGINE] Hours, droning over your head. Oh, yes, it was rather apparent. 

INTERVIEWER: Only the planes? Not the explosions? 

EDITH: No, because I wasn't living in that area. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

EDITH: Father decided to take us to the west coast to [INAUDIBLE], which is a harbor, and to see if we could not get to England. 

INTERVIEWER: When you left home, what did the streets look like? 

EDITH: The street looks-- at that point, just everybody was agitated, and we got out on the highway, and we ended up in a military [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] What do you call it? You know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Convoy. 

EDITH: Yeah, convoy, right. And we went with the convoy to the ocean we-- because we had to get over the dike, the famous Afsluitdijk Dike, which kept the north and the west, you know, connected. And we were stuck in that convoy, and then the airplanes were starting to anti-aircraft. So we had to jump out of the car every time, lie flat in a field, to not to be hit by the anti-aircraft, or by the bombs, whatever they're going to drop on us. So-- that took us hours and hours to get through the convoy to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the military convoy, the bombardment? What pictures flash through your mind? 

EDITH: Tanks, tanks, tanks, soldiers in green-- you know, whatever, attire, uniform. And we were stuck into one little car with the four pintos in it, stuck in the middle-- military convoy. And every time they were shooting, we had to go out of the car and lie on the grass. So it took for hours. Finally, we entered the highway again, and then we got to the coast. And at this particular place, there were thousands and thousands of people trying to get a boat to England. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe the town, the-- 

EDITH: There is no town. It was-- was an open area, and the boats were, you know, right there. So what everybody tried to do is bribe the fishermen to bring you across the channel, and it happened that many of our friends did get across, and my father was one of the last ones to get a fisherman. And it was all settled with lots of money and so on and so forth, and all of a sudden, he said, I won't do it. 

They just put mines in the channel. The Germans have just laid mines, and I will not take a chance. I won't bring you. And that was our luck. We could not get to England, so we had to go back-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was that true, by the way? 

EDITH: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: That they mined-- 

EDITH: Yes, that was true, but I mean, you know, maybe one more boat would have been all right. I don't know. So we went back to Amsterdam, and my sister-- my mother's sister lived with her husband and son. We stayed overnight there, and then of course, the military were all over Amsterdam. I mean, the Germans were-- and Holland was invaded. It was finished. It was in four days. That was it. So we had to go back home. Back, now, the other route, with the German convoys marching into Holland, back to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the German columns and what you're thinking, or as a girl, was what you felt seeing them? 

EDITH: I don't know. I just saw tanks, uniforms. What was it going to mean? What was it mea-- what-- the meaning to us, it was at that time, incomprehensible. Nobody knew. 

We knew that we were occupied territory, and we had the most horror of horror Seyss-Inquart, who was then in charge of Holland, who was a very-- what do you call it-- strong anti-Semite, and he was going to make Holland miserable, which he did indeed. But it was, you know, step by step he did that. So this was the 14th of May. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, being-- seeing a German-- German tank, German soldiers-- it was a different experience from the previous Dutch-- 

EDITH: It was frightening. It was awfully frightening because you didn't know what was going to happen to you. So one lived with an enormous fear from that moment on. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, in the convoy, do you remember comments, words exchange with soldiers? 

EDITH: No, no, no, nothing. I mean, we just were lucky that we-- you know, everything was so new. It was one day. Nobody had acclimatized yet to the new image what Holland was going to be. 

And what happened was that when we came back, of course, our whole life changed overnight because, immediately, they started putting restraints on people. And of course, the ones who were putting restraints on where the Jews. And first thing started that we had to hand in our radios. 

INTERVIEWER: How did this command come, in what way? 

EDITH: Though the town-- whoever was in charge the town of Leeuwarden. You had-- every town had a commander, and he was-- got orders from either it was Goering or it was from Seyss-Inquart, whatever their sequence was. 

INTERVIEWER: In what way did you-- were you-- 

EDITH: The newspaper. 

INTERVIEWER: Newspaper. 

EDITH: Newspaper. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember such an article? 

EDITH: Oh, yes, of course. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] Jews are not allowed to go to the movies. Jews are not allowed to go to school. Jews are not allowed to do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Headlines in newspapers? 

EDITH: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you say them in Dutch? 

EDITH: Yeah. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] I mean, all these things had to be said, so the first thing what happens-- 

INTERVIEWER: As a girl of 11, what did you feel reading those headlines? 

EDITH: A threat. An incredible threat. What was going to happen to us? How were we going to do this all? But due to our incredibly strong parents, I think we all survived. My father and mother had an enormous head on their shoulder and were thinking, what were we going to do with our lives. So I'll tell you what the sequence was. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were frightened reading those headlines? 

EDITH: Yeah, because it was a threat to our lives. We were-- were hampered. We couldn't do anything. We couldn't go-- in the afternoon, it started first that they took our bicycles away, so we couldn't walk. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they take-- you remember your bicycle being taken? 

EDITH: Sure, I had to bring my bicycle to the big town-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that? 

EDITH: Everybody took their bike-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, your bike. Your bike. 

EDITH: My bike? My bike was taken out of the garage. 

INTERVIEWER: By? 

EDITH: By me and my mother and my father, and the four of us took our bikes down to the-- wherever it was. Town hall maybe. I don't-- That I don't know-- don't remember where the central part was. Then you had to have in all your radios. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm-- how about you? Do you remember your own? 

EDITH: No, it wasn't such a trauma. I mean, I was not alone. It was everybody, so it was not me in isolation. 

INTERVIEWER: No, but what was your memory of it? 

EDITH: Not really. That, I don't-- that-- these things, I-- I don't really remember. What I do remember very strongly is that we had to barricade the doors, but I'll come to that. 

I remember that we had to wear a David star. It was a very traumatic thing because everybody's said "jood", you know, said on it. Every afternoon, we were-- we were not allowed to do marketing anymore. The only way you were allowed to go to the grocery store or to the bakery or whatever, to the butcher, was between 3:00 and 5:00 in the afternoon. And it happened that the Germans made sure that there was no food in left unless you had a very nice grocery store owner or a butcher or anything. 

And because my parents were so well known, when my sister and I would come, he would say, I have your package ready for you, and he would hand it to us. So we always had something. But it was very, very unpleasant to go from 3:00 to 5:00 to the store, and you could only walk with all your heavy groceries. 

And we lived miles out, so that was really not very pleasant. We were not allowed to take a cab or a car because cars were also taken. You were-- you were not allowed to do anything anymore. 

Then they decided we were not allowed to be on the street anymore after 8 o'clock. There was a curfew, so everybody after 8 o'clock had to be inside. You were not allowed to have household help anymore, so our household help came illegally. The woman was so devoted to my parents, she would come and visit, quote, unquote. But all that stopped fairly soon. 

Then it happened that my father was not allowed to be in the factory anymore, and because we were living so close to the factory, he did something rather unique. He pretended that he was having another kind of business, repairing bicycle tires, and it was in the back of our house. I'll never forget it. And on our back porch, he had made an enormous hole, kind of a cellar. And of course, there was no food anymore because, you know, we had no food. 

But because my father was so well known by everybody, and also all the farmers and everybody, periodically, people would bring food, grain, for us and put it in that hole, that we had-- my mother could bake bread and make things. So we were-- we were never hungry, never. That was completely taken care of. That was in 1940, '41 when things started. Then it started in the September-- 

INTERVIEWER: Any days or evenings that the family was together that you remember talking about what was happening, things that you said to each other? Can you recall the event? 

EDITH: Sure. My father and mother decided-- at that time, Poland was already becoming an issue because people were sent to work camps and then going from the work camp Westerbork, which was the famous camp in Holland. They went to Poland, and in order to pretend that we were also going to Poland, my parents had made a room ready, which is called the Polish room. It's all medication for diarrhea and for influenza and God knows what, with warm clothes because it was going to be cold. We were allowed to take clothes, of course. 

My mother and father invested in down, in blankets. I mean, they told you, you could bring everything with you, which was, of course, an utter lie. But in order to protect yourself, that you knew that if the call came, we pretended that we were getting ready to go to Poland because that was one of the decrees that you had to get ready to go to Poland. But I'll come to that in a minute. 

What happened was, in 1940 and '41, when they decided we could not go back to school anymore, we were not allowed to go to high school. In my hometown, there were about 44-- 5 young people my age. Well, not only 45. Maybe a little more. 

We established our own high school. It was a Jewish teachers who are high school teachers, who were not allowed to teach, of course, anymore in high school, either. We formed our own high school, and I was going into second grade, sophomore year in high school. 

Renee, my sister, had finished her gymnasium and became our English teacher. She was excellent in English, and she became our [INAUDIBLE] because she couldn't go to the university, of course. She was not allowed. She was going to be a law student. She was tutored temporarily by a law-- a lawyer to have something to do also. 

So we all went to this high school from 1941 September to 1942. A few people had to disappear already. It became more and more complex, but anyway. I lasted until September 1942, just before second-- the third year started that I was going to high school. And I remember-- 

INTERVIEWER: What is it, yes, a class like? What-- 

EDITH: A class was-- we were in a house. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the-- 

EDITH: I remember vividly what the house was like. The house was a beautiful house on a canal. The first floor were rooms like a living room, a dining room, and a kitchen, and each classroom had something. One was a chemistry room, and the other one was a French and German and whatever, and this is where we all got together as young people, and that was our social life because there was no social life. And I still have a book. 

I don't think I have ever shown you the Memar book, have I? Next time you come, I'll show you the book because it is a wonderful history of the Jews in Holland, and I'm in one of the pictures as the high school. I mean, I have that picture, and maybe you want it for the archives even. So in 1941-- 

INTERVIEWER: What is a-- can-- what is a day or a class in school-- in that school-- 

EDITH: It was very fragmented because half the time, the teachers came from the surrounding towns as well because we didn't have so many Jewish teachers, so we needed to get them from other towns. Due to the system in the first place, that traveling was very dangerous for the Jewish person. A teacher-- half the time they couldn't come to town, so we had no class. I mean, it was basically getting together and to pretend that we had class, but who-- who was intellectually able to go to school was-- when the whole thing was falling apart? Every day there was another [INAUDIBLE], another friend was picked up, another thing had happened, so it was-- it kept us together. 

INTERVIEWER: A particular day where you were-- the girls are together, talked about certain things, did something together. Does the memory come? 

EDITH: No. No, it was-- there was no spirit like that getting together in that sense. I mean, one went to school. One talked about whose father was picked up that night before or who was still, you know, here, what has happened to the community. It was a-- it was a communal kind of thing just to pass time, but really-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the passing-- 

EDITH: We didn't do anything. We just read, or we-- we talked, or we had some mass, and occasionally, we had a test. But it was a real farce. I mean, I looked upon that year completely as a farce because there was nobody who really could study. The professors were scared for their-- for their skins. 

I mean, were they going to have a [INAUDIBLE] this morning? Did the Germans come by and scoop us all up? It was a very trying time. The sirens would zoom past by the canal, and you would say, oh, god, what are they up to now? You know, who is now being picked up? 

And this is the way it went, and it was really a very trying period. But in that period, it happened, that was in 1941, that the underground became quite, you know, workable. And what happened was that one of the underground people came to my father and said I'm-- I belong to the underground, and I would like to help you. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see it, or that's-- 

EDITH: I know the man. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe his entering the house? What it-- 

EDITH: He just rang the doorbell, and-- but he was an old friend of my father's, had worked with him and said, I know how the situation is. If you want to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was it night, day? 

EDITH: Usually at night. If you want me to, I can maybe help you to get to Switzerland. I'm part of the underground, and I can help you. So my parents said, please, if you can get us to Switzerland, by all means, do so. We'll-- whatever we have to do. 

Well, the first thing, what we had to do was, of course, get false passports. That was number one, and we pretended all the time that we were getting ready for Germany-- for Poland, you know, the whole sequences. We were, well, waiting. We were biding our time when our day fell. 

And it happened one Saturday morning, I had gone to [INAUDIBLE] with my grandmother, with her still alive, and it happened that-- it was an orthodox show, so I had to sit upstairs and the men sit downstairs, and all of a sudden, the Germans came in. Zoom, picked all the men up, 10 men, and had done the same thing in the community. Had picked up 10 men that Shabbat morning, and when I came home, my mother was all agitated because all my father's friend had been picked up except my father. Why they didn't pick my father? Our good fortune. 

Anyway, so that started the period of complete traumatization, basically. Every hour, you could have another [INAUDIBLE]. You never knew when they were coming. It was day. It was night. 

Every night, we barricaded our door. Father barricaded our door with huge beams, that in case they would come in, they couldn't come-- you know, zoom up the stairs right away. They had to first get rid of that barricade, and my father had time to then escape. 

But coming back to the underground, this was in the beginning of 1942 that this whole underground syndrome started, and people were leaving already. Many people were sent already to Poland, to Westerbork. It was beginning. The transport was starting to go out of Holland already. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know-- were there rumors about what was happening? 

EDITH: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember-- 

EDITH: I remember that people went to Westerbork and were picked up. 

INTERVIEWER: But the rumors-- 

EDITH: Yeah, rumored, but I mean, none of us knew anything because nobody had any communication with these people anymore. Once we knew that people were sent to Westerbork, we knew the next step was Bergen-Belsen, Auschwitz, whatever. I mean, there was no way of return. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you imagine was happening there? Again, you're back in 1942. 

EDITH: We didn't know yet. It was all too soon. Nobody-- arbeit kamp you know, work camp. That was what the name of the game was. You had to work-- or labor camp, so OK, we-- you know, it was terrible, but we didn't know about the gas chambers at that time, you know. 

So then in 1942, we were going to get ready for the underground, and we were-- people-- the one-- two links, two-- two men who were really the underground constantly came to my parents to plan how it was going to be done and what was going to be done and how we were going to be picked up, and so on and so forth. And at one point, it happened that my mother said to one of the men-- the men were Bob and Bill, were their names. I mean, that was their-- Bob came one night and said to my mother, well, we're getting closer now. Pretty soon, we can take you to Switzerland. 

So my mother said do me a favor. I have one sister and one brother in Amsterdam. Why don't you go and tell them what we are going to do and maybe they will go with us, and you can help them? 

Well, it happened that he miscalculated. These two men, Bob and Bill, were the wrong group. They were the Nazis, but they played the game. Our friend was OK, but these two men were Nazis, SS, spies. 

And he told my aunt in Amsterdam that he had just brought my mother and her family to Switzerland, and here were the pictures, and was this his sister, and-- you know, because he had our passport, pictures, of course, for the passport. He said, you know, these are your-- this is your sister and her husband and her children. I just brought them to Switzerland. 

Now, there happened to be a cousin of my mother who was not married to a Jew who happened to come the next day to Leeuwarden and to say, I spoke to Louisa last night, who said that you had left for Switzerland. And then we knew that there was something wrong, that things were not completely in order. And very quickly after that, the man came the day before we were supposed to leave for Switzerland. My mother never let on, of course, that she knew this, but we knew that we were in trouble. 

He came and said to my father, why didn't you give me your money? And if you have some jewelry from your wife, why don't you give that to me now? And then it's safe when you go to Switzerland, you know. You have the money there and the jewelry and so on. 

My father said, Bob, if I leave this house tomorrow or tonight or whenever, I'm not [INAUDIBLE] anymore. I'm the man who's on this new passport, whatever his name was, and I'm a free man. I'm not a Jew anymore. So I can go and take my own money and my own watch and jewelry of my wife in my own pocket. 

Well, he said, you're-- I guess you are right, and that tipped my father off and said, now, there's something wrong. And he said, now, we better escape. Well, they were one minute smarter than we were. 

On Rosh Hashanah morning, September 12, 1942, my father was never allowed to open the door. We were always because we never knew when somebody would come. At 11 o'clock the doorbell rang, and a detective from the Dutch police came in and said, is Mr. Pinto home? 

And my mother said, well, I'll see. I don't know. Can I-- can I say what is the message? Well, he said, he has to come to the [INAUDIBLE]. They want to see him a minute. 

So then we knew there was something wrong. Father heard that, and my mother said, this-- this was the sign that he had to disappear. And he left-- jumped off our roof, I don't know how many feet, and escaped to a close friend of my mother's who had come about a week or two before and said, Lena, if there's any-- any of you in danger, don't forget we will help you. We are underground. 

And they lived fairly close to us, so my father could just walk there. That's what he did. He jumped off the roof, escaped the back street, and walked to these friends. 

So in the meantime, this detective comes upstairs and said to my mother, where's your fath-- your husband? And mother said, well, you just gave him a few minutes to change his shirt and shoes to look a little more decent. You know, it takes a few minutes. He will be down in a minute. He says, well, it takes awfully long, so he jumped upstairs. 

And we had a hole in the roof. We had prepared all this for father for an escape, and father, of course, was gone. So he said to mother and Renee and me, you will pay for this. So he left the house, and mother said to Renee and me, OK, we better clear out as fast as we can. We all had our homes where we could go to families who had offered to put us in hiding. We didn't have a cent on us. I mean, there was no time to do anything. We walked out with the coat, the dress, and the shoes we had on us, and our David star, and it is pouring. Mother and I had an umbrella. Renee went to another family. Renee went to our family doctor, who was a close friend. Mother and I went to somebody else whom we had never met, but that house had been made available by my mother's girlfriend when my father went. So mother and I worked for an hour, believe it or not, in the rain, looking, you know, who's following us, because it was obvious they wanted us. 

Within 10 minutes, our hos-- whole house or whole block was surrounded by SS. They were going to get my father no matter what. My father had disappeared. We were in a Dutch newspaper for months, with pictures, that they wanted my father because he was hooked up with the underground, and they knew that. And you know, it was a complete horror story. 

Well, anyway, that was September 1942 when we were all separated. Father went to one family. I went to another farmer. Mother went somewhere else, and Renee went somewhere else. 

INTERVIEWER: The way you describe it, there was a lot of planning, clandestine meetings, discussion. Do you remember any of these? 

EDITH: Sure, in the-- in the living room. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe-- 

EDITH: We were sitting around a table. I remember it, and the man would say, well, your name-- I don't remember. My name was Ellie, I think. You will be Ellie-- I don't remember what my last name was. 

Here's your passport. This will be you. This is what you do. We'll pick you up at night. 

We'll drive you in a car to-- through-- via Belgium to Switzerland, then to Spain, and then to America or to England. That-- that wasn't decided yet, but as long as we got out of Holland, we didn't care where we were going. And it was all planned, and it all fell through. 

INTERVIEWER: And those other shelters were also planned? 

EDITH: Everything was planned. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember-- 

EDITH: I don't-- 

INTERVIEWER: --such discussions? 

EDITH: No, that was never-- my mother and father never discussed that with us. That was kept secret because, still, I was very young. They didn't want to jeopardize. So all these things-- I do know that my mother's girlfriend, [INAUDIBLE], who was married to a lawyer, came-- I remember that very vividly, that she came and said, Lena, if you're ever in danger, don't forget we are here to help you. 

And two weeks later, we were in danger, so we went there. I went to another family. He had made a family for me and mother, in case. Father went to him, and Renee went to our family doctor. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, how-- how much time passed between this Bob asking for the money and the-- the-- and the raid? 

EDITH: A few days. That was a very quick [INAUDIBLE]. I mean, time was running out for him. He was realizing that, and he was going to get us one way or the other. 

And the one unfortunate thing was we had to prepare suitcases with clothes, and the man who was the right wing in this whole sequence was an enormous tall man. And my father, as you know, was fairly short, but he has enormous long arms. And the SS wanted to check this man out, and he came into his house and said what are all these suitcases doing here? Oh, he said, I'm planning to take a little trip. 

He said put those shoes on. Of course, my father's shoes-- my father has very small feet, and this man had, you know, boats. And that started the whole sequence. 

And then he said, whose clothes are these? Oh, he said, they're mine. He said, huh-uh, those are not your clothes, so then he was taken in custody, and then the whole thing started. And then the next morning, they came for my father. That was May 11th at night when this happened, and May 12th. They came-- 

INTERVIEWER: If those were the spies, Bob and Jim-- 

EDITH: Bob and Bill. 

INTERVIEWER: And Bill, then they knew about your father, anyway. They didn't have to take that man custody first. 

EDITH: No, but that was the other link that they were getting because that was the real underground. You see, they were-- they were getting after the real underground. These men posed as being the underground from another section, and that is integrated in. But half of them, quite often, were not the real thing. 

INTERVIEWER: But they-- but they already knew about your father and about the-- 

EDITH: Of course. They knew about my father, but they didn't know about the other men. So that was all-- you know, that was very delicate and very difficult. So that was 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember of this news-- did you see those newspapers with the photographs? 

EDITH: No, and we never saw them. We ne-- we only know that from our friends that we were in it for weeks and that they wanted to father, definitely. So that was in 1942, and then this friend of my mother's husband-- this-- yeah, this husband of this friend of my mother's took me, at night, on a bike to a farm where I was going to spend the night. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, this is-- you were 14-- 

EDITH: September '42. I'm just 14. 

INTERVIEWER: 14. 

EDITH: And a half. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that beginning this trip on the bike? 

EDITH: We stepped on the bike in the middle of the night, about 10 o'clock at night. He picked me up from where I was hiding with my mother, and we bicycled for hours on a little bicycle path through Friesland, through the country, until we hit a farm. 

INTERVIEWER: No patrols? 

EDITH: No nothing. No, that was safe. They picked that very carefully, the routes. And when I came to the farm, I was very nicely received. 

I fell into the canal first before I got into the house, soaking wet. I never forget that. I misstepped for some reason. It was pitch black, of course. It was-- on the farm, there were no floodlights, exactly. So I stepped into a little canal, and I-- he picked me up, but I was soaking wet with all kind of dirt from the, you know, kind of a little water. 

And I was put into a room, and I was not allowed to come out. That was my first encounter that I was all day in a room. When I-- during the day, the farmer's hands were not supposed to see me. 

Nobody was supposed to see me. At night, I would come out, and then the next day, the same gentleman pick me up again because I couldn't stay at this farmer's family. They brought me to another farm, which was way, way out, maybe another three hours. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the first farm? What it--? 

EDITH: There was a big house. I don't know because I was never allowed, of course, to see it. It was a beautiful home, and I was in one of their elegant rooms-- I mean, the good room, as they called it, the Sunday room. And that's where I stayed for the day. And they brought me my food, and they talked to me, but that was all. 

And then the next day-- or day and a half, or whenever it was-- again, in the evening, the same gentleman came again and brought me to the farm where I was for three and a half years. And that was another huge trip, and that's why he brought me to this farm on-- on a-- this is called a polder, which is surrounded by water. And he owned-- there were eight farms, and the only way you could get to there was by boat over water, and the only you can get on the farm itself was over a little bridge. 

So you were basically protected. Whenever everybody was home, the bridge had to go open, and nobody could come at night to come in. So that was a fairly safe place, and I was there for a month. 

And then mother was in great danger because it was not good. She was in Leeuwarden, and everybody knew her, and it was not good. So the farmer said my mother could come also, and so mother and I spend really the war years together. 

And father was at another part of Friesland, and a year and a half later, he was quite in danger. So the farmer said, well, why don't I pick him up, and then he can milk my cows, and he can do some work for me. So that's when father came in. 

And Rene stayed always by herself. She was from one family to another. We never saw her. The only way we had communication with her was through this lawyers wife who would-- was also underground, who would get the letters from another group transferred to us and then to Rene and vice versa. And that was our only communication we ever had with her for three and a half years. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the-- your arrival at that farm and your impression of the first night or the second night or what? 

EDITH: Overwhelming. Not knowing what had hit me. Just being-- entering this farm family, where there were two sons and a daughter-- 

INTERVIEWER: What ages? 

EDITH: The son was my age. I think, he was about 14. And there was another son who was-- no, the son was about 18, and the other son was about 22, 23, and the daughter was about 25. She was a teacher, and the farmer's wife was a very sick woman. Both the farmer and the wife were really-- I would call psychopath and almost schizophrenic later on. She became a very sick woman. And we-- I lived in a little room in an-- in an alcove. It was a kind of a room in the wall, and where they had made a bed. It's an alcove. That's a typical Dutch farmhouse, has alcoves, and I would sleep there. And about a month later, my mother came. She and I would share one of these alcoves, and in the other alcove slept the farmer with his wife. And you had doors in front of them. It was a horrible situation. 

INTERVIEWER: The alcove was closed off by doors-- 

EDITH: Yeah, you could close the door, but then you-- you'd practically suffocate because of-- there was no air. So that wasn't very pleasant. And mother and I would sit on a couch, well, like in a niche, and that's-- the couch was set back into a niche, and that's that we sat for the day. We would come out of the alcove in the morning. 

It was the same room where we slept were these two alcoves, and we would get our breakfast as it was. An hour lunch, an hour dinner, and it was a horrible situation because the woman was so sick and so was her husband, that what they would do is when they wanted to feed us, they usually would bring us food that had been in the cellar for so long that the maggots would crawl out. And then they would feed us our meatballs. So we wouldn't eat that, logically. I mean, you know, that was not exactly what you wanted to do. 

My days were spent either by spinning on a spinning wheel all day-- I had to weave the yarn-- or the wool that came from the sheep and put it in a spinning wheel and do that for three, four hours a day. And he would say, well, you haven't done so much yet or whatever. And then the wool that I produced, my mother had to knit. Well, my mother is-- is a bright woman, but she's not exactly a knitter because our patterns-- I mean, he would say, well, make-- make socks, make skirts, or whatever. I mean, we just knitted. 

And one terrible thing what he would do, because they killed their own beef or-- or sheep or calf or whatever, he would bring a sheep on the-- on the living room table, or the room where we lived in, and he would say here, two little knives. Now, you peel that skin off the sheep. That's your task for today. All right? So my mother and I would, all day long, pull the wool-- fleece off this animal. 

So these were not exactly what you call pleasant memories. We would have to clean it, cut it open, take the intestines out. I mean, it was just horrendous. 

INTERVIEWER: That's all in this one room-- 

EDITH: Room, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: With-- with-- 

EDITH: Where we did everything. 

INTERVIEWER: Everything? 

EDITH: Everything-- my mother and I did everything. We-- we ate. We drank. 

The only thing that wasn't-- we could never go to the bathroom. There was an outhouse, and the only time we could go to a bathroom was when the labor hand had left, and he would say, now, you can go to the bathroom. Well, who can go now, this moment? 

So you know, my whole intestinal system is-- I can trace it back very easily. Why do I have such a lousy system? Because it was ruined for four years. I could never go when I had to go. 

There was never a way that we could do anything. I never saw the outside. Only once, I was on the outside when there was-- Christmas Eve, one of the sons took me out for a walk, and it was very dangerous. 

We should have never done it because somebody noticed that he was walking with a little girl. Who was that? So that was a very dangerous thing. So ever since, I was not allowed to go out ever. Then about a year and a half-- 

INTERVIEWER: Walking to the outhouse when you wouldn't. 