INTERVIEWER: There's something missing. Yes. It a pleasure-- what pleasures are there? People around you, friends, those who not been children. Continue also where you were, that this was your-- this was your young years, your adolescence-- and how you fit in now. 

CREW: OK. 

SUBJECT: Well. 

INTERVIEWER: This one. 

SUBJECT: Um, may-- maybe when my children were young. Sometimes I put a little bit pressure, too much maybe pressure on them. I wanted them to understand my background, which they couldn't because they lived in a different society. And now they do, most of them. 

I have three children. And two of them do understand. But I-- I wanted things-- they should understand me and they should understand our way of life, but they couldn't. So there was a struggle in the beginning. 

But I also never wanted to tell them about my horrors because I felt that if they would want to know, they would ask me. And if they don't ask me, maybe they are afraid to know. Maybe they're afraid to-- to know the truth. 

But then they knew that their lives were different than other children's lives because they were missing family too. They were missing-- where is my grandmother? Where's-- why don't I have a grandfather or grandmother? A matter of fact, that they were so hungry of family that our friends were aunts and uncles to the children and-- and I was an aunt and uncle to my friends' children because we all lacking the family. And we tried to make a new family and a new life for each other. 

There's also that we feel most comfortable between those friends that went through the same experience because we understand each other. We remember incidents here and there, and we don't have to say much or remember this and this time. Yes, we know. We understand. We remember this and this time how it was. So we feel most-- most comfortable with them. 

And then when we came to the United States, life was-- was very hard. It was very tough. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the neighbors now today, people around you, Jews, non-Jews? 

SUBJECT: Non-Jews, it's a funny thing, but I cannot trust them. I have neighbors, very nice neighbors, but I cannot trust them as friends. It's also from my experience because before the war, we lived in a non-Jewish section. We had neighbors, Polish neighbors. My mother was most respected. They adored her, even so she was a Jew, but they adored her. 

The anti-Semitism in Poland was always great, but never felt it because we lived with our neighbors so close and so nice and so fine. But when the war broke out, when the Germans came in, they were the first ones to show, this is a Jew, here live the Jew. Because the-- the Germans, when they occupied Poland first, they didn't know where lives a Jew or who is a Jew. They helped to show them. 

So I developed a mistrust to non-Jewish neighbors. Now the Jewish neighbors that I'm very friendly with, I-- as I said before, I'm close with them, but I will never open up because of the fear they will not understand. They will not believe, and they will not understand. So I don't. It's also kind of a mistrust. 

INTERVIEWER: It's lonesome? 

SUBJECT: Beg pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: Is it lonesome? 

SUBJECT: Yes, it is, very. It's the need comes a holiday or it comes to simcha, yes. It's the need of family. So we invite friends and we make family. This is our family. And if-- we try to make the best of our lives. 

INTERVIEWER: But it's still lonesome? 

SUBJECT: It's always lonesome, always. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 