SUBJECT: Don't you think so? 

INTERVIEWER: No. Nobody will. You don't say anything you're not comfortable with. Can you remove your glasses? 

SUBJECT: No. I have a swollen eye. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, it doesn't matter. 

SUBJECT: No? OK. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your other glasses? 

SUBJECT: No. I cannot. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: My eye is very swollen. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. We want you to start by giving your name and approximate date of birth and your-- 

SUBJECT: No. Not necessary. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. Whatever you want. And where the town you were born is. 

SUBJECT: Yes, Cluj. 

INTERVIEWER: And then I want you to tell the story from your own eyes and ears only. We really are interested in your personal not only reaction, but what you saw, what you heard, what you felt. 

SUBJECT: Should I tell you how they start to take me from the room? 

INTERVIEWER: No. I want you to start right from the beginning that you can. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? Uh, whenever you're ready 

SUBJECT: OK. I was born in Romania in the town of Cluj on the Romanian border. I attended school. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your name when you were a little girl, your first name? 

SUBJECT: And 1940, the Hungarians occupied the city where I was born and actually we were deported by the Hungarians. My father was 47, my mother was 45, my youngest was six, one of my sisters eight, one of my brothers 23. The rest of-- my three other brothers were already taken away ahead of time. They kept us in a ghetto for four weeks in Cluj. 

The town had 18,000 Jewish people what surrounded from the little villages and from the smaller places they also brought into that place the Jewish people. It was a huge metal with outbuildings. We were sleeping like sardines on the floor. The only thing what they had above us was the linen what they made up with four let's say to hang up like a roof. 

INTERVIEWER: Like a tent? 

SUBJECT: Like a tent. They were not prepared for it. The Gestapo started to interrogate people who were told they had money, jewelry, gold. And among these people happened us to be, too. Actually, the division that we were in the ghetto was supposed to go to that old promised land, Rhodesia, where they promised us we are going to a plantation to work agricultural work. 

INTERVIEWER: Who told you this? 

SUBJECT: The Gestapo. The Jewish Judenrat. That's how they fooled us in the ghettos. We didn't know that we were going to a concentration camp. You were told they were taking us to agricultural plantation. 

INTERVIEWER: The Gestapo told the head of the ghetto and they told you. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: The heads of the ghetto understood German? 

SUBJECT: Sure. They were selected which-- by the name the Judenrat. And there were made up transports to go to that plantation or agricultural camp, whatever they promised us. Then we find out that the Gestapo start to torture the people they should give up their gold or their possession, whatever they hided. They beat, tortured so much my cousins, my fiance. They burned the nipple off the breast, they burned the fingers and ordered to admit whatever he has, which he did not have. Seeing this torturing from the Gestapo voluntarily we went to the third transport. We went to the third transport. We supposed to go with the first transport. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see the torture? 

SUBJECT: We brought them out from there. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw them burning people? 

SUBJECT: I-- we brought over that fiance of mine and linen and pieces of blankets. And he was burned the nipples and the toes in order to tell where the gold is, where the diamonds, where the money is, which we did not have. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he tell you how they burned him? 

SUBJECT: Sure. Sure he told us. So when my uncle's team was on the list that we are next for interrogation, we just fled to the train-- freight train, not a personal train but a huge long freight train. And we went with the third transport to that unknown place what they promised us. We supposed to go for that small place to the fifth transport. On the freight wagon, we were 92 people in it. 

I as a young girl happened to travel five days to that unknown destination. In the train, in that wagon, I saw giving birth, dying people. We were thirsty and hungry. Once the train stopped somewhere-- we don't know where-- and two SS men with guns walked in, you should give us up if you have some watches or gold rings. Some of the people still had perhaps a wedding band or a watch which we had to give them. this was the last train which I saw Romania-- Hungary, actually. 

We arrived in the night about 11:00 to Auschwitz, which was a huge sign, hier werden die Juden vernichtet. This was not the promised agricultural farm, this was extermination camp. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew this? 

SUBJECT: We didn't know. We didn't know at all. We just arrived there. When they pried the wagons opened, SS people with whips started to beat us up and hollering, lost, lost, lost stay in line like soldiers. We stood in lines. We lined up five people like soldiers, one after the other. But we find out in the other side they're prisoners dressed up in prison dresses. 

They spoke Yiddish to us and they said, if you have a little child, give it to the elderly people. But we did not understand why. As they counted us and we start to march, I noticed there is a beautiful building surrounded by bushes with a white gate. They said-- I asked what it is, they said it's a hospital. And they started to march in 3,000 people to that hospital. 

I must have been the 499th person who they wanted to select for work. So they needed young people for hard work. And among the selection, I must have been the fifth-- 500th one. And I marched, and I marched, and I marched. And I looked back where those people went to that hospital. I almost wanted to go there. 

I felt that I belonged there because my-- my-- my relatives, my mother, my everybody is there. But an SS man with a-- with a cane grabbed me by my throat and pushed me to the group where I was counted 499 and I have the 500th. Now we are marching one and a half miles or two miles to a place, a huge building, where we have to undress totally naked. Everything what belongs to us does not belong anymore to us. 

And they are screaming and beating and torturing, los, los, los, los. We did not understand what does it mean. The shoes, everything that belong to us we don't have anymore. They putting in in another big room and they start to cut our hair, our head, under the arm, and you know where else. SS men are-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did that hurt? 

SUBJECT: SS men are sitting under windows, open windows, with guns in their hand in case we would love to fight back. But who dared to fight back? We were surrounded by SS woman and SS men. Now comes the torture. When I find myself without hair, naked, and looked around with the 500 people who I did not recognize them at all, SS woman told us-- among us-- we should get up on the table because we must have some that hidden diamonds. 

Now, they put us on a table and they want to examine us like a gynecologist if we did hid diamonds somewhere. I pleaded with her, I never had been married. And one of the prisoners who was the helper for that SS lady, SS woman, said to her, she never was married. What do you want from her? So she only examined me from the rectum. 

In the morning, when I find myself already it was daylight-- or what kind of light you call it? It was not exactly 5:00 or 6:00 in the morning. I was very thirsty and hungry and dizzy. I find out that I have to stay in line for another hour or two to get a prison dress, one simple long prison dress with long sleeves and with long stripes and a pair of shoes which I saw sometimes in the stories from Holland. I never saw it before. And this how we wind up again marching to the destination where we will belong. 

And on arriving-- and this must have been Birkenau where they took us-- I heard that the same place that I left all my belongings and where they gave us the prison dress, this has been a crematorium. If those showers would have been without water would have been with gas. But it seems they did not needed us that time for gassing, they needed us for hard work. Now we are arriving to Auschwitz. C3 is the block. 

For what reason or what was it-- I don't know what kind of punishment must have been in that camp, they put us-- the three-- the 500 girls naked with that one dress, a rainy day. And schotter what is schotter? Pebbles. Pebbles? To kneel in the pebble. And I asked there the blokova which I heard blokova I never heard of blokova? What does it mean blokova? 

So they told me, oh, don't worry. You will learn here a lot. Blokova is taking care of the 1,500 prisoners which belonged to C lager. This is the lager that I belonged. Why are we kneeling in the pebbles? What did we do wrong? We just arrived. they did not answer us. Now comes breakfast. They gave us a piece of bread, dark, which was approximately 5 decagram-- 5 how do you say-- maybe 10-- 

INTERVIEWER: Grams. 

SUBJECT: 10 decagrams, a slice of bread, and some kind of coffee which looked like rainwater. But it was sweet for us because we were thirsty. For five days we didn't see water. So that water was-- that coffee was the most sweetest thing. Now comes the torturing. The blokova of C3 happened to be a Polish girl, also a haftling prisoner for many years, gave us a beautiful speech, you Hungarians, you were home eating butter and bread? 

Now you will taste what we tasted for four years. We are here the one who built Auschwitz. We are here the one who made those camps. Now you have to suffer just like us. But when she did that speech, she had two Aufseherins SS woman. She had to say that speech. She was forced to say that speech. 

So this was the ovation when we arrived to this camp. Now we are waiting for further torturing. In the night, we have to go to sleep. We are sleeping on the floor like sardines. It was wet, my prison dress, from that heavy rain. And in the morning, we smell like vinegar. The body gave such a smell of that rainy, wet prison dress. We were so put together we didn't have room so we had a very bad odor. 

Then came Sunday. Sunday we were told, do you see that piece of soap what we gave you to go to wash? This is made from human flesh. To our astonishment, we looked at each other, are they crazy or I am crazy? I couldn't believe my eye. This would be true, that from human bodies they made soap. They don't have ladies' room, they had a latrine. This means that we have to go to do our duty, a huge, huge dig-- ditch-- which was at certain times you could go to a tent. 

But human nature cannot tell you certain times. there's time when you have to go. If I wanted to go, I was beaten up why I'm going. I was beaten up by blokova. But she had rules from the SS woman. Why did she have these rules? I not understand her. That time I was not able to understand. I thought I'm crazy or she is crazy. But now thinking back, I do realize that she has forced to obey the regulations of the SS woman and of the SS men. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name of the SS woman or the SS men? Do you remember any-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I only heard Hilda and Helga and, uh, Marianne. But other names I couldn't know. There was young and beautiful, sadistic. They had a pleasure if they were able to torture us. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any names of the other prisoners? Did you ever know their names? 

SUBJECT: Of prisoners? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, of the other haftlingers. 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. From my hometown, who unfortunately do not exist now. Maybe one exists in Sweden, which suffers a lung illness. Uh, a couple are in mental hospitals. Don't forget we were very young and we couldn't take it. Sometimes I think to myself I'm able to face you, I'm able to talk. I constantly live with medicine and I'm under doctors' care. To lose over 70 members of my family and to live a tortured life, it's not enough time to outcry, to tell our story. 

Too late. Too many people lost their lives already here in the United States, whoever came over. I pay a big price. Because of this, I don't have children. I was not able to bring a child to this world. I was not sure that I'm able to raise a child of my bad nerves. Why should suffer that child because I'm sick? 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever experimented on? 

SUBJECT: No. They did one morning put us in cell appell, which means we had to stay in line again. They only draw from us blood to send blood to the people to the front, they did. I did work very hard for them in bunkers. They took us miles and miles away to bunkers. This was after Birkenau. There, to my surprise, I find some kind of soldier which I couldn't believe, the Wehrmacht. And the Wehrmacht find us there, 300 girls-- this was 300 commando young, everybody was healthy young. 

Before they selected to the 300 commando. We were naked and exposed for the full day. They overlooked us. We shouldn't have a pimple nowhere. We should be very healthy. they needed us very badly to be very healthy. We arrived to the destination near the Vistula, the River Vistula, in Oberschlesien. To my surprise, I find there solders. I couldn't understand. They didn't look like SS, entirely different kinds of uniforms. 

It was twelve o'clock they had their meals. We must have been so far away from them, like 200 feet. And one of them dared to talk to us and they asked whoever speaks German. And me, I was the one who didn't dare-- I didn't care if I'm alive or not, if they kill me. I said, I do speak German. 

He says, lay down. They shouldn't observe that you are talking to me. So I lay down on the field and he was sitting there eating because the SS had their lunch. He says, tell me, who are you, crazy people from a crazy house? I said, don't you know that there is a concentration camp, the Vernichtungslager. He started to cry. He said, no, we are the Wehrmacht. Can I help you with something? 

I said, yes. Can you give me your food? We are very hungry. He walked into their fellow men, he collected food, and he put it down between the stones. He was watching that the SS didn't see it. And I grabbed that food and I distributed it among my nearest friends. Everybody was my friend there, but about 14 the girls could have the food what they he gave us. 

This went on for three, four weeks. One day, we were asking that Wehrmacht that he should tell us who he is. He's a pharmacist from Frankfurt am Main, he has four children. And he was crying that he doesn't believe that there is existing a concentration camp, but now he realizes, he sees with his own eyes. Who knows what happened with his family. He understands our bitterness. 

So he collected cigarettes. He put down the cigarettes in that field any we two girls took the cigarette and we put it-- we couldn't put it away because with us nothing. We had a handkerchief on our head and we put it in the back. Coming into the camp where Mengele had his beautiful days with the music, the capella, the music was playing. We were stopped in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to know about the music. 

SUBJECT: You don't know the music? 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me-- tell us about the music. 

SUBJECT: Coming into that camp, there was a big beam, a podium selected talented girls from all over who knew music, art. And Mengele had these drills. The most beautiful classical music played every night. When we entered the camp, we are listening to the music. The crematoriums were burning day and night. But the music afternoon between five and six was playing according to Mengele's order. 

They did not let us in that evening to our camp. They start to search and naturally, they find the cigarettes what we brought in. That evening, the 300 girls got punished. The SS made films about us, they beat us up. And as they beat us up, that's how they made the films. 

INTERVIEWER: They made films-- 

SUBJECT: Films about us, how they're torturing. We were filmed that night. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name of the Wehrmacht market man who helped you? 

SUBJECT: The Wehrmacht man, he was a druggist from Frankfurt am Main but his name I wouldn't be able-- it's 35 years. That night, the blokova got an order that the 300 commando has to be removed not to see anymore the S-- the Wehrmacht. So they took us to another place to work. We did not see him anymore. They took us somewhere else to work. 

Where they took us this time to work, we made like railroads. We had to bring those iron with us and put a railroad, to make railroads. The time changed. It was summer, it was very hot. We came home with blisters. We were not anymore the purified 300 girls. Some of us took sick, they wind up a revier I never saw them again. 

What happened with them? Whoever winds up in the revier is already marked, has to go to the crematorium. 

INTERVIEWER: Winds up in the what? 

SUBJECT: revier mean a little hospital, like an emergency room. Now they're taking us by truck far away. We are passing by villages where we could smell the smell of a bakery. We are dying for a piece of bread, but we only had the bread in the evening which is divided for five people-- the bread like here a pound of bread, a loaf, which has to be divided for five people. This is our daily ration. And we are there working very hard, struggling. 

But the SS woman and the SS men are having again a good thrill about us, to see a little sadism, how to torture us by the Vistula. We always were told that if we keep ourself sort of clean, we do not get lice, we do not get typhus. So we were disciplined from zuhause, from home. We wanted to keep ourselves very clean. So I happened to go down with three of the girls who came from Yugoslavia. 

One was my friend, a banker's daughter. I remember clearly her name, Roberta. And we went downstairs to clean ourselves. Two SS women came up up-- came down, said, verfluchtete Jude, smuckstuck. Come up. I didn't know she want. So there she started to beat us up and we had to bring home one of us like that and we brought her home dead. 

And the weather changed, became very, very severe cold. Oberschlesien is a very, very cold spot. We went to that hard work in the morning with those shoes from Holland, with just one dress. They gave us a little jacket from the gypsies, what was leftover when they killed the 10 million-- 10,000 gypsies. That my eyebrows was full of how you call that, frost, and my temple, I felt like a knife was cutting me. 

And every day, we brought down two or three dead girls. This was already in the month of October. I happened to be in Auschwitz till the 1st of January. By mistake also I wind up in a freight wagon and I went in that wagon to Bergen-Belsen but not knowing where they take us. And in Bergen-Belsen, I became sick with typhus for three typhus-- bauch typhus, kopf typhus, para typhus. 

I was in such a big temperature that I did not know about myself how many are dying, how many are alive. I only came to one conclusion in the morning that I pinched myself and I felt I'm still alive. And I slept with a dead woman because she was very nice and cool. The dead body was very good and cold. And this-- this helped me a lot because I was thirsty, no medicine, no food. And that cold body helped me tremendously. 

So the girl who used to bring us in to eat, she whispered to me that I shouldn't say there's a dead body because she could have an extra piece of bread for her. Well, if she gives away the dead body, she doesn't have the piece of bread. But to me, this was the life because this was wonderful, the dead body, because I was burning up from the typhus and that high temperature. 

I was there in Bergen-Belsen from the 5th of January to the 14th of April. Before the liberation, four days before the liberation in Bergen-Belsen, the SS people started to shoot. The bullets came through the walls from our block-- blocks where I was living. Some of our girls got killed there from the bullets. Then they had the nerve, Dr. Klein and SS Oberseher to come in and to tell us that please, the English men are not far from here. Tomorrow you will be liberated. 

But we were good to you. Did we give you from the red cross the candy, the sugar, the cakes-- which I never saw it. But I was so sick from typhus that I did not even know what he's talking to me. But he was actually pleading to us that we should defend him. Now we are liberated by the English people. People among the dead people were thrown out. The pulse were still on, but they were among the dead, on the mountains of the dead. I said, this must be my cousin. 

Here I thought is my cousin. When they took her, she was already dead. This was the last I saw of my cousin. I happened to be with her together, but I recognized her. They took me to the revier the emergency hospital. And they decided they have to take me to Sweden , to the Red Cross, because I was very, very, ill. But in Bergen-Belsen while we were sick from typhus, we did suffer a lot. 

It's not enough time for every hour to tell the torturing what we saw. 

INTERVIEWER: You told me about a person by the name of Paula Fried. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, Fried. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about her. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Dr. Paula Fried who finds herself in Petah Tikva in Israel happens to be my doctor as a child when I was her patient. 

INTERVIEWER: In Romania. 

SUBJECT: In Romania. That Dr. Fried saved a lot of young girls. The came in pregnant, some of them one month, two months, three months from all over. And during the night, she used to perform abortions. I as a young girl never saw this, I never knew this. We had to hold these girls by their hands, by their mouth not to scream. The SS people shouldn't find out what was going on during the night among us. 

INTERVIEWER: You helped Dr. Fried by hold-- 

SUBJECT: I-- I saw it. But stronger girls than I. I was too fragile to help. They were stronger girls than me who helped to hold these womens' hand and their head. Here she was able to perform the abortions within us. But I as a young girl never saw this before. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was she doing the abortions? 

SUBJECT: To save the girls. If they're pregnant, they would experiment on them because those SS men tortured these girls. They should be able to go ahead with the labor. They're better off if you go to work than to be dead. 

INTERVIEWER: So by performing-- where was this? 

SUBJECT: In Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that why they call her the Angel of Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: The Angel of Auschwitz. So is another doctor. She wrote a book, I'm a doctor in Auschwitz, Dr. Gisella Perl in New York. 

INTERVIEWER: What did she do? 

SUBJECT: She did the same thing. President Truman and Eleanor Roosevelt wrote her story and they allowed her to make a book. She made a book. And this-- if you want to get in touch with her, you could talk to her. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw Dr. Fried-- 

SUBJECT: Dr. Fried I saw. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw Dr. Fried performing abortions. Was there-- there was complete darkness? 

SUBJECT: Sure, every night. 

INTERVIEWER: She performed the-- 

SUBJECT: She-- on the floor. 

INTERVIEWER: How did she dispose of the fetus? 

SUBJECT: Do you know what was there? We were 1,500 prisoners there. 

INTERVIEWER: 1,500? 

SUBJECT: 1,500 in one block. 

INTERVIEWER: 1,500 in one-- 

SUBJECT: In one block. One block is so big like from-- what should I tell you-- like a block. And this was-- this-- that's how it was. 

INTERVIEWER: No. No, really, describe how- the block. 

SUBJECT: The blocks, how it is? In the middle, the latest time, the Polish haftlings. The latest time they build it from bricks, a long, huge, like a stove. In the two sides were like beds. 

INTERVIEWER: Stacked bunks. 

SUBJECT: Bunks. So seven in a bunk, used be six in a bunk-- like sardines. And to get up in the morning-- we used to get up at 5:00, then a line two hours to count us, and then to go to work. Then came to those SS to say if it's OK. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep from losing your mind? 

SUBJECT: Well, maybe I was young and I was praying to God on so much life he should give me I should be able to tell the story and to outcry to the world what a cultural nation did in the 20th century and how many deaf ears were in the world and nobody knew it, what was happening to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you feel that no one wanted to hear the story? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In Sweden, yes. In Sweden, this-- they heard my story, yes. Priests, educator, dean from Uppsala University-- very many people came to us to listen to us. And they were trying to cure us. Thanks to them that I'm here. 

INTERVIEWER: Here you didn't feel people wanted to know? 

SUBJECT: Here I was bitter. I came over here and I had to make a living to sustain myself. I was an orphan. But in Sweden, the Swedish people give a lot of theirself for us. The cream of the town took care of us. We were four weeks in quarantine and they just gave us love and attention just like a little infant baby. 

INTERVIEWER: From all of this-- 

SUBJECT: I'm grateful to the Swedish people very much. and so I'm grateful now here that I'm able to tell my outcry. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question, perhaps. What-- what has this left you with? Do you believe in God, do you trust people? What do you feel about your Jewishness? 

SUBJECT: Yes. While I have been in Auschwitz, I was angry with God. I kept saying, God, why I'm choosing to be here? Why can't I be among the dead people? They are better people than me. Maybe I committed some sin. Why I'm here? There was religious people, rabbis, scientists, people who could contribute much more to the humanity than I. 

I'm just a simple person, I'm nothing. Why I am here? I don't deserve this. I envy the-- the dead people. I prayed that sometimes the SS when I was working very hard and they beat me up, I wanted to die. They should shot me. He said they have to use me to work. Now as I'm mature, unfortunately, I don't have children. I was brought up in a I religious home. I do believe in God because I was taught home that I should believe in God and to live with hope-- hope-- which helped me a lot, hope, to believe in hope. 

And perhaps I'm here to tell-- and people should listen to my outcry and they should learn from us. It should never happen again. Also, we are living at a difficult time and are still doing those awful atrocities, killing and destroying people. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you trust people you meet, you deal with, you interact with? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's a question. 50% yes and 50% I have a doubt. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you still feel strong about your Jewishness? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes because I was brought up as a Jew, I want to die as a Jew, and I sacrificed my life as a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: Israel? 

SUBJECT: Israel is very dear to me. In fact, I'm a big Zionist. I was working 16 years for Zionism in New York for the retarded children in Rosh HaAyin. I visited Israel, my fellow sisters, largerschwesters, so called, who wind up in mental institute, they have children. I'm sending packages. I-- I like to help them and I would love to help them more. I'm for them. 