KATHY PLESCHELL: Well, my parents, they came-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not yet. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not yet, I'm just sort of explaining to you, you know? You know, your own memories-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Beginning with my parents, or what? No, or my own? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your parents, too, everything. What's that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Will you begin giving your name, where you were born, when you were born. And after that, tell us what happened after you were born. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yeah. Well, my name is Kathy Pleschel my maiden name, Kathy Kohn I lived in Germany, Dortmund, Westphalia. My parents-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were born-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: I was born in Poland. My parents came from Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: 19-- December 1909. I was never in Poland, so I had my education 100% percent in Germany. I went to school, first to Jewish elementary school and then for high school, non-Jewish. I had many friends in Germany. But all these friends, they were friends-- superficial friends because I saw very early, my early years, that there were always anti-Semit-- anti-Semitism in Germany. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you give examples of incidents? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Well, in school, for instance, there were always girls, they said, ah, that Jews-- that they grab. They like to grab money. They like to make money. 

And then they asked me for-- to-- to forget it. They didn't said it-- that they didn't say it. Well, this was friendships, very superficial friendship. But this, I think, it's not so important. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. Talk now Germany around the First World War, 1916, 1918, when you were in school-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: No, they-- I was very little. This, I don't remember. But then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What years are you talking about when you mentioned this-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Well, this was 1925, or so-- '24, '25. Then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your father doing? What family-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: My-- my parents? My father was in the war, World War I. And he came to Germany. My mother was already with four children in Germany. And my father came as an invalid from the war, World War-- World War II-- one, one. 

And so they established a business in Dortmund they headed until the thing. I got married in 1933-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can-- I'm stopping you because I would like-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yes, please. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --to know more. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell us a little bit about home, what kind of person your father and mother was, your sisters. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: My parents, they had a very strictly kosher home. My father was very orthodox, and my mother, naturally, too. And they lived a very Jewish-- highly Jewish life. 

My parents, they had-- they lived in the Jewish section in Germany, in Dortmund, because of the shul of synagogue. My father would never go by-- by bus or so to the synagogue. He wouldn't do that. What do you want me to say? 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was invalid in what way? Flashes of memory with your fam-- with your early family-- a day an evening, a Shabbos. Any memories that you-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --think of, come back to you. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: For instance, the Friday nights, my father always came home from school with somebody-- the poor man, you know, to eat, also. I remember my father, every day, he put on Tales and Tefilin, and he didn't even shave, only with a little-- little stick with powder, you know? In that time, we didn't have a electric shaver. He had a little beard, very little, like Weizman, Professor Weizman or that's style. 

We had a very nice and Jewish life in home. We had to be, every Friday evening, home because my father, he has to make his-- the Kidush and so, you know, we had to be there. It was impossible to stay out. This was not allowed for us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

And so, even I am not religious today, but I am very-- a very traditional Jew, very, and I wouldn't give it up for nothing in the world. And so I grew up with all my-- with my other sisters. We were four sisters. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you in the family? What-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were what in the family-- the second, third? What was your-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: I am the-- the third. The last, she died in Auschwitz, the youngest. So up to now, I have thanks God: One sister lives in Buenos Aires, one in Israel. I am here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of memories do you have at early life? You've mentioned the Friday evening. What other memories? Not at home, but child-- but with other children and school-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: I went-- went to several organizations. First, in my youngest years, I was very religious, so I belonged to the Agudat Israel. Agudat, yeah. And then I was older, so I didn't want it anymore. I was-- I liked more freedom, and so, you know. But always, I never forgot that I'm coming from a very Jewish home, and this I will never forget. And I'm very grateful to my parents that I have that education. 

Then I was a little bit older. And I remember also I was looking for a job after school, and my father didn't let me take a job where I had to wear Saturday-- Shabbat. So I didn't. I went to an organization as a secretary, the Ostjudischer Verband. There I worked as a secretary. So I learn-- I met my husband there. He was practically my boss, the president of the organization, vice president of the organization. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of organization was it? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: The Ostjudischer Verband, this is an organization from the Jewish people they came from Eastern Europe, Poland, Russia, and so we were many in Dortmund. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it like a social or political, or-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Social? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Not political, not political-- social and Jewish, you know. So that I met there my husband and I got married in 1933. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK, a little bit before that, still, you were living in Dortmund. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Dortmund. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's a German town. What is it like? What is Jewish life like? What was your father's occupation? A little more about your life. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: My father-- well, I told you, we had a store and for brides, linen, furniture, and everything what was necessary for a family, they sold. And well, I think this was enough to do. My father, he belonged also to a few organizations. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Those were Jewish brides and non-Jewish brides? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: No, no, yeah, non-Jewish people, mostly, non-Jewish, not Jewish. Not only brides-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, I think-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: People. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think we are-- you probably have things that you think of, flashes of memory. If you have nothing to do, you may go back to Dortmund and remember a day. Let's forget the cameras. Let's forget the interviewers. It's like looking at a photograph-- what do you see in Dortmund as a girl that grows up? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Dortmund-- you know, Dortmund was a city-- an industrial city. We went-- I went to the schools, to non-Jewish school, first four years, the first four years in a Jewish school, then the non-Jewish school, and I met there, all my friends. But coming home, I had my Jewish life. 

In my parents' house, I couldn't invite so easily non-Jewish people, friends. My father wouldn't allow it. I had-- I had a friend, a girlfriend, non-Jewish, but this was the one. But generally, speaking in generally, I couldn't go out with non-Jewish people. My father would not allow this, was always afraid that I will meet somebody, you know, non-Jewish. Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's-- that's the-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't touch this. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Ah, I'm sorry. And you know how it is when you have girls-- you are always afraid of something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yeah, and what shall I tell you, more? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Flesh it-- think of a-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: With a few words, I lived-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --things that you would remember if nobody would ask you. And do you have a Saturday afternoon, or a Friday afternoon with a Ma'ariv and you are sitting down. You have nothing to do, and things will come back about your-- the years that you were growing up. Any memory that's of importance to you. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Friday night, for instance, we are sitting on the table and my parents, they had already-- the son-in-law, two son-in-law, two sons-in-laws, they were-- one was very strictly orthodox and the other, less. But when they came home to us, to my parents, they never, ever would sit-- what's it-- without the yarmulke, or smoke Saturday, never would do it. This I remember very much because we respected very highly, highly our parents. 

And well, this is what I can tell you about my-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember talking to your parents, or to maybe your older sisters about the anti-Semitism, what it was about, how they understood it? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: No, because I was very young, you know? And it was not so terrible to talk about. In the beginning, it was not so terrible. Then later on, it was, but in the beginning, it wasn't because my-- my parents, they lived there many years and they made the business with them. They had also good friends-- I don't say no-- between the non-Jewish people. 

But it was already anti-Semitism, but we didn't take it so in serious, you know? This was our fault. We should have think about it. It was our-- really, it was our fault. 

And I remember when somebody came to me, my-- my father was very unhappy when he saw non-Jewish. He said, well, I'm sure he's an anti-Semite, or she's an anti-Semite because she said this and this word what I didn't like. You know, it was always something against the Jews. Even they didn't talk about, but it was-- we could feel it. We could see it in their faces, that something they had against Jews. 

Oh, I had a very nice dress on, as a girl. She said, well, you can buy a nice dress. I don't have the money. But you have the money. You can buy it, you can afford it, you know? 

Or for instance, when I gave away a dress, a nice dress to a girlfriend, a non-Jewish girlfriend, she was my friend. When I didn't give away a dress, she was not my friend anymore. So that I have practically-- I had to buy the friendship all with a dress, or with a chocolate, or something, or a ticket for-- for the cine. It was not the real friendship, what we had. 

They had their interest to be friendly with us, with me. This was my impression as I-- when I was young, you know? Well, this is practically my life, my young life, in my parents' home and I am very grateful that they educated me that way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your-- your sister-- your older sisters, though, got married before you? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: My--yes, sure. My father would never allow to-- to give me the permission to get married before my oldest sister. This was not allowed. But they got married very young. 

The oldest-- oldest sister, she lives now in Buenos Aires. She went through the hell. She lost her first husband in Auschwitz, also. My second sister lives in Israel. She left Germany in 1933 with her husband. And I fled Germany the end of 1938. And my youngest sister, she was caught in Belgium and sent to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Eh, Germany in 1929, 1930, what was it like before the-- to you, what was daily life like? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: The daily life-- well, the Jewish people, they lived-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: For you, your own memories. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yeah, this-- well, I was working in the Jewish organization at that time and I was very happy there. I liked it very much. It was a Jewish life. I had to do something with Jews, someone with a Jewish life, even it was only socially. 

But it wasn't only socially, really, because when somebody had something-- two persons, one against the other, we-- our organization, we had the power to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Settle? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: To settle it, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was that done? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Well, it went to the court. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you describe an instance where that happened? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: No, I cannot, I cannot. But we-- like arbitrators, you know? And my husband, he was the one who settled it. At that time, he wasn't my husband. I was the secretary. And it went to court and then it was-- the record, the court recognized it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The German court would recognize it? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: The German court, they recognized our urteil. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Verdict. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yeah, it was very interesting. So that the Jewish people not only socially, we had-- and then we had the fundraising for poor people, poor Jewish people, for camps, Jewish camps. And so we did a lot for-- for sick people, for old people. This was our obligation to work for them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did things begin? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did things begin-- 

KATHY PLESCHELL: With Hitler? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the first signs. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Yes. In the year-- what I told you before, you know, there was a putsch in Germany. He says a putsch, a coup. I think it was 1923 when Hitler had his meeting in Munich in the bierbrauhaus I saw this bierbrauhaus a few years ago in Munich. 

And there, he met a few men, three or four. It began with three or four men and he-- he was the founder of the little party, Nazi party, the Nationalsozialistische Partei. Then he went to prison. They took him to prison, to Landshut. There, he wrote the book Mein Kampf. You know it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, but we would like to hear your experience. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Ah, my experience-- well, it started 1933. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before that time, you didn't know about Hitler? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Before that time, no, it was anti-Semitic, we know it. And-- but it started really 1933, the real in Spanish they say acontecimientos. 

The-- what can I say? Eh, what happened-- it happened really 1933 with the boycott against the Jewish stores, the Jewish department stores. And I remember where I lived, there was a department-- Jewish department store. The name was Meier und Gunther a very big store. 

And-- and one day, I don't remember the date, but it was 1933, they were standing there, SA men, and they didn't let come in nobody. And when somebody wanted to come, even non-Jewish people, they didn't let them. And we were on the other side, looking through the window. We saw all this. I was very young married. And so it started, and little by little, more and more, we never could think that something like that, what happened, will happen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you saw this in '33, you know, what went through your mind? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: We thought-- my husband said, I give him half a year, no more. Then after half a year, he will go. This is what we said, what we thought. But it wasn't so. Hitler made the most impossible thing possible. And every time, more and more and more, you know? Once he made the boycott, then, he didn't let, for instance, work-- a non-Jewish maid in a Jewish home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, we are interested in your-- in the way you found out about all this and what you thought. 

KATHY PLESCHELL: Well, this I saw. I saw with my own eyes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

KATHY PLESCHELL: There were men standing that didn't let go in nobody, but nobody. This-- so it started. Then, it started also non-Jewish girl didn't-- couldn't go out with a Jewish man. So they took the man, this I saw also, and put them here. Sign, I am a Jewish pig, or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you describe that-- what you saw? Or-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: This I saw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had friends that this happened to? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Uh, not friends, but the people I knew, yeah. They were not directly friends, but I knew them because Dortmund was not such a big city, you know? With a sign, I am a Jew-- Jewish pig, for instance. OK-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What if they wouldn't wear it? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What if they didn't wear it? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Oh, they had to. They had to because they were also-- they went together with the SA men. The SA men wear it on their side. And they had to go through the city with that sign. Not only in our city, in-- in Essen, for instance. And th-- there were men, I knew him, Mr. Rosenbeck, I think it was his name, I'm not sure. He had to go to the whole city with this sign. Yeah. And even the non-Jewish girl, she had to go from time to time also with a sign, I am a whore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what did people do around this? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Nothing. The people were standing, and they didn't do anything. They-- I don't know why. Or they were afraid. Or they saw-- thought-- thought the same, I don't know what happened. Nobody said a word. This what happened. For instance, they took me personally, as a non-Jewish person, because I looked Irish, non-Jewish. My husband looked Jewish, so that-- they thought I am going out with a Jew. And many times they said to me, you are a Jew-- a Jewish-- you are a whore. They said it to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: You are a whore. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who-- who said? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: The SA 

INTERVIEWER 2: In this-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: I remember one thing. I was engaged. Not married yet. I was engaged. And we had a store for, uh, men's suits and fabrics. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Material. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Material, yeah. En gros. It was a wholesale. My husband, one day he went to by-- at that time he wasn't my husband. He was my fiance. He went to buy, um, merchandise to another city. And while he was away, six SS men came to my store. I never will forget this in my life. And he asked for my husband. Now, my husband, he was very exposed. He was very much working in Jewish organizations. He was the repre-- representative-- representant, representative in the Jewish community. The-- the, uh-- the whole Jewish community. German Jews, German Jewish community. Then he was in the Ostjudenverband. This is for Eastern Europe Jews. Then he worked in the Jewish Welfare Organization. He worked in the Jewish berufsberatungstelle. What is it in English? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Job counseling. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Professional counseling. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Right. So that-- he worked in many organizations. So six men came in SS uniform. I thought I will faint when I saw the black uniforms with their boots. And he asked for Mr. Preschell. I said, Mr. Preschell is not here. Who is Mr. Preschell to you? Now, I was afraid to say he is my fiance. I said he is my friend. So, you have a boyfriend? Yes, he's my friend. You know you are a whore? I didn't answer. I was afraid to answer. So they said, all right, we will come back tomorrow. I went to the post office-- not from home, to the post office, to make a telephone call to my husband not to come back until I call him. 

He stayed away eight days. And they always came. Is Mr. Preschell back? No. Is Mr. Preschell back? No. Then my husband said, I am eight days away. I go home. He came home. The result was, the next day, one of the six men came. And he was, before I ga-- was engaged to my husband, he was a client, my husband's client. So when he saw my husband, he said, oh, Efraim, what are you doing? I am looking for you. Like a friend, you know? And he proposed my husband to tell them if he knows if-- when he knows if somebody is leaving Germany, but somebody with money, to tell them, the Gestapo. 

My husband said, what? What do you want me to do? To tell you? I don't know who is leaving ma-- uh, Germany. Because if somebody will leave Germany, he does it in secret. I don't-- he don't tell me. Well he must-- you must know because you belong to so many organizations. I said-- my husband said, Fritz. His name was Fritz. You want me to be a spy. I never will do it. I prefer to die. I will never do it. If you are my friend, who-- how could he be friend in a black uniform? But if you are my friend, you shouldn't come to me. And please, I beg you not to come with this proposition. You can come as a friend, but not with this proposition. 

This I never forget because I was shaking. It was not so easy to have visitors like this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: You know? This is one incident I cannot forget. Another incident. I was married very young. I married in '33. It was '35. It was on a Sunday. My husband was sleeping a little bit between 1:00 and 3:00 or so. And I was standing-- I was waiting for a girlfriend, and I didn't want her to, uh-- to, um-- to knock on the door or something because my husband was sleeping. So I went out, and waiting for her to open the door. So a man in SA uniform came, was standing before me, and he said, you whore. You Jewish whore. And I was calling my husband. I was-- I-- but I couldn't anymore. He grabbed me, and he hit me, and I fell. And I broke my arm. Look, the arm is not straight, you know? This happened to me. 

On the other side were a building. This was the police, the-- like, a precinct or something like this. They saw it, but they know-- they knew me. The policemen, they knew me as a child. So one of the men came out of the police. And he said, what hap-- what happened to you? I said, didn't you see what happened? And they took the man inside to the building. A few days later, this policeman came to my husband. He lost his job. They fired him immediately. And he offered my husband cigars, to buy cigars from him. He didn't have a job anymore. This happened to me. 

Another incident. My husband, he was very exposed, I told you, in organizations. So that they had him, uh-- they-- they didn't forget him, you know? They were always looking at him. So that one day they came, and-- and took him to the same precinct with other people, with maybe two dozens of people. Under them was the Shoykhet. Two Shoykhets there. Eastern Europe Shoykhet and the Jewish-- the German-Jewish Shoykhet. And I saw it with my eyes. I saw it, how they hit them in the back. And how then-- I was standing, and he said to me, go inside. If not, uh, we will do with you the same. I couldn't even-- they didn't even let me look. 

So they took my husband to the building, and they put all the people on the wall. This is what my husband told me. And the hands on the wall. And they made so as they will shoot them. But they didn't, you know? This is what happened also. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Then, I had a Jewish maid. It was forbidden to have a non-Jewish-- first, I had a non-Jewish maid. Then I had to let her go because it was forbidden. I took her-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did she-- was-- was she sad about it? What was the good-- goodbye to the maid? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the good-- farewell to the maid? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Uh, the maid? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The woman who was working for you. And-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --she had to go. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: She had to go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like for her? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: For you? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Nothing. Nothing. She left. She didn't say-- this was-- this came from Hitler. And this was right, what he did. So she left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: So I took another maid, a Jewish maid. I had a little baby. My daughter was born in, uh, March, '36. So that-- I forgot what I have to tell because I'm very nervous. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: About the maid, you were saying. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. I forgot what I have to say. It's difficult for me to [SIGHS]-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did she-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: --live again all this, you know? And-- uh, yeah. Then suddenly, this maid, this young girl got, um, a letter. She was a very poor girl. Jewish. And she got a little bit money from the welfare. She had very poor parents also. And from the welfare, they want-- they sent her to clean windows. And she couldn't do that, so she said, I am sorry, I cannot do it. Why can't you do it? I am suffering with headache. So you have headache. Tell me. Your father passed away. Yes. With what? What did he have? And she said he was epileptic. Oh, epileptic. All right. 

So they took her. They sent her a letter first to come to a hospital. They have to, uh, um, make an operation on her to sterilize her. Now, I got a letter, for instance, a few weeks ago. I got a letter from a-- a cousin of hers to describe all this. She needs it for the restitution. And my husband went from E-- from A to Z, from one to the other, to ask not to do this operation on that girl. She was 18 ni-- 18 years old. It didn't help. My husband went-- this girl was a Polish citizen. My husband went to-- to the Polish, um, consulate, to Essen, and to tell them what happened. They couldn't do anything. 

And they took her. And it was forbidden for my husband, for me, to talk about this completely. We couldn't tell to nobody what happened. This was strictly confidential. And they performed the operation on this girl. She cried. The mother cried. It didn't help anything. She had to undergo this operation. Now she lives in New York. And I got a letter from her cousin, because the cousin is working on this, asking me to describe all this to her lawyer in Germany what happened because she doesn't have, until now, the restitution. This also is in my mind. I never can forget it. 

Then one day, my-- my child was one and a half years old. I had another Jewish girl before this. And-- and it was, I think, 1 o'clock or 12 o'clock, she wanted to go out with my child to a park. Suddenly-- we had a-- a door, a glass door, and I could see three men came up the store. We had our store on the floor. Three men came up the stores, and I recognized them immediately on the hat. This must be the Gestapo. My husband was-- he was taking a nap, he was sleeping. I was afraid to say something. 

I opened the door, and they came in. And they asked me, you are Mrs. Preschell? Yes, I am. I opened the door from the store. He said, we want to see merchandise. All right. Then my husband came. And they asked me-- and I saw in the middle-- I let fall a-- a glove from the child fall down-- fell down. So I saw in the middle that they are looking at me, what I am doing. I saw this in the middle. I picked up the-- the glove and put it on-- on my child's hand. And my husband came the same moment. I couldn't tell him, be careful. But I saw it already in the mirror, something is wrong with that three men. I saw it. 

And they asked me, what is your name? Kathy Kohn. My maiden name is Kohn. Oh, he said. Well, I had a very good friend, Alfredo Kohn. Is this a, um, ret-- relative of yours? I said, yes, he's my cousin. He said, oh, we were many times together with a beer. We are s-- we were drinking a beer. He's a very nice man. So I thought to myself, well, it's something good. They wanted to see if we have the merchandise, if we are not going, if we are not leaving, if we are selling the merchandise for nothing. This is what I felt. And it was true. So they asked me, how much this costed, how much this costed. I told them the real price. That means, not a price to-- to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Liquidate. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: --to s-- to liquidate, yes. And then he said-- he asked me and asked me. Not my husband, he asked me. And I asked that-- answered what I could. Well, they left. A few days later, two other men came. First, they wanted my husband to open the, uh-- the, uh-- the Eisenkasse. The-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Safe. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: The safe. My husband, that time, before Hitler, he was a member in the Democratic Party. Now, the safe had inside another little safe, but my husband didn't have the key. He lost the key. And my husband was afraid that this document from the Democratic Party is inside. He-- he was afraid of this. And they called a technician to open this safe. Can you imagine what went through me and my husband? We were so afraid because nobody can understand it when he-- he didn't live there. So finally they opened the safe. Nothing was there. But they wanted to know, and to know, and to know. 

And first-- and I prepared already a few drinks because I knew that many people, they did it. So I did the same. I prepared in a little, um, drawer a few drinks. So one of the two men left, and the other stayed. So I said to him, and I said to my husband, please let me talk. Don't talk. Me, as a woman, it's not so-- maybe not so dangerous. And I said, please take-- take a seat. May I invite you for a drink? He said yes. And I gave you another drink, and another drink. And he started to tell us stories about Goring and his child. Look, he said. They are taking away from the Jewish people money, uh, to buy a golden little bed for Goring's child. 

These two men, they came. Every Jewish businessman had to-- they had to give to every Jewish businessman to pay money to-- they said, you had-- you have done this wrong, you have done this wrong. Something. Never did wrong something, but they have-- we had to give money. So they-- he said to us, well, you have to pay I don't remember the amount. If it were-- if it was 20,000 mark or 50,000 mark, I don't remember. But a lot of money. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which would be in dollars what? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: No, in mark. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But what would it be in dollars? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Oh. In dollars in that time, uh, $20,000 or $10,000. 20,000 mark, $10,000 approximately. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: So I said to myself, well, he is sitting here, he is telling us stories about his-- Mr. Goring. I try, and I said to him, look. Yeah. And he said to me, and I cannot even afford to go on vacation. And they buy for his child a golden little bed? I said, look, Mr.-- I don't remember his name. I have it in my papers written. Would you allow me to pay your vacation? It was very dangerous to say that, but nobody was there. He was alone. Oh, he said, how can you tell this? I said, forget it. I want to invite you to take your vacation. Please, do me the favor and allow me this. And he did. And he did. 

So we had another friend. He was more friend to him that we were. I gave the other friend, also a Jewish man, 150 marks. I'll never forget it. And this other friend gave him the 150 marks so that we came out without penalty, you know? This are also an incident very interesting. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: But my husband, he-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How frightened were you? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How frightened were you? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Very frightened. We were very frightened. And this, what I did, I think a second time, I couldn't do it. For instance, when this happened, they came always, and we knew they want to ruin us. And I knew they are looking for my husband. They are looking for something to take him, but they didn't have, um, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Evidence. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes, evidence. So that I knew we have to leave Germany. We didn't know when because nobody was talking about je-- gas chambers in that time. How could we-- we think about gas chambers? And we had a good business in that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have--did you know of people who had been killed or disappeared or anything yet? Had that happened yet? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. Yes. Yes. There disappeared many people. We didn't-- until now, I don't know where and when. And so many-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Friends of yours would-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Friends of yours? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Uh, no. Not directly friends, but we know. I know the people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were getting very scared? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Sure. Sure. Our whole life was with-- with fear. Our whole life. So that one day we had Polish passports. And we had to go every year, or every ho-- every year, I think, to make it valid for another year. So my husband didn't go out anymore on the street because he looked Jewish. So I went. And as I worked in the Ostjudenverband, Ostjudische Organization, so that I knew all this people from the police and from the-- who has to-- who had to re-validate my passport. So I went to him. It was in a-- a high-- in high position, Mr. Wolf was his name. And he said to me, Mrs. Preschell, give your husband my best regards. Tell him to leave Germany at once. 

First, he went to the door, and opened the door if somebody is standing there outside. Then, he came in and he talked to me. He said, give my husband my best regards, and tell him to leave, at once, Germany. Something will happen. This was a few days before October, uh, 25, I think, when they sent away all the Eastern Jurope-- Eastern Europe Jews to Zbaszyn. This was a n-- uh, uh, nobody's land because-- between Germany and Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 2: October 25, what year? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Uh, '38. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Huh. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: We didn't-- I didn't understand what will happen. So that I sa-- I said, Mr. Wolf, what can happen? It cannot be worse. It's worse enough. It cannot be worse, what could-- Mrs. Preschell, please leave Germany. This he said to me because he knew us. He knew my husband very well, and he knew me. I went home, and I told this to my husband. And I don't know how, we didn't believe everything, but this we believed. And so I said to my husband, we have to do something. We have to go-- we have to leave Germany. We couldn't leave before because there was many things that we couldn't. My, uh, uh, mother-in-law was alive. She was very, very sick. We couldn't leave her alone. So we have some-- many things that we couldn't go before. 

But now it was really dangerous to stay more time in-- in Germany. So t-- so that I said to my husband, now we have to do-- we have to take as in serious. I heard that the police in Mannheim-- another city, it's far away from Dortmund. There are a few policemen, they give for money, they give the stamp in the passport, and everything what you need to go out to Germany, and to come back to Germany. Because I couldn't say, I go out from Ger-- uh, I leave Germany. I had to say, I leave Germany for a few weeks, and then come back. 

So that I went to Mannheim with another friend from childhood, a boyfriend. We two, we went. And we slept on the floor in a Jewish, uh, apartment from-- it was an old man, he gave us the-- to sleep there. We were there a few days until we met the policeman. Because every day when he went to him, he was drunk. So one day, we met him no drunk. And so, he gave us the stamp in the passport-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you begin, uh, talking to him, and telling him about the deal? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Well, he gave already to other people the same, and we knew it. We knew that with him we can talk. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So what did you say to him? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: We want this and this. We want the stamp in our passport. And so he gave us the stamp, and the little stamps also. I have the passport until now, I think. The little stamps, we put it in the passport. What I had to-- and we gave him a lot of money. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How much did you pay him? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: $1,000 dollars, one passport. And we had two, so that's $2,000. And I paid for the other boy-- for the other young men, also $1,000 because he told me this. Through him, it was. So that now I had all this in my passport. But how could I go home with a passport in my pocket? This was very dangerous. They could make, um, an assault in the-- in the station, you know? Or they could-- something could happen, and they could find the passports with a false stamp. 

So--but we were lucky. We came home. And I was sitting and writing out with my hand this stamp. I took, I don't know, any date, and wrote it in. And I was looking for a ink who looked a little bit older, not very new. Something like that. And I put it in the passport. I wrote it in the passport. And with this stamp, I went with another person to Dusseldorf to the French consulate. Because the French consulate gave us the visa only when we had the stamp. The stamp said, we are allowed to-- we go out from Germany, and come back to Germany. Only with a stamp to come back, he gave us the visa to France because it was a-- a visa to visit family, not to stay there. 

So finally, I got this-- the visa to France. It was not so easy. And I came home with all this. This was, uh-- it was, I think, October 25, 25th. We-- we went to Paris. But don't ask me how I was shaking. I was horrified with something false in your pocket, you know? We took one little suitcase for my husband and me, and one little suitcase for my child. First we went to my parents to say goodbye, and to my sisters. We didn't know that something the-- what will happen. We didn't know. And we went like nothing with a little baby, with a-- with a, uh-- the baby, uh, car to the station. 

And we were sitting there, and my baby was lying on the-- she was two years old, I think. And suddenly, near the frontier, I heard it already outside, the boots. The boots. The boots. One, two, one, two. And they came in. And I asked alway-- also my husband, please, let me talk. Because, you know, in case-- when you are in danger, a man cannot lie. A woman can-- does it a little bit better. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: And my husband couldn't lie at all. And he came in, and he said, where are you going? To Paris. Forever? No, for a visit. How long time you want to stay there? Well, three or four weeks. What are you doing in Paris? We want to visit family. So you are coming back to-- to-- to, uh, Germany? Yes, we are coming back to Germany. Do you have something new? No, we don't have. Do you have cigarettes? Yes, I said. We have three boxes of cigarettes. But you know, it's only allowed two boxes for each. One-- one box. I didn't smoke in the time. That time, no. So he said, it's only allowed two boxes. 

But I took-- I knew it is not allowed three boxes, but I took it. I wanted to give them the opportunity to find a little thing. Not to go further. So I said, all right, if it's not allowed, I go to the office and give the one box back. He said, no, keep it. How much money do you have? I said, 30 marks. But you know it's only allowed each one 10 marks, 20 marks. So I said, well, for my baby. I thought I can have it also for her 10 marks. He said, no. It's not allowed, but keep it. We kept it. I opened the s--the-- the, uh, suitcase, and he found a smock. An old smock, but it was very nice like new. He said, this is new. I said, I'm sorry, it is not new. It is already used. So he believed it. 

And he took the passport. And he took the passport. And I tell you, [SIGHS] I felt one cheek was hot, and the other cheek was cold. And I said-- I was sitting this. I didn't say a word. He was looking at the passport. And once in a life, you have-- you must have mazel. And this was our mazel, our luck. He didn't see that the passport was, uh-- it was given to me in Essen. Because the Polish consulate was in Essen in that time. The visa, the f-- the false stamp was given to me in Mannheim. And the French visa, in Dusseldorf. And I lived in Dortmund. This he didn't see, and this was my mazel. 

Can you believe th-- can you think what happened-- what would have happened to me when they would have seen it? So that I-- I don't know how I went through this. I really don't know until now. Then, th-- yeah, when he came, I said to my husband, give me a cigarette. This was the moment when I started to smoke. And I smoked 150 cigarettes a day. Now I don't smoke anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was your husband doing when this was going on? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: My husb-- smoking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was just sitting there? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Smoking and smoking. I don't know what what he-- what he thought about my husband, but I was afraid when he would open his mouth, everything will come out, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: So I thought to myself, better he-- they take him as a-- a sick person. Better that way. But then I slept. When this happened, they left, I slept 24 hours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: We came to Paris. And we had friends there. We went to the same hotel. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let me back up for a second. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you left your parents, you-- you didn't think that they were in danger at the time? 

KATHY PRESCHELL: We didn't think nothing. We didn't think that something will happen. We-- no, we knew s-- something is going on, but we didn't think-- we didn't know what. We thought, because my husband, he's in so many organizations, they always came to him, ask him questions. And so that they think only my husband, something will happen to my husband. But we didn't think that something would-- will happen to all the Jewish people. And then, how could I-- let me say, if I would have known, how could I take my parents, my sisters? I didn't know my dis-- destiny, you know? So that I thought, when I come to Paris, then I will take my parents to the s-- through the same way. And my sisters. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: But it was late. We left October 25, 25th. October 28, we were already in Paris. We read the newspaper in the morning, and we read, all the Eastern Europe Jewish people are-- were sent to Zbaszyn, to the nobody's land. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No-man's-land. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: No-man's-land. No-man's-land. I went to the post office in Paris, and I made a telephone call. Not to my parents, my parents didn't have a telephone. So I called to the-- to the landlord. The landlord was half Jewish, but he lived as a non-Jew. Nobody knew that he's a half Jew. We knew it, but nobody knew. So I called his daughter to the teleph-- to come to the telephone. Uh, how was it? Yeah. No, I called her, and she went to the telephone. And in that time, my mother had a broken leg. This is why they couldn't send her away, my mother. She was lying in bed. 

And one of my brothers-in-law, he could hide himself, and they didn't send him away either. And the other brother-in-law, he fled the same minute to Belgium. Because in other cities, they sent away only the men, not the woman-- the women. But in our city, they sent way the men and the women. So that the men, they-- they were in a hiding place. And my sister-- my sisters, they were-- they sent them away with my father. My mother was in bed. So the girl from the landlord said to me, Kathy, don't cry. Your mother is-- they didn't send her away because her leg-- of her leg. But she's lying in bed, and she's crying. [SIGHS] (CRYING) I cannot-- I cannot talk. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: But don't be afraid, nothing will happen to her. (CRYING) Then came the-- the Kristallna-- night. I was in Paris. And I heard that my mother and the one-- one brother-in-law, he came, and he took my mother on his shoulders, and went to upstairs to the last floor, to the la-- um, to the-- it wasn't the floor. It was where, uh, uh, [SIGHS] depositors, where they put things in. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: N-- magazines, [INAUDIBLE]. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Where the roof is. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Attic. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: To the roof. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: And now, I don't think it's necessary to talk about. You know what happened in the Kristall night. They threw down on the street-- to the street the people from the roofs, from the floors, from everything. My mother, she was th-- here. She was on the f-- on the roof. Under the roof, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, the attic. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. The landlord, he gave her the keys to go. And I couldn't do anything for my parents anymore. My father was sent to Baus-- Zbaszyn with my sisters-- with my two sisters. And then my mother had to leave Germany. They forced here-- her to leave. And she went to Zbaszyn to take out my father. And it was allowed only to go where my father was born, in Gorlice. My father was born in Gorlice. So they went to Gorlice. After so many years living in Germany, my mother was not-- wasn't used to this life in Gorlice, in a little town, you know? Without money, without anything. And there they stayed until they came to the ghetto in Gorlice. I was already in Bolivia. In Paris, we bought the visa to Bolivia, also with a lot of money. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You tried to get into the United States, but-- 

KATHY PRESCHELL: We couldn't get the visa. I went before, in Germany, to the-- to the consulate-- to United States consulate. He said, you have to wait at least 10 years. I couldn't get the visa. So I went-- in Germany, I went to Hamburg, and I went there with another girlfriend from one consulate to the other, to-- even to Honduras. I don't know where, we couldn't get a visa. No visa. Then, when we--when I was in Hamburg, one night I couldn't get a hotel, a room in a hotel. Always was written here a-- a sign, not allowed for Jews. So that I-- we didn't know where to sleep. Finally, we found a hospice. You know what it is? A hospice? It's like a-- it's not a hotel like a-- 

[KNOCKING] 

From the religious people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have to hold on for a minute while we change the tape. 

KATHY PRESCHELL: Yes. 