[BEEP] PHILIP HALLIE: My name is Philip Hallie. And, um, I was born in Chicago, Illinois, gangster land, May 4, 1922. And, um, I was raised in the Jewish neighborhood of Chicago until my mother saved up enough money from her grocery bills-- grocery payments-- to buy us a little land outside of Chicago in my mid-teens. And I moved into a very different life from what I was raised in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is the Jewish neighborhood in Chicago like? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Southwest side near Douglas Park. Um, it keeps changing. It kept changing all during my lifetime. But it was basically-- well, it was a place you-- if you walked down any-- down a-- almost any street at the right or wrong time, depending on your point of view, you were trapped for a minyan. A very Orthodox people there in large numbers. And then around the fringe of it, near Douglas Park there on the southwest side, there was the Italian neighborhood. And the Italian neighborhood blended into the, uh, Jewish neighborhood. 

And there was also an area where people came, apparently, from Appalachia. Even way far back in those days, in the early '30s, there were still people coming up from hillbilly land. And, um, so there was a mix-- a very volatile mix of-- of people there. Um, and, uh, since-- or poor people. There-- there was a lot of fighting going on, uh, just to pass the time away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember people in the streets that you saw, that you spoke to? 

PHILIP HALLIE: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What they looked like? 

PHILIP HALLIE: There was-- oh, well, only the people who pulled me in for a minyan. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I mean, I'd walk down the street, and somebody would start-- uh, I understood Yiddish com-- fully. And people who spoke only Yiddish would pull me in. And when I-- they heard I couldn't understand, they'd always make a gesture. And then they'd pull me in anyway. 

I mean, they-- they knew I could understand. But they knew I couldn't-- found out I couldn't talk. So they were a little disappointed. But they pulled me in anyway. 

And I was-- I spent a fair amount of time with such people. Um, I had very few friends, uh, because, uh, there wasn't a sense of friendship. There wasn't the leisure for friendship. It was, um, it was jungle. Even in the Jewish neighborhood, it was rough. 

Uh, but people would come into the Jewish neighborhood, uh, especially the people from Appalachia. Big blond kids would come into the-- big tough kids, much tougher than those Jewish kids. And they would, uh, near the little synagogues, uh, they would pick us up after we got out and beat us up. I got-- I got beat up a few times. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one incident? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, yes, indeed. I remember one particular incident. I'm-- I was 7, maybe 8. 

Was more like 8. And that was just before the Chicago World Fair in '33. It was 1930. 

And, um, I, um, was coming out of a synagogue, not because I especially was devout. But I was always being dragged into it. And, um, a big blond kid was waiting. He was twice as big as I was. He was waiting for me. 

He-- I don't think he was waiting for me. He was waiting for a Jewish kid who was small enough. And, uh, he waited until I'd gotten-- made a right turn off toward my home. 

And he jumped me from behind, and pushed my face down on the pavement, and turned me around, and started hitting me and accusing me of being a Jew. And that was a very interesting experience, to be accused of being what you are. It shook me up and confused me very deeply. 

And I couldn't do anything, uh, because he was a very heavy, big guy. And my face was a mass of blood. I didn't see the blood. I just felt sticky stuff all over me. He was hitting me in the nose. 

I've always had a glass nose. I boxed later on. And-- and, um, if anybody wanted to beat me, all they'd have to do was hit me in the nose, and I was a dead duck. So I had very good guard for my face. And they could hit me all they wanted. Developed all the muscles here so they could hit me all they wanted. 

And, um, I was covered with-- with blood. And, um, but really not knowing it, came home. And, uh, I was indignant and confused. It was the first time I'd ever been really attacked for being a Jew, although I'd been kidded and yelled at. 

And, uh, my mother's kid brother, Louie, after whom I named my son Louie, was-- happened to be talking to his big sister in the house when I came in. And I came in with my face covered with blood. My mother screamed. 

But my uncle is a boxer-- was a boxer. He used to box with Joe Louis in Chicago. Was the spar partner. He's a very powerful boxer. He had to be in order to stand up to Joe Louis. 

And, um, he asked me, uh, who did that to you, Pinky? He called me Pinky for Pinechas but also because my nose got cold. This funny nose of mine got cold whenever it got cold in Chicago, which is very often in the Windy City. He asked me whether-- what had happened. And I told him. 

He said, OK, you're going to learn how to fight. And that's-- at that very early age, I learned how to fight-- two different kinds of fighting-- street fighting, where you'd kick people in the groin as fast as you can in such a way that your foot doesn't get caught, so you don't get turned over. Uh, get-- you get your foot away. It's called a horse kick. It's very easy to-- once you know how to do it, and then nobody can grab you. Um, and then also boxing so that I could develop my timing. 

My mother fought it all the way. She just couldn't stand me learning how to fight. So my Uncle Louie had to teach me on the sly. But, uh, after a couple of years of teaching, I started doing some boxing, uh, in the ring. Nobody bothered me on the streets anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, what-- you mentioned your mother. What was home like? How many sisters and brothers? What does father do? 

PHILIP HALLIE: I have a kid brother who was four years younger than myself. My father and my mother are both still alive. My father was a cab driver in Chicago. Uh, a very-- he shouldn't have been a cab driver. He should have been a farmer. 

He really was a farmer. But he lost all of his money in the crash of '29 and '30. And, uh, he found himself in Chicago. Lost everything. 

And we were living in a big building called the cockroach building on the southwest side, right across the street from Douglas Park there. And, um, in the cockroach building, there were mostly Jewish people-- very poor Jewish people. And, uh, somehow my father just didn't make enough money to, uh-- for us ever to get out of the cockroach building. 

Life was not a very religious life. As I say, my mother and father were not religious people. They were both born and raised in Chicago. And they were very secular people. 

My mother really got deeply religious after the war, when I went to combat and she was scared as hell about my being killed. And then when she started finding out about Hitler and what he tried to do to wipe out the Jews, that-- that turned her around the corner. And ever since, she's been a real gung-ho religious person. 

But as I say, it was a secular home life, poverty stricken, with a lot of fighting between my mother and my father. And, um, everywhere was violence in my life. I even was taken into the synagogues by an act of kind of mild violence. 

I mean, the people who took me in grabbed me by the arm. They didn't even ask me. My life was a life of, um, violence. 

And I learned to enjoy it. As a matter of fact, now and I'm a teacher in a college, I get bored awfully fast. I get angry awful fast, just to break the monotony. And you get used to things. You get tuned up for things. And you get fairly good at handling violent situations. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So violence-- any other scenes, imagery that you remember from those days? 

PHILIP HALLIE: After this first knock down, when I was so young, for about a year or year and a half, as I mentioned a moment ago, they still started picking on me. As a matter of fact, they started challenging each other to pick on me as I got to be a fighter. I got to be sort of the-- the gun you had to get. 

And, um, I was, uh, I was coming out of school, uh, uh, one day. And, uh, I remember two-- two boys. They were Italian boys. 

And, uh, they decided that one of them wasn't enough. That was pretty far along in my uncle's teaching me in street fighting. I didn't box with them because you never knew who had a knife or a stone or something. And, um, they both jumped me. 

And, uh, it was very bad. Um, I-- I was covered with blood. But I knocked out a couple of their teeth-- their front teeth. They were-- they were looking pretty bad, too. 

We were rolling around, um, and, um, a great big Italian woman came up. I was 9 or something. A great big Italian woman came up. 

And I was on top of the one boy who was still fairly competent. I had gotten the other one in the groin. And, um, he was walking around taking care of himself, trying to walk it off. 

And, um, she picked me up off this Italian kid. And she hugged me. And then she put me down. 

And then she looked at him. And she said something in Italian, to the effect, get out of here. She must have seen a lot of it, before and at that incident. And he walked away. I'll never forget that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: And then she-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --was it to you? 

PHILIP HALLIE: What it meant to me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

PHILIP HALLIE: It changed my life because she was Italian, and these two kids were Italian. And it was very clear, even though to an outsider-- to a blond outsider-- doesn't look-- can't tell the difference between Italian and Jew. But a Jew can tell the difference between an Italian and Jew, and so can an Italian. 

Um, and when she took me in her arms-- I was on top. I was beating up the kid-- changed my life, because what it did for me was to show me it wasn't just a jungle in this world, that it wasn't just self-interest and self-- your own little cult or your own ethnic tight little group, that people really could, um, could-- could-- could feel and think and act outside of your own little group. 

That one hug that she did was redemptive. Changed my whole life. She had a great big bosom. I'll never forget. She was black-- covered with-- oh, the way most Italian families are so big. They're always mourning for somebody. 

So, uh, I remember all this blackness. But it was light. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She sensed that you really didn't want to fight? 

PHILIP HALLIE: She sensed-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

PHILIP HALLIE: --that I had been put upon. I don't think she sensed I didn't want to fight. I wanted to fight. But she-- she-- but not to start it. I wanted to fight once somebody else started it. But when somebody wasn't starting it-- maybe she sensed, maybe she didn't. 

But one thing she felt, there were two against one. She must have seen the beginning, because in the beginning, I was really getting it. And she must have felt indignation. I can't imagine why, other than that, she would hug me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I thought she sensed that you were just-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: That I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just-- or-- you had been in the right. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I daresay that. And I daresay I felt that she sensed that, too. And that's one of the reasons it was redemptive. We were-- we were-- we were doing ethics. I mean, we really were making ethical choices, both she and I, and the boys, too, of course, of a stranger sort. 

But she and I were trying to see goodness or something across our narrow self-interest. Um, and she acquainted me that there was-- with the business of-- of justice, as you say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think knowing a little bit about, uh, your book, it's like, um, premonition here, that no matter how brave a soldier you are, you really don't want to be one. And that's what you picked up. Is that-- could that be? 

PHILIP HALLIE: You-- now matter-- let me get that straight, or--- Do you-- you-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: --brave a soldier you want to be for whatever cause, you really didn't want to be one. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I didn't want, no. That's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that's what she under-- this is the heart. This is the way-- why you felt so wonderful, because this woman understood way beyond the surface behavior. Could that be-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, it's quite-- oh, it's quite likely because if I remember-- and, of course, memory plays such tricks on you. But who's to know whether it's a trick or reality now. It's all over, and nobody was there except this woman and these two boys and myself. 

I was crying while I was on top. I was in anguish, socking this guy, as if to say, I-- if I remember correctly, I-- I was-- I was screaming and-- and crying while I was hitting him. I was punishing him very badly because I was terribly angry. But I was angry at myself and at the world. 

And she sensed all of that. It wasn't just an act of sadism, although certainly there was that in it-- triumphant sadism. But, um, but I hated the whole thing, despised it. And she sensed that. I'm sure she did. 

And she took me out of it. She really broke the circle of viciousness and violence. My mother had tried to keep me out of that circle by forbidding my uncle to teach me how to street fight. But her way of doing it would have killed me in that neighborhood. 

Well, I could have stayed indoors. But that's no life. Nothing to do indoors. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where is-- was there any, uh, other place that you find-- found something soothing-- I particularly ask about services, observances, holidays in the family, in groups of friends, or-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, before my bar mitzvah, my mother decided that she, uh, really wanted me to have an orthodox bar mitzvah, despite the fact that I had not gone to shul. I hadn't gone to Hebrew school at all, uh, except when I was dragged in for a minyan. That wasn't Hebrew school. It was just services I didn't really understand, except all of a few words. 

And, uh, it was, um, when I was being trained for my bar mitzvah, my mother put me into the house of a rabbi. She made arrangements with him in the southwest side of Chicago there. And this was-- well, I was, you know, 12 years old, going on 13. This was, what, '34, after-- after the World's Fair in Chicago. 

And, um, she had me live in his house for three weeks, if I remember correctly, where I was learning Hebrew. He would speak only Hebrew to me. And I was reading Hebrew with him. 

And, um, he was a doll face. He was a absolute doll face. He was not a martinette at all. Just as sweet as he could be and made me want, out of appreciation, out of affection for him, to learn Hebrew. 

And he was a mystic. He must have been-- had something to do with a Hasidim. I'm-- because there was something happening in the house that was too happy and joyous to be, uh, non-Hasidic. It had to be. 

And, um, that happiness and that gentleness and no violence-- nothing, no strict authoritarianism, nothing. Like, I did everything out of love for-- or may-- admiration for him. That was a wonderful experience. And we used to talk about the Shema. And our talks-- I don't remember the details. But I think that's formative. And it gave me a sense of peace that I was-- that I was really happy with. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about the Shema? What do you think? What-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, look, the main thing about the Shema, well then, you know, before the Holocaust, when there was nothing of the Shema, uh, associated with the Holocaust, uh, uh, it was the summary of everything. It was summary for-- of everything for him. Heroes of the Lord, our God. The Lord is one. 

And this is what we talked about-- what this meant, what monotheism meant, what, um, what it-- what it means to believe that the Ehud is a serious word, one. Um, and what it came to mean to me in living with him and remembering very few things, including that Italian woman's thing, was that people are one with each other. And if they're not, um, there's-- there's-- there's a deep fracture or break or-- or wrong happening in the world, and a wrong that people almost can correct. This is the feeling I had then, just if they reach out a little farther, they'd be able to heal that-- that break, that crack that's making the world 2, 3, 4, or 5 million-- whatever. 

And-- but talking with this, uh, this rabbi, and in Hebrew-- I didn't-- I never got too good at it. But I-- I have a-- a bump for languages. And so I got pretty good. 

In fact, he really was very happy with my-- with my learning Hebrew. But I've forgotten everything. It was so many years ago. 

And, um, talking with him about the unity of mankind with mankind, of people with each other, and of all people-- all nature-- with people, and of all the infinite spaces beyond. Uh, it's partly because of those conversations that I went into physics because I had a feeling from my teachers in high school and in Herzl Junior College, where I went in Chicago, that physics was about the same unity of the energy and everything. And I went into physics when I went to Grinnell College in Iowa in my-- uh, when I was-- well, how old was I? Uh, I was 18, 19. 

Because the same unity of energy interacting, there were no breaks in the world for physics. All this energy-- just everything is one mass of legal law-abiding energy. And, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the face of this man, or his-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Yes, yes. He had a round face. Um, he didn't have a beard. Um, he had a lot of hair, all gray. 

Terribly mobile face. Had this teeny-weeny nose and a big face. Looked so funny. His nose was almost-- sort of somebody said, OK, here's a nose. It's just a minimum nose for breathing through. 

Um, great big, round face, lot of hair, great big eyes. Made his nose look really silly. And he was just incapable of, um, of harshness, at least as I-- far as-- well, I used to eat-- I mean, I lived my whole life with him. Far as I could-- and sometimes I-- I really gave him a hard time, uh, because I didn't know enough. And, uh, he knew so much. 

But he was very patient with me, very loving. And he was very physical with me-- something I love. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: --I just believe in it. He used to take me in his arm, and when I'd do well. When I'd do badly, he'd push me away, never harshly, just till I'd know that I wasn't trying hard enough. Um, Singer was his name, Rabbi Singer. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did he view your violence? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Uh, it's as if it didn't exist in his house. Um, when I would try to bring it up, he'd smile. And I'd say to myself, he doesn't understand. 

But he did understand. But he was smiling because he felt that we were all part of God, and that these things were just what, you know, what else is new? This is all pain and suffering. That's fine, too. And there it is. 

But I felt when he smiled that I can't go on with the story. So I never talked to him about it. But he understood. 

When I look back now-- I was only 12 years old. I didn't realize that there was a mystic view, a Hasidic view, of all these things being part of God, including the violence. Um, I didn't realize that at all. 

So I thought he didn't understand when he smiled, although I loved him for it, and I felt very happy that he wouldn't let me dwell on these things. It was, um, it was-- it was, uh, a smile that I couldn't take. It-- I wasn't used to it. I didn't know anything about that smile. 

But if I met him now-- he's long dead, I'm sure. My God, this was 46 years ago-- what, 45 years ago. Uh, oh I'd understand that smile now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's though it was a second reconfirmation in you after the Italian hug-- woman's hug of something of a unity of-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --oneness. 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. It all kept coming back in that form, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were fighting in the ring or on the street, was it linked up with being Jewish? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Did I-- pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it linked-- connected with Jewishness? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Sometimes it was because, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: For you. 

PHILIP HALLIE: For me it was only when somebody would make a point of it. Uh, after a while, when I was learning how to street fight, uh, people stopped picking on me as Jewish. They would just pick on me because I was the fastest gun on the block or something, and they were going to gun me down, uh, because I was getting to be pretty vicious and effective, angry, and so on. 

Uh, and-- but then they never called me Jewish. They were fighting me as a man and not-- not as a Jew. And they didn't-- I-- it's a very interesting point, though, that you raise because now that I remember it, it never came into, uh, into the picture that I was Jewish when-- when I got to be a pretty good fighter. I was just a challenge, uh, as a-- as a person. 

And I never fought bitterly because I was being attacked as a Jew. That was-- it was way back. That was the beginning. I was-- I fought bitterly because I was being attacked, period. 

And in the ring, my Uncle Louie, uh, was Jewish, and everybody knew it. And, uh, everybody loved him and worshipped him. He was a singer. 

He was a-- well, he was God Almighty to me. And everybody loved him-- blacks, Italians, every-- hillbillies-- everybody loved my Uncle Louie. He had green eyes and my mother's red hair. And he was really quite a handsome guy. Women fell all over themselves for him. 

And, um, when I went into the ring, nobody would think of calling anybody Jewish, even though that person might be. I don't know. Could have been anti-Semite or something because I fought very few Jews in the ring. Um, never came up. Mm-mm. The time it really came up was when I went into combat. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before-- before you-- a little about your father, your mother, your kid brother. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, my father was a man who'd, uh, as I said, was basically a farmer. But he-- he worked on a cab and made a very, very bad living, very meager living. So we lived in this cockroach building for years. 

And, uh, it was also a frightening job because, well, one of my uncles was killed in his cab around, uh, when I was-- I don't know how old I was-- something like, I don't know, 11, 12. And so it was a dangerous job, the way it is now to be a cab driver in a big city. 

And, uh, you've got to remember, these are times that Dillinger was-- was around and, uh, and, uh, the Capone gang was around-- all around Chicago, too. I was in the same neighborhood where Dillinger was killed-- uh, heard the shots and everything. 

And, uh, so anyway, it was a very rough thing to be a cab driver. And my father would come back at night very much on edge and very sad because he just didn't have any money. And everything was always money, money, money around the house. We are you going to do? Hah, move, huh? 

And, um, so there was fights-- fights, fights, fights for my mother and my father. A lot of that. And, um, I didn't-- I didn't ever feel much, uh, much love between them because of this financial thing and possibly because other things I still don't understand. 

My kid brother was only four years, uh, difference from me-- younger. Uh he, uh, he seemed then to be so much younger that he was out of it. I had-- and then maybe sibling rivalry or something kept me from being too interested in him. I went out on my own, and I lived my whole life on my own. Came home to eat and sleep-- that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Very early on. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Very early? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Very early on. Very early on. And this solitude is something-- another thing-- that explains a lot of my feeling because I hated the solitude. But I-- the only way I could-- could really cope with life was to be on my own because my parents were fighting. And my kid was-- my kid brother was boring. 

And the world was pretty-- you know, the only person I was close to was my Uncle Louie. I'd follow him around like a puppy dog. He'd sing-- he was a singing bartender when he didn't work out with Joe Louis. You couldn't earn very much money, uh, as a-- a sparring partner. 

So I'd follow him around from one Chicago bar to the next-- uh, another, and surprise him. Turn up right in the middle of a bar. And he'd say, oh, Pinky, what the hell are you doing here? He'd pick me up and put me-- hide me behind the bar. I worshipped him. 

But, uh, he was the only one. The rest was violence and separation, and, uh, even in my own family, really. Not violence, but separation. 

And I didn't feel close to Judaism at all, until my bar mitzvah. And then after my bar mitzvah, we went up in the-- uh, the country. And we weren't in a Jewish community. And it fell away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then in-- when the war began, you found your unity in physics. But the war broke out? 

PHILIP HALLIE: But the war broke out. And, uh, I was still in physics, uh, when the war broke out. And I was trying to decide what to do. 

Uh, we were going-- uh, the one incident that I remember that was decisive in my leaving physics and going into philosophy, where we were going to cross the Rhine, it was '44-- late '44, way after August, more like November of 1944, when we were south of the Third Army. I was in the Seventh Army in the 44th Infantry Division in a [INAUDIBLE] outfit attached to the 44th Infantry Division. 

We were going to-- we were going to cross the Rhine. And I was with my-- my, uh, foxhole partner. Name of Smitty, Russell Smith. And, um, we were sitting in a, um, a foxhole just the night before we were going cross the Rhine, just north of Mannheim. 

And, um, we were-- had banks and banks of anti-aircraft guns behind us. And, um, a ME-109, a Messerschmitt 109-- German plane-- came down, uh, toward us. They were sending in all the planes they could to try to slow down the, uh, crossing of the Rhine. 

But we had these banks of, uh, of, uh, feedback, uh, anti-aircraft guns that automatically zeroed in, even at that early stage. And very efficient and very thickly banked. We had tremendous anti-aircraft stuff. 

And-- but these ME-109-- well, they were like kamikaze pilots. They were coming right down toward us. And naturally, all these anti-aircraft guns zeroed in on him and got him. 

And he just went up in a great big orange blossom. I'll never forget it. Just everywhere. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The plane exploding in the air. 

PHILIP HALLIE: The plane exploded in the air. Just must have just been a-- just a absolutely direct hit, um. There were hot shells, you know. 

So I turned to Smitty when all the pieces had fallen down. I said, Smitty, why did that have to happen? And he said, well, Phil, I'll tell you why it had to happen. A-- a volatile liquid, uh, dissected in space and time a-- a hot projectile. 

I said, oh my God, Smitty. He said, that's all I know. And that's all I care about because that's clear and definite knowledge. He was like me, an engineer-- sort of involved in that sort of thing. 

And, uh, I said, no, that-- that's not what I'm interested in. And, um, but I was interested in is what is it that makes one human being kill another human being-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because there was a pilot in there. 

PHILIP HALLIE: A human being with-- or with-- who, for whatever reasons we'll never know, uh, was-- was flying that plane. Um, uh, and, uh, Smitty was going to make it nice and simple, clean and clear, mathematical, scientific, and-- and miss everything, just miss everything there was to see. And what there was to see was one part of the Ehud-- the unity of the universe-- killing another part. 

That's what he-- that what he would not see. Everything was separate things. And he didn't-- he didn't know. He didn't feel. 

And then I knew that the unity that physics talks about was not what interested me. It was the unity of ethics, or metaphysics, or something deeper than all these [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Coming back, do you remember the first days of the war? And what do you feel about it? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, gee. Uh, well, I-- I don't-- I remember, uh, Pearl Harbor. It was very distant for me. I was very sensual. And I was going to-- going to college at Grinnell in Iowa and, uh, such a genteel, peaceful, quiet world. And all this poetry they read and-- and all this philosophy. 

And, oh, it was such a wonderful world. I didn't really know or care much for what was happening to the rest of it. Uh, I was really so happy, peaceful. There were people fighting. And I'd read about it in the newspaper. It didn't really happen to me [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing to disturb the oneness. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Uh, it was not really-- I was in a-- I was in a genteel world that I'd never been in before. And I was living it up. Where-- in colleges, you know, everybody's polite. They make knife you, but they do it politely. 

And so everything is really sweet and genteel. And I enjoyed that. I could see the knifing because I had a sharp eye for violence, especially hidden violence or quiet violence. I'm very sharp-eyed on that. It's one of the things that keeps me angry all the time. 

But still, despite the habitual anger I had, it was a-- it was a very sweet and wonderful experience. I had a cute little blonde girlfriend. And everything was just peachy. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jewish. 

PHILIP HALLIE: --they were killing people. She was not Jewish. And, uh, uh, and then when I, uh, I was not drafted. I volunteered, uh, for the army. But if I wouldn't have volunteered, they would have drafted me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um, but you volunteered. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I volunteered. Why did I? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's a decision. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Part-- part-- yeah, it's hard to tell. Part-- uh, partly because a lot of my friends were volunteering. And I felt like a sort of a laggard. And there was a lot of patriotism in the air. 

Then I was beginning to hear some disturbing things about what the Germans were doing, uh, from historians at Grinnell College. And, um, and, uh, I was hearing some rumors about anti-Semitism and things like that. I was reading some modern history. People were talking about these things. Um, but that didn't influence me too much. 

I-- I was, um, I volunteered, I think, because for the reasons many people did. First, I wouldn't have-- if I wouldn't have volunteered, I most likely would have been drafted. But if I volunteered, I had a choice of parts of the Army to go into. 

And what I chose to go into was intelligence training, what they call ASTPA. And, uh, and, wh-- and, uh, and I was able to go into that because I volunteered. And what intel-- I didn't know what intelligence training meant at that time. But, uh, one of the reasons I volunteered was that. 

But also, I wasn't a big patriot, although I was influenced enough. The reason I went was that I was going to get in anyway. I may as well get in on my own terms. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, I agree. I think you already had made up your mind to do a specific thing. Obviously, you want to have-- wanted to have the choice of the service. And I would wonder what is it that you wanted to do? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Yeah, whatever it was, Dori it was very unclear in my mind. Um, I certainly didn't intend to continue a sheer violent relationship with my fellow man. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Uh, I was sick of that. I'd had that. Um, I know I had been trained in French already. And I was good in French. 

Uh, in Herzl Junior College in Chicago and my first year at Grinnell, I was very good in French. Uh, I had a wonderful teacher. And I was given by God some of the greatest teachers. They taught me real French-- the spirit, the literature, the everything, especially the language, uh, and the accent, and the melodies-- everything. Um, and I wanted to use that. 

And I knew there was a use for it because I knew French-- France was under the German cup. And the oc-- they were occupied. And, um, so, uh, I wanted to use that French. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. And what was so attractive about French or France? 

PHILIP HALLIE: I've always felt of-- that France was what the French sometimes think it is-- a [NON-ENGLISH]-- a bridge-- pont. It's a bridge between things. And, uh, I felt that-- that I had this image that if I just could get into France, I'd first-- first of all be able to make myself abundantly and easily understood, and even-- because my accent, for at least certain accents I had-- were almost, uh, completely unidentifiable as American. They were French accents. 

And I felt that, um, that I could communicate beautifully with the French. And I was right. It was-- there was no problem there because I'd been very well trained. 

And that was wonderful because they were a-- another group. And they were a Catholic group. But also, they were compromised. Even then, I knew that they'd compromised their souls, uh, by joining and collaborating with the Nazis. 

And this was a part of the [NON-ENGLISH]-- the bridge idea, that they were a bridge to the rest of mankind, uh, because they were French, and I was American. But because they were under the Nazis, and-- and-- and they were talking and cooperating with them, and it's because that I had a feeling that if I talked to the French, especially the resistance people in the French, uh, nation, that I would be plunged into the universe better than if I just shot at people. So I-- that's why I wanted the intelligence, to talk to people and get to know them across-- across would-be boundaries, like the French, uh, like the ocean-- the Atlantic Ocean between France and America. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just a thought-- is anything with Hasidism connected to the French or mystic? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Always, absolutely always. For me, um, Hasidim-- Hasidism, a kind of mysticism that is so difficult to express. And the Hasidim are always trying so hard to express. But sometimes when they don't try, it comes out so well. Elie Wiesel, [INAUDIBLE]. 

This has been a very deep, uh, influence in my life. Falling asleep is always-- has always been a great joy for me. Um, closing my eyes and feeling the-- the darkness and the-- the-- the artificialities of boundaries that really, it's all one-- uh, falling asleep has always been-- it's not been a-- a death sort of thing for me the way it is for some people. For me, it's an entry into life to fall asleep. 

That's why I'm not afraid of death. Oh, I'm sure I'm a coward. If death were immediately threatened, I'd do everything I could to get out of it and maybe faint or something. But, uh, but I always feel that it's going to be like a dreamless sleep. And I-- and I've always felt that's just reality, and-- and the waking life is the darkness. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And why France? Why is it embodied in France-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Just a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --for you? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Maybe an accident. Maybe it's just because I had wonderful French teachers. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Another Rabbi Singer. 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. And my French teachers were very much like the-- like Rabbi Singer. Uh, there are so many accidents that maybe aren't accidents but are, too. 

Um, I had a wonderful teacher at Herzl Junior College in Chicago. Um, and, uh, his name was Schreiber And he was German. He was not Jewish. 

And he was a martinette, and he was magnificent at teaching you French French. And you had to get it right-- the melody and all, not just the words, but the melody. I'll never forget that. 

And, um, I just learned. And I had the power. And as Nietzsche says, when you have the power, you tend to use it. And I had the power to speak French, and I wanted to use it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you joined the service. And you went to Intelligent. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Yes, I went to an Army Specialized Training Program, STP. And the idea was that I was going to be like, uh, various other people, who are still my friends, many of them, um, involved in contact with the French resistance-- the chiefs of the French resistance in northern France. This was the idea. 

We went to Iowa City. And we were there in '42-'43 in Iowa City. And we were being trained for, uh, as we gradually learned, uh, for various types of service in France, or with regard to France, I mean. 

But I, because I was able-bodied, and had been athletic, and had nothing especially wrong with me, except for my glass nose, they-- that's a figure of speech. My nose isn't made of glass. Um, the-- the idea was that I was going to, um, um, most likely be dropped behind the lines because my accent was good and so on. And, uh, I was going to contact, uh, certain chiefs of the resistance in the Normandy area. 

And that was going to be fun. I really wanted to do that. I didn't smoke, but I had learned how to smoke the way a Frenchman did. Almost drove me nuts. I hate smoking cig-- always did. 

And, um, so I was, say, trained for that. It seemed like a very exciting thing and physical enough to be-- to be real, sort of, to me. And, um, not especially danger-- it-- it wasn't that dangerous, really, to be-- at least we were taught this. 

Maybe we were taught badly. But I think they would-- to be accurate with us. I don't think they would have kidded us. 

In the Normandy, the-- the chiefs of the resistance were very strong. And the resistance there for a long time had been extremely effective because the Germans had occupied northern France from the very beginning. And they had really sharpened up the resistance there. 

Southern France had been occupied for the first half of the-- so they were sort of relaxed. And, uh, they didn't know how to-- how-- the resistance didn't know how to work. But in northern France, um, they were-- they were sharpened up by the danger of having the, uh, Germans right there. And, uh, they were good. And, uh, I was going to be contacting them for various reasons. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For what? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, uh, giving them information, receiving information, receiving very sensitive information, uh, about where, uh, the chiefs of the resistance were located whom we didn't know about, particular character, personality traits of the very people I was talking with, as well as the people that they were associated with. They would give-- first I'd have to find out about the pic-- their chief I would be talking with so I could correct for anything he says about the other chiefs or the followers. And, uh, personality was a lot of it. I really had to pass various judgments on how reliable they were, and, uh, how-- how-- how easily they might crack, or how many-- how many people in their family that they had to worry about, and, uh, how much, uh, they can be trusted with in the way of, uh, general knowledge. 

But, um, it was-- it was all sorts of-- I never did it. I was never dropped behind the lines. But that was the sort of thing-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But ultimately, what would the resistance organization, eh, do? 

PHILIP HALLIE: It's always been a question-- a fundamental question, uh, amongst the resistance. They've always argued this. What could they do when Hitler-- as Europe was fortress Europe. And there was really-- now, before the landings in the north and the south, what could they do except get killed and harass? 

Um, And some people have said, nothing, and they shouldn't have-- they should have just organized, and-- and gotten ready, and gotten ready, got ready until the landings, and then swing into action. Other people said, no, they should do whatever they can do, uh, because that would slow down things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, sooner or later, the resistance fighters would be involved in ambushing, mining, killing. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. There's no question about that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were going to be a part of it. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, I wasn't really-- uh, uh, that was possible. But, uh, my main thing was to get in and then, uh, my idea was also to get out. There was a great deal of-- people don't realize how many, uh, English airplanes were coming in. That was practically like an airport, France was-- uh, not that. You know, but there were quite a few incredibly skillful English pilots who were bringing over, picking up, dropping, picking-- it was a whole-- it was a whole schedule-- unscheduled airline. 

Um, and then they'd pick me up, take me back. And they'd, you know, not leave me there long enough perhaps. Well, that was all very indefinite. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Phil, of course, we are talking about you-- you-- what you imagined. Eh, but that sounds like it's not part of a war. 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That you were going into France to, uh, uh, meet Frenchmen, certain people, to give to-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not [INAUDIBLE]. 

PHILIP HALLIE: It was not really part of a war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And so you felt it wasn't going to be part of the violence in the war. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I didn't think it was going to be. I-- as a matter of fact, I really was interested in how likely it was that I would not be immediately a part of the resistance but would rather be a conveyor of information back and forth between England-- between Bigorre, really, and, of course, the Alliance as a whole, and, uh, and the French, uh, resistance, just to, uh, information, uh, you know. 

The specialized training I had had was for information con-- convenience. Um, and also, I love English-- I love French food. And I really wanted to go there to have as much French food as I could. And Normandy has the best Camembert in the world. And, uh, Calvados-- ooh-la-la. Calvados-- you know, apple brandy. Oh, man, if you were just a sensualist, you'd risk your butt to get into Normandy, no matter what. You sit in a caf, and they cut off a slice of this Camembert. It's just [FRENCH], just perfectly ripe. And, uh, uh, a tumbler full of Calvados. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's enough to risk anything. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- the way you describe this, though, again, you were going on a vacation-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --that you, eh, completely blotted out the fact that in what-- in some way or another, you would be connected with the war effort, with fighting-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: You're-- no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That [INAUDIBLE]. Even-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: No, you're quite right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --track information. 

PHILIP HALLIE: No, no, you're absolutely right. I had domesticated it all with my, uh, with my intelligence, uh. And they made it very easy for me to do it because they weren't going to try to scare the heck out of this. They were going to train us. And, uh, and then maybe gradually just before all the jumps we were going to be made-- we were told the real story. 

So it went along with what they were doing, their very elaborate training they had to do. So we-- I just fantasized along with them. It was all going to be Calvados. 

I didn't even know about Calvados. But I knew about Camembert. And I knew about the French cooking. Uh, and, um, it was going to be a, uh, a lot of fun. 

Oh, it was going to be dangerous. I was no idiot. But, um, and, uh, it was that way pretty much for quite a while, until Mannheim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was-- it was going to be dangerous. And what's-- what about that? What's the dangers in [INAUDIBLE]? 

PHILIP HALLIE: It was-- it-- let's put it this way, Dori It could have been dangerous. But it could also have been absolutely non-dangerous. 

It wasn't like combat, where you come up, and you stand there, and you're a target. You're-- it had-- it has to be dangerous in combat. But in resistance work, everything is clandestine. It's underground. And-- and you can, uh, you can, uh, find yourself living a whole non-dangerous life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you imagine the danger, though? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, if I-- if I picked up my cigarette the wrong way. Uh, if I slipped. If I-- if I got hurt and-- and yelled a word in-- in English. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then what would happen? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Ooh, I'd be a dead duck. No question, I'd be a dead duck. We all knew that. 

I'd be shot on the spot if I were-- uh, if they-- if it wasn't in front of a French resistance person. If it could-- if it was one of the many-- 95% of the French were collaborators. And if it was one of the front of the 95% that I would make the wrong move, they had everything in the world to trap an American because they hated England-- the collaborators hated England and-- as much as they hated anybody-- in fact, more than they hated because that was part of their collaboration, to hate England. And England and America were in cahoots-- Churchill and Roosevelt. So, um, I was, uh, you know, quite-- quite convinced that, um, that if I made, um, just the slightest wrong ethnic move, uh, let alone a linguistic mistake-- if I didn't get a-- um, an idiom or a colloquialism absolutely perfect, uh, it would-- it would-- in front of the wrong person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what about this taking of the risk? 

PHILIP HALLIE: I-- I didn't really think about it so much. It was better than going into combat. Uh, it-- there-- that's what the alternative-- going into combat or doing this. 

And as I say, the difference, uh, was that it's quite possible I could have just dwelt very happily with these, uh, Frenchmen whose language I spoke and loved, and then be uplift-- airlifted. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you imagine escaping one risk after another after another-- outsmarting them? Was that-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, I imagined that. That was fun to think about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, that was important. That was part of our training, too, yeah. And little chess games-- I like to think couple couple of moves ahead, you know. 

And, uh, you take a couple moves in that direction, you think, [INAUDIBLE]. And then you see what happens. It's sort of fun. 

Um, you-- that was really very much a part of what we were thinking in terms of-- that, uh, outsmarting them, uh, by, uh, by just stepping right into the most conspicuous spots, if you really were-- felt well trained, well equipped. Um, uh, knowing the local gossip-- the domestic gossip-- the-- the pregnant girls, the, uh, adulterous males-- everything. And knowing all these details, and going to a, uh, a bistro or something where there's a, uh, uh, where a German or-- or-- or a Vichy official of some sort-- a policeman or something, even later on, the [INAUDIBLE], were going to be standing around, and just going there, and talking right there, right in front of them, just going out of your way, um, just to be sure that you're OK, that you're-- I enjoyed the daring. It didn't happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Didn't happen. But, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You enjoyed the daring. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I-- I enjoyed the idea of the daring. I don't know. I might've-- my knees would've shook, and I'd have stayed away from the pub, uh, uh, if I had been really there. 

But this was part of my dream life. Uh, it-- it-- it was when-- it was when the-- the-- the-- the-- the ME-109 exploded over the-- over the thing. But it wasn't-- that wasn't-- when we crossed the Rhine, that was Mannheim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: And Mannheim was the first time I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go back just a little bit. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go back. Eh, the mission did not come-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: It never came off. You see, what happened was that in, as you know, June of 1944, uh, General Eisenhower, Supreme Commander, directed the landings, and, uh-- on Normandy, various places in Normandy. And, uh, [SNAPS] snapped my finger. Dammit, missed my chance. 

Uh, and I came across later in the, uh, 44th Infantry Division as just a regular, uh, artillery man in a-- in a 155-millimeter howitzer outfit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Um, but I was also commissioned and told to contact French. I was kind of liaison with the French, uh, for my outfit. And they would use me for various, uh, minor jobs that were nothing, of course. 

And, um, so I-- it was part of it. And then the deeper we got into France, and I got away from the area that I was trained to understand, namely Normandy, came down to [FRENCH], and the [FRENCH] mountains, and, uh, and then across the Rhine, um, just, uh, north of Mannheim, with, uh, Patton's, uh, 3rd Army on our left. We were 7th. 

Um, when we crossed the Rhine, and there was Mannheim, the glorious city of-- once glorious city of Mannheim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before we get to that. You mentioned to me with the-- eh, talking to another Jewish boy. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was when? 

PHILIP HALLIE: That was, uh, it was-- it must have been August of 1944-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: --when we really were heading toward, uh, combat. And we were going to just-- we were going to the battle for Germany. I have these battle stars-- France, Germany, and Austria. And we were always [INAUDIBLE] they're on my German battle star. 

And uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your French already. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Yeah. And, um, the-- the idea was that we were going to be, um, going into the Germans. We'd talked about, we'd been trained. We'd been-- part of our training had been that there was anti-Semitism. 

The-- the training was very cleverly done. It didn't make a big point of it, but it used our Jewishness-- those of us who were Jews in the-- in the ASTP program to-- to build up a little hatred, very discreetly-- very well done. Um, so we had more information about things like concentration camps and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you know? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Just that there were killing camps, um, that many people were being killed-- Jews, amongst others, but mostly Jews. Uh, we studied the documents. Uh, I knew some German-- not much but knew enough to be able to read some of the documents of, uh, you know, early Nazis and so on. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember one of the documents? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, Mein Kampf. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Mein Kampf in German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. Yeah. 

PHILIP HALLIE: I read it in German. And, uh, uh, in German, it's something. Uh, it's nice in English, too, if you like that sort of thing. But in German, it's-- it's quite, uh, aggressive. 

And, um, some of the Rosenberg's speeches, I remember. Uh, and we were-- you know, the Jew as the bacillus of the species, the Jew as the diseased germ, not a vermin, not even a vermin, not even a thing like a rat, but a bacillus-- a sub-- a-- a microscopic bacillus that you smash just as part of hygiene, a part of cleanliness. All of this awareness of what the essential Nazism was, uh, was-- was fairly clear to me then. I-- I'd been trained in it. 

And so, um, I-- I knew that, uh, that this was, uh, uh, a very clever, uh, philosophy based on hatred that unified its people without a political or economic program of any sort, except the will of, uh-- Adolf Hitler had no program whatsoever. Uh, wiped out the labor unions and so on. In Germany, you had nothing but the Fhrer's will, uh, as the philosophy of the, uh, of Nazism and anti-Semitism to unify the people. It was just more or less that with a lot of trappings and all that guck. 

But, um, that anti-Semitism was directed against me, too. As a result, when I came down to combat, uh, for the first engagement, I was with a guy named Alvin Silverman. And I really hope he sees this because he'll remember this very clearly. 

He's now a big-wheel real estate lawyer in New York. He bought and sold the Empire State Building a couple years ago and manage the whole thing like an orchestra conductor. Uh, what a-- what a powerhouse he is. 

And he and I were sitting in this, uh, prime mover and armed to the gills, you know-- real bullets. We were thinking of killing our own lieutenant-- uh, the traditional things. And, um, and we were pulling a 155-millimeter howitzer-- a great big gun with a shiny muzzle. Everything was just peachy. We knew just how to handle it, and all sorts of emergency we were ready for. 

And, uh, he and I were sitting, uh, in the prime mover. It must have been Sept-- it was like September of 1944. And, uh, we were both looking very silly for a couple of Jewish boys. And we looked at each others, with the helmet and the guck. And we bust out laughing at each other. 

And, uh-- because we both had books stuffed in our pockets and all this weird, uh, paraphernalia. And we burst out laughing. And then we grabbed each other's hands, and we hit our hands together. [INAUDIBLE] like this, and he put his hands around mine. And then he put his hands together and hit them. 

I said, Jesus, we're going to right into combat. We're going to get these goddamned Germans. Look at all this ammunition. We're going to knock their butts off. 

And we laughed and roared. It was wonderful. But it was part of a game. And it all didn't have any-- any real meaning to me yet, uh, but-- except sort of fun, the way the rest of it was, until Mannheim, when, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And Mannheim. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Mannheim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe what is Mannheim? 

PHILIP HALLIE: Mannheim was the great city-- was and still is, now that it's been rebuilt-- on the Rhine. Uh, it happened to have this glorious city of Mannheim, with its wonderful history-- uh, north of it, it had a-- an SS cadet garrison for training SS officers. And that was its misfortune, uh, because, um, uh, we had already done quite a bit of, uh, fighting. But when we-- we had never fought by direct fire. 

We always-- in the field artillery, 155 and larger guns, even smaller guns-- fire by indirect fire. You don't always see the target. You fire over hills for distances of 10 to 14 miles. And you never-- you do it all by mathematical coordinates. And that was the connection with my work in, uh, in physics. 

And, um, and so it was all arithmetic and-- simple arithmetic, really. And, um, we'd always-- never see the-- never see the-- we'd never even hear the explosion. Well, sometimes we'd hear, but we couldn't tell if it was other-- our gun, or somebody else's gun, or another battery's gun. It was all im-- impersonal. 

But when we came to Mannheim, we had a high hill. And we were all lined up on Mann-- because apparently, intelligence had said this SS, uh, outfit was going to be real tough and that we would have to see what we're doing and fire rapidly, uh, on command without using numbers, just sighting along the muzzle. Uh, and, um, that's exactly what happened. 

Um, we-- we kept calling the, uh, commander. Uh, he was an old, tough, uh, I guess he was an old tough companion of-- of Hitler or somebody. Uh, he was a real Nazi. He had to be in order to be head of a cadet garrison. 

And he wouldn't give up the city. We kept telling him, give up the city. We told him, we have white phosphorus heads on our artillery shells. White phosphorus causes stone to burn-- to burn, not just flames on top, but the stone burns. And, um, imagine what it does to human bodies. 

Um, and we told him all this information. Uh, he didn't believe it. And if he did, he wanted to show his young cadets that they were true SS men, you know? 

[SPEAKING GERMAN] 

Our honor means-- or is called-- loyalty. And he loyal to, uh, of course, the Fhrer. And he was going to show it to himself. 

And he was going to-- this was-- many Germans felt it was a great opportunity to die for the fatherland. This was the-- their chance. I mean, wow, we got it, you know. 

This was something like his spirit. And he tried to-- to inspire his kids with us. And they were kids. 

And he would stop. He kept shooting pea shooters at us. And-- and we-- and then finally we got the order, put the white phosphorus in. Screw them into the heads of the thing. 

And Alvin and I-- this Alvin Silverman guy I mentioned-- the New York lawyer-- we-- we-- he and I were just talking about it just a couple-- we were at a Passover service at our house recently. And, uh, we were talking about that again. So my memory's fresh. 

We, um, we fired white phosphorous into this big, beautiful city, right on the Rhine, and watched it burn. We watched people burn. And then, uh, from then on, I've never been the same human being. 

Everything that was coming-- everything in my life that was going, uh, toward, uh, a kind of illusory play-game-- unity of all people with each other, and only distant facts about Jews being killed and wars being fought-- everything-- the-- the-- the division between people, the total-- when I saw bodies divided from themselves, the-- the-- the-- the-- the-- the division between people became, um, a reality to me, between me and them. Kids-- 17, 18 years old-- I could see them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even though they were the German, the SS, some of them, even though, uh, Jews were vermins, and-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --they were going to destroy you if we were in their hands. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Well, you see, it's-- it's not even "though," Dori it's with it. It's all with it. It's the frag-- they were fragmented from Jews. 

I was a Jew. I was fragmented from them. I was fragmented from them as a-- as a-- as an American army soldier. And then I was cutting them into fragments. 

Everything was falling apart-- really falling apart. And there were no illusory unities anymore-- physical, game-playing, anything. Everything was really bloodily, burningly caving in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was-- were the camps and the extermination camp chambers as real for you-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --as that? 

PHILIP HALLIE: We didn't learn that. We didn't know enough. I don't think they wanted to get us, uh, too knowledgeable about-- maybe they didn't know. 

I-- well, uh, you know, you and I have seen pictures of Auschwitz that were taken. But whatever it was, it wasn't really real to us. 

And then, as if it wasn't bad enough, we could see through our sights, or just by naked vision, the burning of people and everything. We drove down alongside Mannheim after it was all over. And I saw chunks of meat-- human beings, bodies, various parts, strewn all over the place, and, uh, bits and pieces of uniform, but not very much uniform, just human flesh. Uh, you couldn't tell just by looking whether they were German, American. 

And, uh, that-- driving along to those bits and pieces of meat, some very large, so that you could really almost identify a human being, uh, that's the-- Alvin and I both decided that that, uh, that was an absolutely, uh, determinative, uh, moment. That was a moment that determined the rest of our lives, in some way or other. Uh, it, um, from that time on, life was a matter of just despair, to me. 

I had absolutely no hope for the unity of anything. Physics was a bunch of bull. That unity was just empty mathematical hypothesis. 

Um, but everything else was falling apart. And being somebody who feels that unity and who enjoyed Rabbi Singer, um, this was like breaking me apart from a part of myself. To be in despair and to feel a unity, it-- it was-- it was terrible. 

And, uh, that's the way I went through the rest of combat. And Al-- Alvin and I talked about these things. Oh, he isn't as mystical-- after all, he's a lawyer-- as I am. But he's a real lawyer. But he knew what I was feeling. 

Um, and from that time on, I became a man in, uh, in pretty much total despair. I became very sensual. Uh, I was always sensual. 

I've always been grateful for having this body. I really enjoy it. I'll hate to, you know, lose it. Uh, but, um, I got really sensual and, uh, changed my attitude towards, uh, women, uh, toward food, toward friendship. Everything was different-- tainted, confused, whatever. 

[KNOCK AT THE DOOR] 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have to change-- 

PHILIP HALLIE: I know-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the tape. 

PHILIP HALLIE: Yeah. 