INTERVIEWER: I'd like to go back just so that-- I'd just like to go back, if you don't work mind. 

MAX: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, fine. I want to go back to when you said your mother was preferred, shall we say, by some Germans. So could you talk about that? 

MAX: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

MAX: Tell me when. It's so warm in here. 

INTERVIEWER: Yep. Sorry. 

MAX: Is the air working? 

INTERVIEWER: It's the lights. OK. 

MAX: Anyway, there was an-- there was an incident. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. You'll tell it in a minute. OK, go ahead. Start with your mother [INAUDIBLE]. 

MAX: Anyway, she, uh, she begged the German to let her come to us, to that camp. So he did. He brought her there. 

INTERVIEWER: He didn't try to keep her for himself? 

MAX: No. Well, you know, she didn't want to. If she wanted to, she could have saved herself. You know. He was blonde and she was attractive. She was young. But, uh. 

INTERVIEWER: He could have hurt her. 

MAX: No, he didn't. You know, she said, you know, he might have been a decent German. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? 

MAX: An incident that I-- that I think is sort of interesting. On the way from this camp, from where we were brought to with my mother, and when we were separated, we were marched to the other camp, Blizyn. And on the way, my father had saved some jewelry. And we had the jewelry wrapped-- had thread wrapped around it, and it looked like a sewing kit. And it was copper rings. 

And the guards at that time were Ukrainian already, who were, of course, the worst there is. Ukrainians and Poles were the most brutal of all. I mean, they were worse than the Germans. When they-- they talk about this guard that was found here in Miami. I forgot his name. But I mean, he claims he was in my [INAUDIBLE] in Treblinka. That was the worst. They were the worst, the most brutal, ignorant people that ever have existed. 

Well anyway, these-- these guards, these Ukrainian guards, they would wear black. They wore black uniforms with the, uh, skulls on the side of their shirts. And they would, while we were marching, would search us for whatever they wanted to find, like gold or whatever. Some people had. And we had this gold wrapped on this little sewing thread around it and so on. 

So-- and I was carrying it in my shirt pocket. And he came up to me and he's searching me and he's got his bayonet there against my throat, and he's looking, you know, and I said, take whatever you want. Take it. So he took the sewing kit out, you know, and in his ignorance, you know, he didn't know that it was worthwhile. And he took it and he just threw it away in the field. 

And there was another, a little degenerate German who was in charge. And he was a crippled kind of a guy, and he'd be running around and he'd make us-- he'd make us-- he'd make us scream heil Hitler. We had to scream heil Hitler all the way down. Running, you know, and stopping and running. Well, anyway, Blizyn was a labor camp. It was not an extermination camp. But what happened was that there were orders of-- to eliminate people. That is, for instance, at one time, two or three people escaped. They took 40 or 50 people in the camp and shot them. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw it? 

MAX: Yes. Or there would be beatings or whippings. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother was with you now? 

MAX: Yes. Yes, my mother was in that same camp, and we would see my mother every day. She worked in the office. As a matter of fact, she worked for Nell, for the commander. She worked in the office, because she was a typist and a short-- she could do shorthand in German. And she worked. And more or less, it was all run by the prisoners, by the Jews. Except, you know, it was overseen by the Germans. 

And we had-- we were working in a stone mill, which was right nearby to camp. This was the reason for this camp was to be working at this stone mail. And since I was young and strong and my brother was young and strong, we were very, very strong children, we had what they called a special command. We were working. 

There were about 20 boys, all between 15 and maybe 18, who would-- who would do real hard work. Like we'd carry concrete, cement bags, and loading trains, and we would do it in record times, because we had fun doing it. It was, you know, it was sort of good work. We were-- we weren't beaten or anything like that. And we'd get better-- better food and better treatment. And we were-- we were sort of an elite group of kids working at this. 

One night, some of the boys were married, and they snuck into the women's barracks to their wives and were caught by the SS. Of course, were shot immediately. And every time some slight infraction would happen, they would call all everybody out and there would be-- you'd get strapped to a bench, you know, and you'd be whipped with the whips. 

INTERVIEWER: Strapped to a bed? 

MAX: A bench. 

INTERVIEWER: A bench. 

MAX: And they had this special little like a dog house, little guard house, where they had a special bench. They'd bring you in there and they'd tie you down and whip you. I had one time, uh, left. I worked in the carpentry department. And we were making ammunition boxes. And I really, I wasn't a foreman, let's say. And I really didn't have to work, just walk around and see that the boxes are right and all of this. 

And one day the officer there in charge sent us home. And then they decided they wanted more work done, and they called everybody back, except I didn't hear about it, and I didn't know. So the next morning, they were calling numbers. And my number was 382 or something. I don't remember. But nobody ever called me by my number. So when they called my number, I didn't-- I didn't know it was my number. And they kept calling and calling and finally, you know, I looked and I said, god, that's me. You know, and I run out. 

And there was this-- this SS man. He only had one arm. He lost an arm in the front. And that's why they would put them in these camps, you know, when they were disabled in a way. And immediately when I ran out there, kicked me in the groin. And said, how come you didn't come out when I called you? You know. And I said, well, I didn't-- I didn't know it was my number. So they take me into the booth and I get 25 lashes. And my father was there too. He got 25 lashes. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

MAX: He did the same thing, I think. He didn't-- he didn't hear about going back to work or something and didn't show up. So my father went in first. And most people that went in, you know, they would scream and fight and everything else. But my father didn't let out a whimper. And even when they beat him, I didn't-- not a sound out of him. And then I went in, and I didn't do a whimper. Not a sound. 

So the guy says-- so there's two guys, one on each side, you know. Each has a whip. And they're pretty heavy whips. You know, they're these braided leather whips. And the guy said, OK, here's an extra one for you because you didn't scream at all. And you know, of course, you're black. Your whole bottom behind is black. It's just-- and you can sit for a few days. But of course, that, you know, that heals. 

Then the next thing that happened is we got typhus. And the entire camp was infected. There was an epidemic. And I remember we were getting shots. They were giving us some kind of shots. And how they gave you the shot was they give you an injection, they pull it out of one guy and right into the next guy. There was no even cleaning of a needle or anything like that. So I got a shot, and, of course, I had typhus. And they had a special barracks at that time for typhus. Now remember this, we still didn't know about-- about killings. 

And I had typhus. I must have been in that hospital, or whatever it was, for maybe four weeks. And when I came out of it, I couldn't walk. I had to learn how to walk again. It was just an incredible experience. And where they gave me the shot, I had an infection, and I had a boil on my leg here that was as big as my fist. 

And we had Jewish doctors there, of course. They had what they call a little hospital there. And of course, they had no kind of medication or anything, but there still were doctors. So they said, well, we're going to have to cut it off. And they said, it won't hurt. You know, they just said, all we have to do is really shave your leg here and it won't hurt. 

So I remember they put me on a table, and one guy was holding my head down, and the other guy was holding my legs down. And the other guy was shaving my hair off. And all of a sudden, two more guys jumped on top of me and held me down and this guy just cut this open. And I remember I screamed like a pig, because that really hurt. And it saved my life. It healed. And of course, I still have a scar there today. 

INTERVIEWER: When you go to Auschwitz? 

MAX: After that. After Blizyn. In-- I think again it was in the fall. And we heard this time, we heard rumors that things are happening, that people are being killed, that there is a camp that they take you to and you'll never come back. And we have people that jumped the trains and came back to Blizyn, to the camp. There was no way of staying alive in Poland. It was almost impossible. Because the Poles would turn you in. The Poles, if they found a Jew, they'd turn you in, because they were vicious people. They were incredible. That they hated the Jews more and Germans, the Poles. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did you get to Auschwitz? 

MAX: Well, one day again, we were being evacuated. And we were this time taken out on trains, and we were going. Didn't know where, again. And we wound up in Auschwitz. And we wound up again together, family, my brother, my father, mother. And we were in front of Dr. Mengele. And I saw him face to face. And again, we were lucky. He went this way instead of that way. 

So we went into the camps in Auschwitz and were separated from my mother. Now, the only separation, my mother was in the next camp, so we could see her through the wire. She was only-- here were the men's barracks on this side, and across the wire were the women. So we used to see my mother every day. 

We came into the barracks and got situated first few days. Now, before I left Blizyn, I was working on a saw, on an electric saw, making these boxes, and I had cut my hand. I pushed a piece of wood through, foolishly, not paying attention, and the saw had cut my hand. I think you can see it. And my fingers were just hanging down. 

Well, somehow they just bandaged it up and it healed. It started to heal. But I had my hand bandaged and I had it in a sling and I was holding it. And we were there maybe three or four days. And we did nothing. Just sitting in a barracks at night and then during the day, we'd sit outside the barracks, and that was it. 

And one day everyone is sitting outside and it's a sunny day, and it's a warm day. And I am standing among 1,000 people. They're all seated. I'm standing and leaning up against the barracks. And on the other end, way on the other end of the barracks, maybe 100 yards, there's an SS man. 

And he points his cane in my direction. And I don't pay any attention. And the guy next to me gets up and he goes, no. And the guy next to me gets up on this side and says no. Before me a guy gets up and says no. So I slide down, you know. Figured I'll hide in the crowd. But he keeps pointing this cane. 

So finally, I get up and he goes. And I run over there. And he says, what-- what happened here? And I start to talk, you know, start to-- I got. And he picks up his cane and he starts hitting me with the cane. And he tells his-- now what they call is the blockalteste They were out there. And they were usually German criminals or political prisoners. 

And he says to these two guys, all right, bring him into the bathroom, to the toilet. And they're dragging me into the toilet barrack, which is a barrack, had a brick floor. And he says, OK, strip his clothes off. They take my clothes off. He says, lay him down. And I'm laying-- I'm laying on the floor. And he says, he gives the cane to one of the blockalteste And he says, OK, start beating him. And this guy, you know, is hitting me, and I'm screaming. 

And goes on for a little bit. And he says, no, he says, give me the cane. And he turns the cane around. It had a silver handle on that cane, you know, real curved silver handle. And he really beat me from-- I was black from the bottom of my soles to the top of my head. But somehow, miraculously, I walked out alive. And I healed. Now, he was drunk at that time, this German guard. 

And a few days later, the blockalteste said, you're going to be working for me. What these fellows did was they always would take a young boy and make him like their servant. And nothing homosexual or anything like that. They were-- they were just-- they lived-- these fellows lived in these barracks like kings. They had everything. They had food, they had coffee, cigarettes. This was like their domain. And they were elite of this camp, the elite of the camp. 

So I worked for him. I'd make his bed up in the morning. I'd shine his shoes and so on. And in all this time, you know, my father and my brother would still be with me, and my mother would still be across the fence in the women's barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: In Auschwitz. 

MAX: In Auschwitz. As a matter of fact, it was Birkenau, the place that we were at. And the black that he was-- the alteste now, this guy's name was Ossie. I remember like today. And he was from Berlin, and he was a kind sort of a guy. He was not a mean. Never, never hurt in any-- I mean, me or any-- anybody that I could see that he hurt. 

And in his barracks, they would bring in a transport of men from other camps totally emaciated and sick. And they'd bring them in and they'd say, OK, you are going to stay here, and you're going to get well. You're going to get food, and you're going to get care, and then when you're well, you're going back to work. And of course, these people are related. 

They come in, they bring in a big pot of thick soup. Usually the soup that we would get would be watery and, you know, hardly anything in it. And here they'd bring in heavy, thick soup. And these people would say, god, we're in heaven. And that same night, a big truck would pull up, everybody gets on the truck, and they ship them right in the gas. Now, I knew that, but I wasn't going to tell. You know, these people didn't know it. And this was a every day thing. This is every day, one transport like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they feed them? 

MAX: To make them feel at ease, that there'd be no panic. You know. And one night, I was sent out by Oscar into the next barracks to borrow a cup of-- a can of coffee. Now, they-- this was like a club they had. You know, this was like an incredible thing, you know. In all this craziness, they lived almost a normal existence. They had everything. And he said, go next door and get a can of coffee for me from him. From the other guy that was the blockalteste there. And I went in. 

And as I come back, the truck is parked right there, and they're loading the people on the truck. And of course, he got them with the rifle butts and all right, get on there, quick, quick, quick, snap, snap. You know. And I want to get in, foolishly, and I crawl under the truck to get in. And one of the guys grabs me, you know, and says, hey, where'd you get on, and throws me on the truck. Now, of course, I knew this is it. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you want to get in? 

MAX: Well, I felt, you know, I'm-- I'm-- I'm-- I'm working there. I'm not part of this group. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, you wanted to get away from the truck. 

MAX: No, I didn't want to get away. I wanted to get into the barracks to give him his coffee. 

INTERVIEWER: Get into the barracks. Yes. 

MAX: You know, because I didn't think, you know, they'd grab me. And the guy grabbed me, throws me on that truck, right? Now, I'm on this truck, and there is a noise going on that you won't believe. You know, of people running and screaming and falling and the schnell-schnell-schnell you know and this is incredible. 

INTERVIEWER: Dogs? 

MAX: And dogs, everything, you know. So I scream on the top of my lungs, Oscar! And he's all the way in the back, but he's there, and he hears me. And he goes, oh, he says, hey, he says, he works for me. Come on, let him off the truck. And the guy says, OK, go ahead. And I got off the truck, which was just incredible. 

So one of the things that this Oscar he used to say, he used to tell us, he was a-- he was a-- he was a thief in civilian life. He was a what they call a second story man. He would break into apartments and-- and rob apartments and then steal cars. 

And then he would, he would told-- he would tell me how to break in and how, you know, you take tar papers and you put it on the window and you smash it and pull it out and you sneak in and you take. You look for silver and the jewels. And then he would steal a car and fur coats. 

And then he would take his girlfriend up to a resort town in Germany. And they'd go up there, and-- and would stay for a day or so, and then would tell the owner of the hotel that he has to go back on business to Berlin or whatever, and he would like to leave him as collateral his fur coat and-- and some jewels. And if he could let him have $10,000 or whatever, so-- because he forgot his money and make up some kind of a story, you know. And the guy would give him the money, of course, and then found out that this is a stolen fur coat, and so on. So he was an interesting-- interesting guy. 

Anyway, one day we got sick. We got a cold. My brother, my father, and myself, we all had a temperature. Did you want me to? Oh. And we all had a temperature. And it was some kind of a sort of a flu going around or whatever. And we were put in a special isolation barracks. And there were maybe 40 or 50 other people in there with us, young men with us in this barracks. 

And Mengele came into the barracks. And the doctor was a Jewish doctor there. And my mother, who knew what was happening. When you got sick there, you were dead. Pleaded with the doctor, with the Jewish doctor to make us leave, to get us out before, you know, Mengele gets in there. But he couldn't. Mengele got in, and the three of us were the first ones by the door. And he looked at us and the doctor, the Jewish doctor said, well, these three are going out. They are well. They're leaving. And the rest he took the charts. At 5 o'clock, a wagon came. 

Now, everybody knew. Even the ones that were there knew, but they didn't-- they didn't want to believe it. Young boys that we were with maybe for a year that we knew for a year or two, you know, men in their 20's and 30's and maybe healthy, you know, just maybe having a little temperature. 

They knew that they were dying, that that was it, but they didn't believe it. We was talking to the end, till 5:00. At 5 o'clock, they came down with a wagon and horses. It's an open wagon. And they loaded them on these open wagons and took them away. And only the three of us stayed there alive. Next day we went out, went back to our old barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think at that moment? 

MAX: At that moment, I thought, it's a miracle. That's it. It was just pure luck. That's all. I don't know. I don't know what I thought. 

INTERVIEWER: How did it all end for you? I mean, what happened to you? 

MAX: Well, all right, we left Auschwitz, and that is when we were separated from my mother. And we were sent to a camp in Germany called Ohrdruf. It's a well-known camp. And it was a labor camp, again. There was no gas chambers. We got there also, one of the first to get there. And we came. This was in the Black Forest region of Germany. And there was a tremendous mountain, tremendous mountain. 

And I said to my brother when they brought us out there, and I said, gee, what do they want us to do here? Build a tunnel in the mountain? And sure enough, that's what they were doing. We were building a factory for the V8 bombs. I think they'd called them V8 or V7. I don't remember. Those V bombs that they use to fire off those rockets to England. Well, we used to-- we built a factory. We blasted the mountains. We dug in there and we got the rocks out. 

Well, in that camp, there was a 24 hour shift. And we worked eight hour shifts. And then for 16 hours, we just slept, which saved a lot of people. Now, we just crawl into those bunks and stayed there for 16 hours until our next shift came. And we were eating. Not well, but we were surviving. 

Again, I was a foreman. And we were together, my brother, my father, and myself. And I was a foreman. And of course, whenever I was forming my groups, I try to, you know, not have them do as little as possible, because I didn't want them to overwork. Because they couldn't anyway. I mean, nobody had really had the strength left. My brother found a German that gave him some dog food to eat. You know, because they used to get their dog rations. And he gave my brother a piece of the dog ration. 

But in all those years, you know, being Austrian and speaking German, we have not come across a sympathetic German. Not one that said he wanted to help or that felt sorry. As a matter of fact, the Austrians were worse. The Austrians that we encountered were worse than some of the Germans that we encountered. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think you survived because you were with your brother and your father? 

MAX: No. No. I survived because I was lucky. It was just not my time. That's all. All right, we went to Ohrdruf. In-- in-- a few months later, we were separated from my father. My father got sick. He had an infected finger. And I found out then after the war that my father died. He was sent to Belsen and he died maybe a week or two before liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

MAX: So he went through all this for nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: How did he die? 

MAX: Just hunger, weakness, and just he gave up. He probably-- he thought we were dead, and he just-- he just didn't have a will to continue. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you have hope? 

MAX: Somehow I had that survival instinct. Somehow it-- it hung on. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you believe? Believe in God? 

MAX: No. No. We were never religious. As a matter of fact, even as a child, I was-- I was not a believer, even as a young child. Although my grandparents would chase me into the temple and I would go. And I was a choir boy. I was singing every Friday night at the temple and all this. 

I was never a believer. I always-- I never believed that-- that there is somebody. I never believed that somebody could have written down all this 2,000 years ago. I just-- just-- that was always sort of vague to me, you know. And of course, after you see Auschwitz, Buchenwald, and Dachau, you don't want to believe on anything else anyway. 

INTERVIEWER: Just to finish, I-- after Auschwitz, you separated from your father. 

MAX: Right. Right. We separated, and I never saw him again. After Ohrdruf, now, we were working then in different towns. They made us dig out the bomb victims and things like that. And I used to love doing that. I loved to see them-- they're Germans. I mean, there was nothing better than to see them, because this was a real uplift when I saw the bombers coming over, the American bombers. I said, drop those bombs right now, here, on me. I don't care, but get these Germans. I loved every moment of that. And that-- that-- that was a great uplift for us. 

But even then, even though we saw bombing and Germans fleeing and all this, we thought that Germany was still winning the war. Because the propaganda was so tremendous. They believed and their children. Now, we would work in these towns, and little children would come out, our age, to talk to us, and would hang around us and talk with us and say, you know, we're having-- we're having a secret-- the secret weapon we're going to have, and we're going to win the war. And we believed it. I mean, there was no reason to doubt it. I mean, so far they're winning everything. Why-- why doubt now? Well. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the children realize what was happening to you, who you were? 

MAX: No. No, they-- well, they thought we were prisoners, and that-- that was about it. After-- after Ohrdruf. And the reason for leaving Ohrdruf was that the army was coming closer and closer. We went to-- I forgot the names now of these camps. But we went to a camp in Germany. 

Probably the-- one of the side camps of Buchenwald. And we went in there. We marched there. We started to walk. And stayed a few days in that camp and started out again. Marched again to another camp. In the meantime, they would give us corn, raw corn to eat. That was all. 

And naturally, the kapos, now the kapos were the privileged people that were in charge, let's say. Prisoners themselves, even Jews, were kapos. And they would get bags, big bags full of corn, you know, and take that along, and we would get a handful of corn. And my brother and I were working and I had a razor blade. And we had eaten our corn immediately. As soon as we got it, we ate it, and that was the end of it. And here's this guy, he's dragging this big sack of corn. 

And I said, you know what? I'm going to go over there and cut his bag, and you take your hat and fill up your hat. And I went over and I cut the bag, you know, and he fills up his hat. And as soon as everybody else saw that the bag is leaking, they all grabbed the bag and took the corn from this guy, and everybody had something. So we survived that way. And on the way, we would pick up some grass and eat it, or we'd find-- find some beets on the road, on the side of the road, and we eat it. 

And then this was-- this was now 1945 and this was early-- early spring. This was maybe February. You know. And it was freezing cold. And at night, we-- all we had was a blanket. And of course, all you'd wear is those striped pajamas that they gave you with wooden shoes. And we'd lay down in the-- on the ground to sleep. 

And of course, we'd lay down real close together, everybody, to stay warm. And you know, in the morning, you'd be maybe 1,000 people, and the next morning, you'd get up and there'd be 500, because the rest of them would be frozen and be dead. And you just-- you just leave the rest of them. And of course, that column that we were walking in got smaller and smaller. 

And what happened was then towards the end, did have some SS men in the back walking along. And he would have a couple of these young German boys, maybe 12 or 14 years old, with machine guns. And these boys, when anybody of the prisoners would fall back or fall down and couldn't get up, they'd shoot them. Young kids would just kill him right there on the street. Or if he bent over to get some water and they said, no, you're not supposed to get water, they'll kill you. These boys. 

Now, I walked in the back. And one-- one time, we come to a clearing, and they said, OK, everybody lay down. Bed down for the night. And there was a big truck of bread, which was left by the Germans as they were fleeing. And they ran out of gas, and they just left this truck with bread. Now, this was a German Komisbrot which was a terrible bread, but it was bread, you know. So still, we wanted it. And the German commander said OK, divide this bread among the prisoners. 

So in the meantime, we had Russians and English and American prisoners among us, and they were maybe a week in prison. You know, they were strong. And we were emaciated and weak. And I said to my brother, you know, if these guys are going to divide this bread up, we'll never get any, because these big guys, they're gonna get right in the front, and that'll be it. They'll get it and we get nothing. And I said, you know, I'm going to go up to the German and I'm going to tell him that we should help him give it out. And I go up on the truck and I says, and once I'm up on a truck, I'll throw you a bread and you run. 

So I go up to the German and I say, look, you're going to need some help giving this bread out. Can we-- can I help? And you know, talking in German. And he says, no. He says, I don't need any help. Get back in there. And I turn around and go back. And he pulls his gun and shoots me in the back. Now, luckily, my luck, he hits me in the back of my arm. And of course, I dive in to the rest of the group, you know, hundreds and hundreds of people. And he couldn't find me anymore, and he probably thought he killed me. 

And I dive in and there's a couple of doctors in the group. There were always a couple of doctors, prisoners. And I had an old towel around my neck, and one of the guys took the towel and he ripped it apart, and he tied my wound. Now, not realizing that my arm was broken. And he tied it and he stopped the bleeding, which saved my life. He tied it up. And of course, you have a bullet in you and a broken arm, and I was in pain. And here I had to get up and walk and run. And my arm started to swell up, and it was getting to a point where I just couldn't make it anymore. 

And I said to my brother, you know, I don't care if they shoot me now, but I can't make it. And he would say, come on, you know, you've got to make it. You can make it. You can hold on. And I see this German Red Cross lazarette truck, they called it. And I said, you know what? I don't care. I'm going over there and I'm going to tell them I need help. And I went over there, and I knock on the door, and there's this SS orderly sitting. And I said, look, I'm a German, and I got hit by a stray bullet, and I'm shot in the arm, and I need help. 

INTERVIEWER: But you're wearing a striped-- 

MAX: Oh yes. Yeah. But I'm a German prisoner. I didn't tell him I was a Jew. And he says, OK, come on in. Now, I go in. And he takes my arm and as he takes my arm, he sees my number. So he said-- he said-- he said, you're a-- he says, you're a Jew. And I said, well, yes. Because you know, only Jews were tattooed. Germans were not tattooed. And he was in Auschwitz. 

So he knew immediately. You want that? He knew immediately that I was a Jew. So he said-- he could have shot me right there and then. And he said, well, come here. And he fixed me a splint. Gave me a wire splint. You know, one of these to put my arm on. And he bandaged me up. And again, it was a miracle. 

And I walked out with my brother, and we worked. And picking up, again, beets and stuff from the ground and surviving on it. And feeling better that I had my arm. And we got-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did we run out? 

MAX: We got to Dachau. We got to Dachau. And as we walked in-- no, no, excuse me. First we got to Buchenwald. And we didn't stay long in Buchenwald. We only stayed maybe a few days, and again, they marched us out and continued walking us to Dachau. 

And we got to Dachau and we walked in, and there were mountains, mountains of bodies as you walked in. And they were-- they were as high as a house, you know. Must have been hundreds of thousands of bodies there. And we walked in and they put us into a barracks. Maybe it had room for 30 people and there was maybe 150 people crowded into this one barracks room. And again, here I was with my broken arm, and I just couldn't move. 

And I said, you know, I don't care if they kill me, but I'm not going to stand it. I can't. I have to go. I have to get help. And I walk out. And I say to one of the Germans, I said look, I got shot by accident. I'm a German. And I said I was in the Hitler Youth, and I just-- I just got here because I didn't want to go to work detail. And I said, I can't. I'm in pain, and I got to get help. And he says, OK. 

And he takes me into a hospital. They had a regular hospital set up in Dachau. And that was there only for the Red Cross, whenever they came in to inspect to show them that there was a hospital. And they take me into the hospital and give me-- they gave me a bath, which I didn't have in three years, probably. 

And they put me in this tub. And this Dutchman who was also prisoner is giving me the bath. And while he is given me the bath, he's talking about how he hates the Jews. And I'm agreeing with him. You know, of course. Because all he had to do is just hold me under there for about a minute and I'd be all over too. So I get out. 

INTERVIEWER: He didn't see you were a Jew? 

MAX: No, he didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Why, circumcised? 

MAX: No. That-- a lot of people were. You know, that you couldn't really tell. So they take me out, and they give me a cast, a regular cast. They have a doctor. And they x-rayed and they give me a cast. And they give me a shirt, nightgown like. Went down all the way down to my-- to the floor. And they put me in a bed, in a white bed in a room with six other prisoners who were wounded. One guy across from me, also from Vienna, was shot in the knee. 

And gave us food. Started to feed us. And of course, not being used to eating, I immediately got dysentery, you know. And I was-- I was going to the bathroom I didn't even know it. Now, I had-- I felt-- I felt at one time I had to go to the bathroom, and I get off the bed and walk outside the corridor. 

There was one bathroom on the outside. And I'm walking to the bathroom. I get to the bathroom and I didn't have to go. And I said, I can't understand it. You know, I had such cramps. And then I walked back. I had a trail. Didn't even know I was going. So somehow, I survived that. 

And all of a sudden, we're in the bed, and we hear shooting outside. And lot of commotion. And the door opens and there's soldiers coming through. And they didn't look German. They spoke English. And they start throwing candy and cigarettes and chocolate at the-- at us. And I said, my god, it's Americans. And we were liberated. It was incredible. Couldn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father, your brother? 

MAX: No, my father didn't-- didn't make it. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother? 

MAX: My brother. And my brother didn't know what happened to me. You know, he thought I was killed. He went looking for me and he couldn't find me. He didn't know I was in the hospital. So about two days later, he found me. And of course, I had a broken arm. They took me-- they took me into the American field hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother? 

MAX: No, I didn't know about my mother then. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find your mother? 

MAX: Well, they put a cast on me, the Americans. Put it from my neck down to my waist and only my hand was sticking out, and I had a cast all over my body. I was in that cast for three months, and we were in Dachau now, liberated. And they wouldn't feed us. They kept giving us very little food, and I kept screaming for food. And they said, can't give it to you because they would have killed us, because thousands and thousands of them died after the war by eating too suddenly. You know, their system not being used to eating. 

So we were in Dachau for three months. And a man-- people started to travel from one camp to another with little notes from people looking for people. And we had this barber that we knew from Blizyn came. And he said, you're Max Kaufmann I got a note for you from your mother. And here he had a note in my mother's handwriting that she was looking for her boys. She found us. 

And the funniest thing was this. There was a book in the camp with names of people that were liberated, which I and my brother, in our stupidity, never bothered to look. And my mother's name was in there. But anyway, she was liberated in Belsen. Same place where my father died. Of course, she didn't know that he was there at all. But she was liberated there. 

And soon as we found out, you know, that my mother was alive, we took off for Belsen. We were in Bavaria, which is the southern part of Germany, and Belsen was up in the northern part near Hamburg. That took us, I don't know, a week or so to get there. But we hitched rides on trains and all kinds of trucks and things, and we got to my mother, and we found her. 

INTERVIEWER: You weren't religious, but what do you feel about Israel? 

MAX: Well, I feel Jewish. I don't feel religious, you know. I like Jews because I'm one. But I don't believe in God. I-- I-- I don't-- I haven't got a strong kinship to Israel, because I feel for me it's too late. It was too late. 

INTERVIEWER: Your children? 

MAX: My children, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Had there been in Israel, would you-- do you think this would have happened? 

MAX: Well, it's hard to say. I don't know. Had the Jews had organization, a leadership, this wouldn't have happened. Because you could have-- you could afford it. Because the Jews have just as much guts as anybody else. But they just didn't have any leadership. There were just nobody there to tell them what to do. 