INTERVIEWER: Mr. Gold, give me your name, the place where you were born and raised, city and country, and the date of your birth. 

MR. GOLD: Romania. I been born in 1915, June 23. 

INTERVIEWER: In what city? 

Cluj. 

INTERVIEWER: Cluj. Mrs. Gold, can you give us your name and your place of birth, city, and country of the date of your birth. 

ROSA GOLD: My name is Rosa Gold. I was born in Budapest in Hungary. And 1915, September 15. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Gold, can you tell us a little bit about your childhood and the-- your family-- mother, father, brothers, sisters, and your childhood background in Cluj. 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. I have five brothers, three sisters. My father and my mother died in Romania in Cluj. My three sisters-- they take them in prisoner camp and all three was put them in gas chamber. And the children all die. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us a little bit about your life before the war. 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, I was a stockbroker in Romania in Cluj. And I was working in this business all my life in Romania. And after the German come, they picked me up and take me in there to their camp. And they take you to work for the German people. 

And after they take to Auschwitz. I mean going of Birkenau. Auschwitz was the Gypsy lager. I was there, maybe, three, four weeks. After there, they take me off Kaufering lager eins. And I was working there for the firma Holtzman. And I've been going there to work, and I build all the lagers there-- lager four, lager three, lager seven. I was doing all the building in there. 

On night, when you come back in the camp, they give you the food. They beat you up for a bunch hour, needing to sing when you come back in the camp. And one boy was stealing potatoes. 

And they bring out the father and the mother and they show him his son to hang him. This was a Sunday afternoon. Everybody bring them out and they show him that somebody is stealing potatoes, they hang him. 

And I was doing there when somebody die, I take the Sunday, make a big hole, and we picked them up and then throw them in there hole. They would give me a big steel to take them out their teeth, the gold teeth from the certain people who have gold. And they kept them [INAUDIBLE] to give them the teeth, all the gold teeth from the people. 

This every Sunday was take them out. And we Dr. Heller. Then when one Sunday was decided to take women who go up Dachau [INAUDIBLE] 

Only Dr. Heller or certain people decided to tell them the truth what will be done with this ladies. Only take them Dachau to burn them, only take them out and burn them in whole in Dachau. That was to be. I-- I never was there and I never see it, but there supposed to be. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Heller was a German doctor. No, she was from my town, Professor Heller. He decided to tell him and who tell him and what to tell him. Tell him just to be ready to [INAUDIBLE]. They take them off [INAUDIBLE]. 

Then certain people must pick them up from here, from Kaufering. Was 13 women when they picked them up and not decided what they can do. And you can do nothing about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you married before the war? 

MR. GOLD: After the war. 

INTERVIEWER: After the war. 

MR. GOLD: After the war, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't have a wife and children before the war? 

MR. GOLD: No, I don't have. 

INTERVIEWER: You were a single person? 

MR. GOLD: Single person, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in a ghetto before? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, I was in ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: In where? 

MR. GOLD: In Cluj. 

INTERVIEWER: How many-- how many days? 

MR. GOLD: I was maybe two, three months in ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: With your family? Father, mother? 

MR. GOLD: No, my father and mother both died. 

INTERVIEWER: But your brothers and sisters? 

MR. GOLD: No, my brothers needed-- my brother-- my brothers was by the Russian working there. They take them there. The army, they take them there to pick up everything for the bombs and everything. They use people to go in the front to blow him up first, to see he have bombs there. 

And that all, but was my sister was with me, all the three sisters. And when I went to Kaufering, the captain told the doctor left, right, left, right, left, right. And that was-- and I never see any more. Then after the war, I find out that all mine three sisters been killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

MR. GOLD: Mhm. Gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in the camps? 

MR. GOLD: I was a year in the camps. 

INTERVIEWER: One year? 

MR. GOLD: One year. 

INTERVIEWER: From 1944? 

MR. GOLD: From 1943-- end of three, and in 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. How-- how many camps were you with? 

MR. GOLD: I was Auschwitz, in Landsberg, Kaufering, on lager four. This three camp I was. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember when you were taken from the ghetto to Auschwitz? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, straight I been gone with the train. They put me down to 330 people in there box car and close it and they told us we will go someplace to work in Germany. That's all. They no tell you where you go. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened when you arrived? 

MR. GOLD: We arrived with the Dutch. Come out and six or seven lanes we be getting off, take down the clothes and everything on the other side you come out. You don't know what will be meet with you. Is sending the barracks. Different barracks for every night, I run from one barrack to another one. 

Where the people told me you will be this-- and maybe you be killed tonight, maybe tomorrow. You be going from one barrack to another one. [INAUDIBLE] find [INAUDIBLE] to go away from there. [INAUDIBLE] and I been gone of Germany. And this was-- I be gone off Kaufering, and I been gone lager eins. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in a work battalion? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you selected for the work battalion by Dr. Mengele? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. You know the young men, he'd take [INAUDIBLE] to see how strong you are. And how you been when you're young. And you can healthy to work, he'd pick you up for the work for the young people. 

INTERVIEWER: Are there any special things you remember about the time you were in Auschwitz? Any special things that you remember? 

MR. GOLD: Yes, I was in the group to take out the shit. I'm sorry if I tell you this. That's what-- you know, that's what my commander told take out every morning. 

INTERVIEWER: Latrines? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. The trash, everything, every day. You need to take them out in the morning and the night. I-- no was good, very bad to us. They hate you and everything. You're lucky you-- you've been gone out from Auschwitz. And I was lucky. But I've been gone of Germany [INAUDIBLE]. 

I have very much hate for the SS. And that was a working commando. Sleeping 20 in a room, sometime 30. You know, you never know how you will work. On every day, you go out to work all night. Pick you up again, you go back. Yeah. 

And I was working off the railroad, and one sergeant no like me. And they picked me up with their stick on the railroad. Big 2 by 4's, put me off my back, and run back up the hill, back and forth, back and forth. 

INTERVIEWER: [WHISTLES] 

MR. GOLD: This is when I check with one guy one day to tell him I die. Only he no look for me. He was looking every day for me. Of the hill up, up and down, up and down, every day. Finally, I get from somebody a little bread. And this way, some guy take my place, and he thought I'd been dead. Only he never looked for me no more. It was. 

INTERVIEWER: And from there-- this was in Germany. This was after you were in Auschwitz. And from there you were sent to another camp? 

MR. GOLD: No, I was staying [INAUDIBLE] in Germany from lager [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] These are place where there we build up all the camps, was building the camps there. Lager 4, lager 7-- all the camps was there. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you-- did you meet any of your family in the camps? 

MR. GOLD: No, never. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your liberation? 

MR. GOLD: Yes. I was in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us a little bit about-- 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, decided the German people to take us on the road to kill us. And when I heard this, where the United States, the seventh army will be there, I run away from the in the hill. I was there seven days, rain or snow. And I was hiding there was when the United State coming, and they picked me up. 

And [INAUDIBLE] French people some 3,000 picked me up. I no can walk. And take me in their place in Kaufering, and they feed me. And this was my life, I'd been life. But they would not let me die. I was 85 pounds, not too much. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you look for your family after the war? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, I was looking all over up there and I no find nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: And somebody told you that they were not living anymore? 

MR. GOLD: That's how I find out. I find out for my brother. One brother, he'd been killed in Rusia. They killed him dead. The German people killed him. They shot him. This was in 1942. He killed him. Someplace he shot him. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you meet Mrs. Gold after the war? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah, I meet her in Landsberg after the war, in 1945. She was a nurse and I was sick. And then I meet her. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Gold, can you tell us a little bit about your life in Budapest before the war? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes. My father and mother, if I can say that, thank God they died before this Holocaust. And I was living together with my brother and with my sister. And I was 13 years when I start to work. I am a seamstress. Way back home, too. 

And 1944, when the Germans came in to Budapest, they picked the people up from the street. We have to wear the yellow star. And then they put us about maybe five months or four months, I can not exactly remember, in a ghetto. 

And after that, they just picked us up from the house and took us to-- they're calling a football where they're playing the footballs, a big, huge place. And picked up, separate who has children, separate the younger, and separate the mens. And I was the youngest in my family. I have two sister. 

One sister who was-- and she has two children that time. And they separate her and they kept that in Budapest, in the ghetto. And my other sister with a child and with a husband, they took it someplace but I never see them. 

And they took me to Germany. We walked about three, four town till we get in Austria. In Austria, they put us up in the bag-- and how you call it-- trains. 

And from there, they took us to Landsberg. Landsberg was eleven lager. I was at Landsberg on 1, 4, 7, and 11. The rest of it I didn't see the lager. And they took us one place to the next. 

And they took and cut us our hair then, the women's hair. And they took-- I was, way back home, I little bit know about in hospitals and they take care of the people. So I was working in Landsberg, lager eins, they're calling lager one in the hospital place. 

Hospital you can, it's the barracks, where somebody would be sick. They'd take him there and give him some aspirin or some kind of-- and then, I am a seamstress. So I would ask anybody from the soldiers if I could talk to them. Too-- if I can mending to them, to get a little bit, maybe a little bread or a little potato peels-- because you couldn't get really good potatoes, or a little bit more soup or something like that. 

And I have in my mind always to think about if I will see anymore my two sisters and one brother who was in arbeitslager. And that kept me alive, I think so. And pray to God to keep me till I find my family. 

And in the morning, they took us up hill-- I don't know how you-- to counting the people from the barracks was anybody would be going away or run away. I don't think so-- anybody would able to do it. Early in the morning, about four, it was winter time, four o'clock in the morning. I didn't have any shoes to go out on the counting line. 

And sometime, we really was sick, and we still have to go. One row of Jew one side and the other one the other side. And after that, they take you back and then let your go, take you out from the wire line to outside to work to lifting the train and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Railroads. 

ROSA GOLD: The j-- yes, yes. And taken one place to the next. The next day you take it left, what you took it right, you take it back again the other side. And or digging holes-- for what reason, you wouldn't even know it. Just they want you to work and maybe go down your strength and take you someplace where they would kill you. 

In 1945, about before the American army came, they took us to Dachau, a huge lager there. And it took us womans down at a big, three or four times bigger than this room, and take your clothes off. And they was saying you get a shower. And we was waiting and waiting and waiting. And nobody came. 

Suddenly, we hear a big noises. What was it? Everybody wanted to look out. But no windows, no nothing in there. So we was shaking and waiting, this minute you die, you die. 

And suddenly, we hear the noise. And then the American soldiers came. And the German soldiers-- they run away. 

And they left us all over there. And then it was we went out. And we didn't know where to go. 

So everybody was running, whatever we could find-- the clothes, what-- before we went to the shower-- so-called shower. We picked up anything what we want. Put it on our body. And we run away from the camp. 

And then we run. We run and see the trains. And we jumped up, and we waited over there what will be, and covered ourselves. 

On top of us, the American planes came. They didn't know we are over there. So they-- they shoot, you know? 

And some of them died. Some of them was lucky like myself. Thank God I have a life. 

And after that, we find ourselves, after when the American gone, we go out from the wagon-- from the cars and start walking. And where we go, I really don't know. And then we walked again and walked, and find ourselves in Landsberg am Lech. 

That's where was all the lagers, but we didn't know at the time. And then we went in to the American camp. And then the American people came, and we eat. And there where I met my husband, Landsberg am Lech. 

And I went again to helping people in the hospital. And I met him over there. He was just like skinny bones. So I helped him. 

And after that we got a room where we was about three, four, or five girls. And they was separated, and we was. And we had to wait till we can register ourselves to come to United States. That was all our mind to come out from then Germany. And took us four years till all the red tapes went through. 

And we got married in Germany. And I had one boy over there who died. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

ROSA GOLD: The-- in the lager-- not in lager, in the town, Landsberg am Lesh. In the hospital was a nurse-- midwife, not nurse-- midwife. And they didn't take care of me. So when the child was born and they took-- cleaned it out, they put it in a dirty bed top or how you call it-- a little-- 

INTERVIEWER: Crib? 

ROSA GOLD: Crib, yeah. Before they put him to clean it out, it was another boy in the same water, in the same. And he was living six weeks, and he died. 

And then I got pregnant later, a year later, and thank God my other boy is healthy. And we came 1949 to the United States. And we are here, thank to God, and thank to American people. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your the first child die from? He contacted a disease? 

ROSA GOLD: A disease, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it typhus? 

ROSA GOLD: I really don't know. After when they want to circumcise it, the mohel, the rabbi saw this child is sick. They cannot do it. 

And they took it to Munich to the hospital. But they didn't even let me to see it. And after six weeks, they said he's dead. 

INTERVIEWER: They couldn't do anything for him? 

ROSA GOLD: They couldn't do it anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Did American doctors treat him? 

ROSA GOLD: No, it's in German-- 

INTERVIEWER: German doctors. 

ROSA GOLD: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Where-- do you suppose that they made a good effort to save him? 

ROSA GOLD: I really don't know because they didn't even let me to go to see or talk or anybody. They-- they-- they-- they said if we can save it, we save it. And I think so. 

That's-- that's very bad. Because the child was precious, beautiful, healthy when he was born. And after that six weeks, he just died. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the period of time when you were working as a nurse when they first brought you to the camps? You were in the hospital at that time, that you did not go out to the labor battalion. 

ROSA GOLD: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, you did both. 

ROSA GOLD: Oh, yes. Early in the morning, we went out. Afternoon, when you come back and you was really tired, but still, you have to go. And I voluntarily to went. To maybe I can see somebody who comes in or who's sick, I can help him. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. Do you-- do you think that the fact that you had contact with the hospital may have helped you save yourself? 

ROSA GOLD: It was a hospital with the lager who was the girls who was in the lager. It was maybe one or two-- like it wasn't nurse-- it [INAUDIBLE] I don't know how you explain-- 

INTERVIEWER: An overseer? 

ROSA GOLD: Oh, yes, yes. And just kept me to-- even if I was very, very sick one time, I still said that I want to go and I want to help. Or maybe I'll see my sister. Maybe I'll see my other sister. 

And wherever I went, I asked them. Finally, I find out she was in Birkenau. And after that nothing, nothing I know about. And the charge-- that I know-- it was to get away from her. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- when did you meet your other sister? My other sister-- when I met-- that time wasn't my husband. I met Dave, and then he build up hisself, and helped hisself. He went to Budapest. 

And I told him-- that's a little story. I told him, if you find my family. You come back, I marry you. And then he came back, and he bring something but I knew they are alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us a little bit about that, Mr. Gold? 

MR. GOLD: This was a very long story. I worked for the American government private secretary. When he gave me paper to go at Budapest-- Budapest when I'd been gone, and I find the brother for my wife. 

When I talked to him and I told him, she supposed to have a sister. And he take me to the sister. And I talked to the sister. I told him she's very well and everything is OK. 

Well, next time, when I go back and I come back at Budapest again, I bring. And I'd been going back of Germany when I take my wife a Budapest. That's my find my brother there, one brother. 

ROSA GOLD: Hm. 

MR. GOLD: This trip was the short story I find them with happy ending. 

ROSA GOLD: Short and long story, but he find my sister. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to your sister during the war? 

ROSA GOLD: During the war, she got two child and her mother-in-law. Her husband was in the work-- working camp, and they was in the ghetto. And they almost got killed when they took her to-- you know, we have a Donau. 

INTERVIEWER: The Danube. 

ROSA GOLD: The Danube. 

INTERVIEWER: The Danube. 

ROSA GOLD: And they took them to the Danube park. After when I talked to her, she explained to me what happened. And they lined them up. And when they went, the German soldiers shoot almost everyone. 

And when they came to there, they didn't have enough-- 

INTERVIEWER: Bullets. 

ROSA GOLD: --bullets. So they said they will come back next day. You will go home, and then-- home in-- in the ghetto. And tomorrow we get you and pick you up. And after that, I don't know how many months she was in the ghetto, because I wasn't there actually. And the Russian people came in. 

INTERVIEWER: And they rescued them. 

ROSA GOLD: And then they arrest them, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So they did not go back and get her the next day? 

ROSA GOLD: No, thank God. Thank God. They didn't have time to go back. 

INTERVIEWER: So she remained the rest of the time in the ghetto? 

ROSA GOLD: In the ghetto, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she tell you anything about life in the ghetto? 

ROSA GOLD: It was-- how I know, it was almost like, then, in the concentration camp. They couldn't go out. There's certain day or evening, certain, maybe one hour, they can go out and buy some bread or something for the children. And that wasn't very good either. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they forge papers to keep them alive in the ghetto? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes, they did. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us a little bit about that? 

ROSA GOLD: Swiss passport-- not passport-- papers, not passport but they couldn't go out from there. Papers-- 

INTERVIEWER: Which made them Swiss citizens? 

ROSA GOLD: No, they some kind of relation from the Swiss Embassy there write something. And my brother, who was in the working lager, they-- he has to wear a scarf-- to different kind, not the working people wore, just-- just a scarf. And the other people was a yellow star. 

And he somehow get it out from the working lager, and he went to the Swiss Embassy and get a paper for his wife and one child. And they was in the ghetto, too. So somehow they survived. 

INTERVIEWER: How did these papers help them survive? Can you tell us? 

ROSA GOLD: They-- this paper-- my brother said he's not Jewish. And then he got a white-- first was yellow one. And then he somehow managed there to get a white one. So he could go out from the ghetto. 

And he went to this Swiss Embassy. And then he-- I think so-- he explained. Well, he explained to me when I talked to him after the war. And he got the paper. 

And they didn't even go out from my sister-in-law, out from the house. And they have a white scarf on their arm so they know they are not Jewish. And-- but if they would find out, I am sure they would kill them. 

And after-- that was in 1946 when the Russian occupy was in Budapest. They run away from the Russian, and they came to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know, either Mr. Gold or Mrs. Gold, about the negotiations that were taking place between Joel Brand and Eichmann? That there were to be so many trucks for so many Jews? Did you know about-- 

MR. GOLD: Kasztner? I knew him personal. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know him? 

MR. GOLD: I know the person this story. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that right? Could you tell us about him? 

MR. GOLD: Kasztner was a lawyer in Kolozsvar, Romania call him Cluj. He was a very smart, educated man. He was supposed to take out from the lager, 175 family. He made the mistake-- his big family, his own family take that. All the brothers, the cousins, he picked up the family. 

Accidentally come to me after say david, you won't come? I can push you in. I told him no. I go with my family when my family go. 

He was picked up not her family, all the wife, and the sisters, all they-- 

INTERVIEWER: They took them out. 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. That was the mistake he made. 

INTERVIEWER: Why-- how was he able to get them out? Do you know? 

MR. GOLD: Yes, you-- we have a general, a German general in Kolozvar. And he was contacted with Kasztner to he gave me so much truck for United States Jewish people to give me so much truck, I can make let you-- let them have all the Jewish people, these people, our own people. That is what the story. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he get the trucks? 

MR. GOLD: I don't know. He get it when I be gone in the camp. I mean, Auschwitz-- I don't know. But I know the people he taked, and there are 100-- I don't know how many. A hundred or how many people he take them all Switzerland. I-- 

INTERVIEWER: He took them out? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. I said he was separate in their line. He put them of a separate place when he taked them out. And I see him-- I was there when he take them out. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw it? 

MR. GOLD: I see with my two eye. 

INTERVIEWER: And they were all relatives. 

MR. GOLD: All the family was. All the-- only was the family, except the rabbi. That's all. [INAUDIBLE] all the family was. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel about it? 

MR. GOLD: You know, I will think about it-- he made-- his duty was to first take all his family. And after, he will try to do the rest of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you feel he was right? 

MR. GOLD: I don't believe he was guilty. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't think he was guilty. 

MR. GOLD: No, my opinion-- he was a human being. He take care of all the family first. And after he will think about, he can negotiate, he will take the rest of people. This is my opinion. I don't believe he was guilty. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel about it, Mrs. Gold? 

ROSA GOLD: I didn't know it. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't know about it? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

MR. GOLD: I know him very well. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of a man was he? 

MR. GOLD: Very educated man, very good friends. He was [INAUDIBLE] Zionist. He wasn't [INAUDIBLE]. Very good man. I knew him personal, a very good friend [INAUDIBLE] to me. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you feel that he was-- that they did wrong to him in Israel? 

MR. GOLD: Yes, I know this story in Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened in Israel? 

MR. GOLD: In Israel, I heard it-- uh, [INAUDIBLE] somebody, when he would talk. Somebody else will know his story, he will kill him. 

INTERVIEWER: In other words, somebody was afraid-- 

MR. GOLD: He will talk. 

INTERVIEWER: He will tell too much. 

MR. GOLD: The [INAUDIBLE] and this whole people supposed to help him out to get the trucks and everything, you know. This was a very-- a big corporation, how you call them, you know? That's all the trouble. When he make it, he was a very educated man, very smart man. In 1941 and '42, he was in Romania among the best lawyer. When he was 100% for Israel and for the all Jewish people. I don't believe he was guilty, my opinion. 

INTERVIEWER: Who killed him in Israel? 

MR. GOLD: I don't know, but I know somebody killed him there. That's all I know. 

INTERVIEWER: And-- 

MR. GOLD: Well, in Israel I have a Hungarian people [INAUDIBLE] this is the main paper was in Romanian, Jewish paper was over here and Kansas City has a Jewish paper. When he was this main paper was in Israel have this paper still working on him. 

He was a very good people and a very smart man. And I was sorry for him get killed. They can do this in the life. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that they-- and you think that they killed him in order to keep him quiet? 

MR. GOLD: That is. This is my story, but this is long story. He was planning to take out how many people he can do it. I know him very well. I know them, I mean no more. 

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask both of you this question. You came to the concentration camps relatively late, 1944. 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you heard before of what was going on in Poland? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

MR. GOLD: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Nobody knew anything? 

MR. GOLD: No. 

ROSA GOLD: Nothing. 

MR. GOLD: You thought that you were take to go Germany to work. 

ROSA GOLD: Work. 

MR. GOLD: To work. In Auschwitz, they give a paper for us to write it down to send home for your friend is everything OK and good. They tell you what you need to write down. 

INTERVIEWER: There weren't any refugees who came from the East from Poland through Romania or through Hungary? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

MR. GOLD: No. 

INTERVIEWER: To tell you what's happening there? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

INTERVIEWER: There were no rumors, nothing? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

MR. GOLD: Nothing. 

ROSA GOLD: They didn't know nothing. Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any attempt made by local people to go to Palestine at that time? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. In Romania, yes. Our paper was going on for the Polish, Jewish people, our papers of our name is going out of Israel. You know from Poland, was coming through Romania, one day, all the Jewish people [INAUDIBLE] everybody, all pictures was going that with certain people [INAUDIBLE] Israel [INAUDIBLE] the blackmail was [INAUDIBLE]. German Hitler coming, you no could do nothing more. Was too late. 

INTERVIEWER: Was too late. 

MR. GOLD: They stop us right away. You don't have a choice where you go, that's all. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you have gone to Palestine had you had the chance at that time? 

ROSA GOLD: Yeah. Yeah, at that time, but it was too late to do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: It was too late. Were-- were your parents Zionists? 

MR. GOLD: I was Zionist where I was working in a kibbutz, at home was a kibbutz. I was a [INAUDIBLE]. Mizrachi. It's a Jewish organization was [INAUDIBLE] in my time, in 1938, '40, '45 or so. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the people in Hungary believe that-- they knew about the war, I'm sure. 

ROSA GOLD: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And they knew that the Germans had occupied. 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they believe-- did they believe that they would be able to escape? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes. They was thinking it can't happen in Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that right? 

ROSA GOLD: It can't happened. And then one night to the next, it just-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why did people think that it can't happen in Budapest if it happened every place else? 

ROSA GOLD: Because they was good with the Germans. The Hungarians-- 

INTERVIEWER: The Hungarians were on good terms with the Germans. 

ROSA GOLD: --were on good terms with the Germans. Yeah. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: So I guess those people, even who had a chance to leave, just didn't leave? 

ROSA GOLD: They didn't leave. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think it was mistaken? 

ROSA GOLD: It was a mistake. 

MR. GOLD: The mistake was making our people in Romania that were in our committee-- the committee no will tell you for the Jewish people to listen. You go up Auschwitz, we know it. You go up Auschwitz, you will be killed. Go do what you can, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't say that? 

MR. GOLD: No say nothing that they would take to work, that's all they say. They tell you nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean, the Jewish committee? 

MR. GOLD: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they know? They knew that the people were going to Auschwitz, and that they were going to be killed, and they did not tell them? 

MR. GOLD: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you suppose they didn't tell them? 

ROSA GOLD: I-- I really don't know. 

MR. GOLD: I think this was a very hard question. Everybody was knowing who was gone-- 

ROSA GOLD: Something-- something happened to them. Because so many people can't go just-- just to work. They have plenty people in Germany. Why they want to take Hungarian people or Polish people or any other kind of nationality people to work in Germany? And it's unbelievable that the very, very first and the very last when we went out, we didn't even know what will really happened to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Where the Hungarians, during this period of time, helping the Germans? 

MR. GOLD: Yep. 

INTERVIEWER: They were? 

ROSA GOLD: Oh, yes, yes. Very much-- when we-- when it took us, they Hungarian people-- they just was very happy to take all the Jews out from Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that right? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes, yes, they was. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they confiscate all the property and-- 

MR. GOLD: Everything. 

ROSA GOLD: Everything what we have. 

INTERVIEWER: The Hungarians? 

ROSA GOLD: And even-- when you have a watch on your-- on the way you go out, they take everything out. 

INTERVIEWER: The Hungarians? 

ROSA GOLD: The Hungarians. Yeah. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And the same was in Romania? 

MR. GOLD: The same thing, the same thing-- that's [INAUDIBLE] Romania was Hungarian this time. 

INTERVIEWER: How were the Hungarians? 

MR. GOLD: Was my town, yeah. 

MR. GOLD: He take away everything for you. He catch me one time. I've been caught in my house to take new shirt and clean myself, and they caught me. The neighbor called. 

And he put me in handcuffs to my feet and take me downtown all way three cop in the jail. And next hour, I been out. And they take me back in the camp. 

[INAUDIBLE] I know-- I know I shouldn't. I broke the window of mine house. You know? [INAUDIBLE] 

I go back to same place. I been go take my clothes and the neighbor call the police on me. And the police [INAUDIBLE] what you doing here? I tell, I take my shirt. 

What you do? Take me in jail. That's all you can do. 

And no make different for me. I've been in jail. I've been in the camp. And they take me back in the jail. When the jail let me out, [INAUDIBLE] they take me back in the camp. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know this neighbor before the war? 

MR. GOLD: Sure! My best friend. 

ROSA GOLD: Always the best friend. 

MR. GOLD: Best friend. I been going open. I bust the door and the window and everything. [INAUDIBLE] government stamp. I know [INAUDIBLE] what you do. I go back in the camp. That's all I can do. 

ROSA GOLD: And we was in the ghetto, we live in apartment. And my brother-in-law was took it away before we went to the lager. And he somehow escaped and came back to the building to see if the wife or child and I, we are all right. 

And then one neighbor called outside the Hungarian-- they call it like SS. And-- 

MR. GOLD: Milosz. 

ROSA GOLD: Milosz. 

MR. GOLD: That's right. They call them Milosz. 

ROSA GOLD: With the black shirt and the green tie. And they came and took my brother-in-law away and right in the next street, they killed him. 

MR. GOLD: They shot him. 

ROSA GOLD: They shot him. Because he wants to see how we are, and maybe he can help or bring some food or something. After that, in the next week or a few days later, all around in the street, they took us. And the place where they separated the young woman and the young child. And then took us out, too. 

And how I said we had to walk and walk and walk towns and towns without anything. It-- it-- would be take long, long time to every little details to tell. They could be written down a book what we went through just to go to Germany. To Austria because Austria-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us just a few details that you remember? 

ROSA GOLD: I very much remember we went Eger, that's a Hungarian town. We went through there. And I said, I cannot go any longer. 

I cannot. I lost my shoes, everything. I cannot go. So I run away. Somehow I run away that nobody see that time. 

And I went in a farm. And it was-- I can't remember. It was the men and their wife, but I saw a little child outside. 

And I just fall apart, fell down. I was hungry and tired. And they pick me up and took it in the house, and they give me food. But they said they cannot keep me. So you have to go. 

So I have to go back again. The line was as long line. They still was on the same Eger, the same city or town, and I had to walk back again. 

Two times I tried to escape. I just couldn't do it, because nobody wanted to take me. Because some people was afraid, you know, if they find out they go there and they-- they take them, too. 

And then one time, some kind of boat or ship or what was I can't exactly remember the city or town. And they took lots of people in the ship. And then on the ship was like you open. And then some people, they pushed out in the water. 

INTERVIEWER: The German's did? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: They pushed them into the water? 

ROSA GOLD: In the water. Yes. That I never will forget. I wish I'd remembered the place where was it. 

MR. GOLD: It was on the river? 

ROSA GOLD: On the riv-- yes. Yes. And we just was so stunned. And they opened in the-- in the bottom of the ship, they opened, and they pushed out the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Just anybody? 

ROSA GOLD: And just anybody-- they doesn't care who was it. It was a girl or a man or-- or whoever. And that somehow you just can't get it out from your mind. You try it, but you-- you just can't do it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever think of going back to live in Hungary after the war? 

ROSA GOLD: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Never. 

ROSA GOLD: No. I don't have no desire, no desire. Even if I have a small family. But I have friends, was friends. And I just don't feel like it to go back at all. 

I never-- I don't feel any feeling for the Hungarian people. Even before the war, I have very good times, everything. But I don't have any feeling for them anymore. I wouldn't go back to live or even visit. I don't want to. 

INTERVIEWER: Do have any people that you know who are still there? 

ROSA GOLD: I have one, my sister-in-law, who she is living in New York now. Her husband, my brother, died. Had one brother in Budapest. He's living. He's the only relative who I know lived there. 

INTERVIEWER: I think that your sister did go back, didn't she? 

ROSA GOLD: Yes, my sister went back. And the reason went back to see last time. And then went to my mother and father grave. And give some money to man who take care of the grave to keep it, to keep it nicely to remember how was it. 

And I think so my brother-in-law has some relative in Budapest. So they went back to see them, too. But I wouldn't go. I really don't feel any goodness feeling for them. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you told your children about the story? 

ROSA GOLD: Many times, many times-- they know from A to Z, everything. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what are their feelings about it? How do they react to it? They are all against what was. And hopefully praying it never, never would happen again. 

CREW: What I'd like you both to do now is just to look right in the camera lens. 

OK, now at each other, please. Could you look at each other? 

CREW: Now at the interviewer. OK, right back into the camera lens. 

Now look at each other, please. 

Now at the interviewer. 

And back at each other. 

All right. Right into the camera lens. Get it in focus. 

Right into the camera. 

Back at each other. 

At the interviewer. 

Back at each other. 

Thank you. 

ROSA GOLD: Thank you. 

MR. GOLD: Thank you. 

