[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER 1: This is what I called mic number two before. Mic two. 

SUBJECT: Of all my experiences, never this one. I never knew- believed that I would survive, that I would be taped on television. You live and you learn. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's right. If you had known, it would have given you some courage. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just a personal victory now, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right, OK then. I would like for you to tell me your name and where you were born. 

SUBJECT: I was born in Warsaw, Poland. My name is Felicia Bader I was born, lived, educated in Warsaw until the war broke out, which, in Poland, it was the 1st of September 1939 when they started bombing Warsaw. After a few days living, going to shelters and up and back, I was taken to Lvov by my first husband, who came to Warsaw, brought some wounded with the ambulance. He took me and my little child into the ambulance, and his colonel and his wife, and we went to Lvov. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, I had wanted to know a little bit about your family in Warsaw, the family that you were born into, what it was like, what your father did and so forth. 

SUBJECT: I was, as they say in this country, born into upper middle class. We were four and all have university and college education, me included. My father was a merchant, but quite well off. Not a very rich man, but quite well off. He could support four children, but sending them to private schools, because if you are aware, Jews were not accepted into regular public schools. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it a Jewish school? 

SUBJECT: Mine? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: No, I graduated from a Catholic school, because probably there were reasons. I wouldn't tell you. All of us, all four of us, graduated from private schools and then sent to universities, like my younger brother who was graduated from a French university, Caen Calvados if you heard about. I in New York-- in Warsaw. And my sister was in law school, and my older brother went to, how do you say, Handler academy in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Merchant school. 

SUBJECT: Yes, met merchant, in that. And that's more or less, and then I got married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like living as a Jew in Warsaw before the war? 

SUBJECT: We didn't-- I stress it again-- we didn't realize, because being a part of the upper whatever, it didn't look to us that it will ever reach us. Because I don't know if you heard about, there is-- that was a-- Poles believed in Jewish doctors, that if there was a real serious sickness, the last resort was a Jewish doctor. And therefore, doctors were very well respected. And my husband, who didn't look Jewish, was-- had a lot of non-Jewish, really Catholic patients. 

Therefore, we didn't believe that it will ever reach us. Also, we realized what's going on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So did you hear rumors that the war was going to start, or-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, there were rumors, because they prepared us to be, you know, all kinds of-- but we didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kind of rumors were they? Like what? 

SUBJECT: They were rumors that some Jews were sent to camps in Germany, not in Poland, because Poland would-- but we didn't believe that it's true. We considered them as rumors. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of camps? Were they extermination camps or labor camps? 

SUBJECT: They were at a labor camp. There was Dachau. No, Dachau was-- yes, this time in '36, wherever, when Hitler came to power, Dachau and other camps. I don't know, I didn't have relatives in Germany. But I know that they were, they sent, they were sent to. And we heard, but we didn't believe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember September 1, 1939? 

SUBJECT: Vividly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that day like for you? 

SUBJECT: My husband was mobilized as a medical doctor in July '39. He was in, I don't know exactly, because I had only the number. You know how it is. And I remember at 7:00 in the morning, bombs. But I didn't-- we didn't believe. And I looked out of the window, and I saw something coming from the sky. But we didn't realize. I have to admit my stupidity, not mine only. And when they stopped-- they exactly started at 7:00 AM-- when they stopped, my father called me, and he said you better close the windows, because it's a war, and those are real bombs. And this is the last time I talked to him. This is the last time. And a few days before I saw them, they lived quite far from me. I mean, in Warsaw, but at a distance. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to them? 

SUBJECT: My mother, I don't know. My father was shot as a hostage, because he belonged to anti-Hitler committee. Being a part of the-- he was somebody in his, as a merchant, guilt, whatever you call it. And when I came back to Poland, my friends who survived found a newspaper when they mentioned names of people who were exhumated. The place is called Palmiry And you probably heard it a few. 

And among others was the name of my father, who was exhumated. They were looking for a Polish politician who was in the group too. And in the newspaper was-- which they kept the newspaper for me whenever I would come back. They knew that I am alive, my friends. And they-- that the Polish Red Cross in Warsaw has more information. I went to Warsaw to the Polish Red Cross, and they gave me, kept in a solution, samples of his-- of his shirt and his suit, a buckle of his-- whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Belt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Belt. 

SUBJECT: Belt. And-- don't forget that English is not my mother tongue. And frames, frames of his eyeglasses. This, they were kept in a solution, and this I got, and among others was a statement he got for some reasons, which identified the body as his. And I got it when I proved that I am his daughter. I kept it for many years. From Poland, we went to France. We lived in France five and a half years. From France we went to Chicago, because my sister lived in Chicago and sponsored us. Then we came here. I still kept it. And finally, it was buried in the Jewish cemetery, which is according to the Jewish mandate. That's it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what was the rest of that day like? We were talking about September 1st. 

SUBJECT: I-- you know, every-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You got a call from your father saying that-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, and my father said, be careful, it's a real war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah 

SUBJECT: And I said, no, I saw some fire kind of-- No, it's a war. Anyway, this was the last time when I talked to my father, because then the telephones were cut off. Then we had those alerts, whatever you call them. They were half an hour, under that, because the Germans are very punctual and very-- and we-- but the bomb didn't come close to us, because I lived in a neighborhood where not many Jews lived, a nice part of Warsaw. And we used to run down to the basement and were kind of shelters, not-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You meaning you and your daughter. 

SUBJECT: My son. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your son. 

SUBJECT: My son. And I had, what do you call it, a governess to him. But we were running back and forth, and the kids-- the kid liked it very much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. And how long did that go on? 

SUBJECT: I was evacuated from Warsaw. My husband came the seventh or eighth day of the war. I-- he said leave everything. The ambulance is in front of the building. It was during the night. They didn't bomb during the night. And I took the child, whatever I could take, grab. I left everything. And whoever got it enjoyed it probably. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And so you arrived in Lvov? 

SUBJECT: I arrived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that trip like? 

SUBJECT: We had to ride at night, because when we rode during the day, they could clearly-- the weather was fantastic. I don't know how old you people are, but how many years is it? 39? 

INTERVIEWER 1: 40 years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 40 years? 42? 

INTERVIEWER 1: 42 years. 

SUBJECT: The weather was fantastic. We were dreaming about rain, clouds, nope. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you arrived in Lvov. 

SUBJECT: No, wait a second. Before Lvov, the colonel, which his name was was [INAUDIBLE], had a brother, a medical doctor, in Baranowice. It was a small Jewish town connected with the forest, forestry, whatever you say. And we stopped there in order, because they had to report to their unit, the colonel and my husband. And they left us in Baranowice. The doctor [INAUDIBLE] couldn't take us. He had a small house. But he provided, he took us to some friends not far to stay there until we know what to do further. Because the men left, and this was the wife of the colonel and two little girls, myself, and the little boy. 

And the owners of the house-- I even know the name-- were afraid to stay there. And in the evening, they left and hid in the forest, but they said the house is yours. And this was-- it was a Jew-- the Jewish holidays. I think it was Rosh Hashanah. And he said there are fish prepared for us, which we didn't take. And you please treat yourself. And when we were eating, I'm going into details, I-- maybe I shouldn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, by all means. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, it's great. 

SUBJECT: When we were eating, it was a small house. Was a patio we heard-- we didn't realize, I will never forget. My husband told me, if you would settle some place, don't settle near a bridge or near a radio station or a railroad. But it was dark when we got to this place and were too tired, being eight days on the road, that we didn't. But when we ate this famous fish, all of a sudden, we heard bombing. 

We looked, went out, and this was the last functioning Polish radio station, was Baranowice. And they bombed, but one thing they did, they bombed the house where we were there. And we were buried under rubbles. But not hurt, just shocked. And when it stopped, this doctor [INAUDIBLE] came to find out, because the building was partly demolished. And then he has to take us to his house for a very short time. And then we had to-- we didn't have a place to live, whatever. Then we went to Lvov. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what was Lvov like? 

SUBJECT: Lvov was-- I mean, I knew Lvov before, but it's a nice-- but there were a lot of refugees, so-called, and life went on there. There were cafes, people who didn't have anything more to do but worry about the family left behind, were sitting in the cafes and nothing. And that's it. On one beautiful night, they came for me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who's they? 

SUBJECT: They? NKVD Secret police. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was-- what was that like? 

SUBJECT: They just came. They had probably-- I was on the list as a wife of a Polish officer. The fact that my husband who was an office-- reserve officer, being medical, a medical man, and not Jewish, because our name didn't sound-- it's a different name. Then they decided maybe I am dangerous too, because all the officer were-- officers were interned in a camp called Smolensk. You heard about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that's where your husband was? 

SUBJECT: Which later-- my husband was in the camp. He was shot. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was he discovered to be a Jew? 

SUBJECT: No, they took him, because this was easier to-- they had 11,000 Polish officers, among them a group of Jews, which they kept. They I mean the Russians. What I feel, they-- if you remember the Nuremberg process, when they-- that the Americans, when they finished with whatever, they ask, who was there? Molotov. Molotov? No. Yeah, Molotov. And they said, now let's discuss Katyn, because later on it was Katyn. He banged his hand like the Russians do. He said, if you will discuss this, I'm leaving, because they blamed it on the Germans. And it's still not resolved. 

But I have proofs that the Russians did it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you went, or you were picked up by the NKVD 

SUBJECT: NKVD came at night. My little child was sick. And they clapped me, if I don't have a gun, and dress, and let's go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your kid? 

SUBJECT: Of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did they take you? 

SUBJECT: First they take me to the railroad station. It was a big train for many, many, many other wives of Polish officers. I was one from Warsaw. They were all from Lvov. And we were 31 days under it, in cattle trails, without any comfort, whatever. Locked, sealed with search life-- lights. Like the Germans, exactly. Occasionally they used to stop and bring us something to eat, which was never good and never cold-- and never warm, even if it was a soup. And 31 days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like for your son and you? Must have been very-- 

SUBJECT: He was small. You see, it's very interesting. He doesn't have very bad memories, because he was too little to compare his previous life to this. He was running around. He had a few kids to play with. And when I used-- now even, I just ask him. He's a grown up man. He said no, I don't have bad memories. You do. And I understand why, but I don't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it troublesome for you to care for him? 

SUBJECT: Very much, because we were starving. First of all, they apparently brought us too early, and they didn't have bread, nothing. We have to barter from the local people for whatever we had, because whatever we had, it was very valued for them, until they had this, they had bread that was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: On the train. 

SUBJECT: Bread no, no. I'm not on the train. It was awful, because I was the only Jewish woman among all Catholics. They didn't know that I am Jewish, because I didn't advertise it. I realized in such a small-- we were 34 people in a car, in this car I was. It would be very dangerous to, but and my son was blond, very light blond. He didn't look Jewish, and he doesn't look even now. But this doesn't matter. But what got them, when they were talking against the Jews, I didn't like it, and I defended the Jews. And then at one point they figured, she must be Jewish, because she-- but it was already very far from Poland. I was the only one who could speak Russian. They couldn't. If we needed something, they ask me to do it. 

And but there was a woman there, a widow of a general, a Polish general called Fabri And a childless woman, and she took kind of a liking at my son. The reason I'm telling this, and because whatever they brought, he couldn't eat, like Kielbasa or whatever. He was 2 and 1/2. And she used to-- she had all kinds of [INAUDIBLE], because she was prepared that she will be deported as well. Wife of a high Polish officer. And she used to give him. When they found out that I am Jewish, and the child is Jewish, there was a rebellion among the Polish people. And they said, how could you feed a Jewish bastard-- this was the expression-- when our children are starving too? This was dangerous, but I couldn't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they find out you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: No, but at one point, they asked me point blank. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you didn't lie. 

SUBJECT: And I said yes, I am. And this was it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they took you where? 

SUBJECT: They took me to a place called, geographically, the Steppe of Hunger And that was a sofhoz. Sofhoz is a farm owned by the government. Kolhoz is a farm owned by peasants, whatever, community, like kibbutz. And sofhoz is owned by the government. We were-- this was a sofhoz called [INAUDIBLE], which their main-- I mean, nothing grew there, nothing, because the soil was completely infertile, whatever. 

But they had cows and bulls, whatever, and made butter for the army. And we have to help. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long were you there? 

SUBJECT: 18 months. 18 months, until there was an amnesty. You probably heard. General Sikorski who later perished in a plane, but apparently he was downed, what we heard. And he had an agreement with Stalin to let us to go. And the war was already on. The war started 22nd of June, 1942. And-- I'm checking my memory. And almost all prisoners were let, were let free, almost. Some were a long time longer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you were let go 

SUBJECT: I was let free from the-- but it was impossible to travel. The war was on. The distances, there is one train which runs there. It's the Turksib railroad, which went-- was coming only once in 24 hours. It was so packed. Some people went to Iran to join the Anders' Army, I hope that you heard about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I did. 

SUBJECT: There was an army, a Polish officer, Anders, who formed an army of Polish men. Among others, my brother was there. And then finally, the south of Asia. And then they were-- they went to-- they went to Iran, Persia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: I went about 45 miles to a town called [INAUDIBLE], because it had a railroad, which a railroad meant to us that maybe one day we will get free. And it happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who went with you? Who was us? 

SUBJECT: The whole group, which was taken from Lvov. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you traveled in a group, is that right? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And they stayed with you even though you were Jewish and they had been-- 

SUBJECT: No-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: It didn't matter? 

SUBJECT: They realized that it doesn't pay to be anti-Semitic, because nobody listened to them. The Russians themselves weren't angels either. I remember at one point I was in the camp when somebody, one of the employees, came in. He said tomorrow, you will become a milkmaid. I didn't see a cow in my life, and I would be afraid to be kicked, and if I were-- and I said no. I never did it. I can do something else. He said I know why, because you are Jewish, and you are afraid of a cow. I said, [INAUDIBLE]. I was kind of outspoken, not realized that I shouldn't, and I said I will. When NKVD will come. They used to come once a month to interrogate us. I said, I will tell them what you called me. The men didn't know what to do to me. 

He gave me extra milk for the charge to keep me quiet, and I never told him, because he was afraid officially. You were not allowed to be anti-Semitic officially, but the government is in the nowhere. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you went with a group, then, to this small town about 40 miles away. 

SUBJECT: Yes, yeah. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you manage there? 

SUBJECT: There we had-- we are on our own. I mean, I worked as a knitter for the army. We knitted mittens and socks. You know, the mittens which are two fingers. And there was a norm. We had to do a month's so many mittens and so many socks, and we are paid peanuts for it. Then we have to barter our possessions we had. Clothes, they were very fascinated by our European clothes. And this way I would-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long were you there? 

SUBJECT: Four and 1/2. I was all together six years in Siberia. And then they decided it's time to evacuate us back. They changed the definition of our status from deported people to evacuated. And then they gave us trains already open, not sealed. The transport was also around 30, 32, or 31 days. But we were-- when they-- when the train stopped, we had the right to go, to stretch our feet and to see the sun or the sky 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where did they take you? 

SUBJECT: They took us. They divided the Poles and the Jews. The Jews, they-- the Poles went to Szczecin. It's in the Baltic Sea. They took us to Breslau, Wroclaw, which was bombed as much as Warsaw. Awful. And but when we were at the station waiting for the authorities to give us some lodgings, they announced that they don't have anything for us. We'll go further. And then we run away from the transport, I, my child, and the man whom I married later, second husband, and another party. During the night, we run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What made you run away? 

SUBJECT: Because we didn't go any pla-- we didn't want to go any other place. This was a place which had tramways, and it was almost like Europe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: It was Europe, but it was almost, which reminded us our previous life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you just ran away? Was that dangerous? 

SUBJECT: I don't think so. Well, we took-- we went. It was night. We went and look for-- because this was the time when they evacuated the local Germans, they left only Nutzliche 

INTERVIEWER 1: Useful people. 

SUBJECT: Useful people, like street sweepers. But and we saw an empty apartment. We took it, which had a hole in the ceiling. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you remained there? 

SUBJECT: Only until I got a visa to Paris, to France, because I had relatives. I had an uncle in France, who did everything to help me out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When were talking before, you had mentioned about how dangerous it was for Jews in Poland after the war. Could you tell us about your experiences around this? 

SUBJECT: Yes. On our way, we came to Kovno. Kovno is the border. And as I say, we had Polish-- I mean, Polish cars and Jewish cars. We came to Lublin, which was a dangerous place. At Lublin, they announced that they will give us some money to buy some food. The Lublin, it was the repatriation center or something. And we have to go and stand in line according to the alphabet of the last name. I remember we stood the little-- not many Jews which were in this large transport, which was about 1,000 people. We stood. The Poles passing by made the most awful remarks, like we thought that all the Jews were exterminated. How come there are still so many here? 

And I couldn't take it. I got a-- and I said thank you for the money, and I took my child and ran to the train. Because I hope, I believe that we went through so much together that they shouldn't have made those remarks. And I didn't get the money, and I didn't get whatever they distributed, because I couldn't take it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were jeering at you. 

SUBJECT: Very much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not especially at me, because I look, and I don't look especially Jewish. My kid didn't look completely, I mean. But I couldn't take it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was humiliating after having gone through-- 

SUBJECT: Very much. After all we went through, after we believed that the world changed towards the Jews, too. And then we got the visa through my uncle. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To the United States. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To France. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was going to be a while, then. 

SUBJECT: No. It took them five years to clear us through the State Department, because we were in Russia. And they couldn't believe that we were not brainwashed or infected by their doctrines. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you find out about what happened to members of your family while you were in Siberia? 

SUBJECT: I, as I say, I don't know where my mother died. Oh, talking about my father, when I found out where he is, it was Palmiry outside Warsaw. I decided to take his remnants, whatever, to a Jewish cemetery, because they apparently were well preserved when they told me. And I ordered [INAUDIBLE] Jewish, and a day, two, I was in Warsaw. And but they didn't let me take it, because this they considered special, how do you say it, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like a shrine, or-- 

SUBJECT: It's a shrine. He's buried at Palmiry It was across, and I couldn't help it. I voted, but I couldn't go there, because you could go there only by a car or a taxi. Money, I didn't have, and friends with cars, neither. And it was in '47. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's it like coming back to Warsaw after the war? 

SUBJECT: It's awful. It's absolutely awful. It's like coming to your own grave, you know, tomb or whatever you say. It's awful, because each stone, I was born there for centur-- for a few. But it's awful. If I would stayed there, I would wind up in an asylum. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's how painful it was? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, because each stone, street, reminds you of your news of your childhood, of your school, and so forth. Warsaw was very, very destroyed, very much destroyed, except the part when they had the Gestapo, which is not touched. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was your home destroyed? 

SUBJECT: It was my home. It was the same. My home was in a part where not very many Jews lived. And when the war was over, the owner of the house was a patient of my husband. And she was a Pole of course, but she was more, I mean, I expect that she will help me to find out more about my family, whatever. And I wrote her a card, letter, I don't remember. And I got this card back not delivered, because the house is partially destroyed. This, I knew that I can't count on her. But when I was in Warsaw, I went there and noticed that the front of the building stands. The apartment where I lived had pipes out, because we had steam, had pipes out. It means that people are living. The steam, of course, didn't work anymore. 

And I went there, but I was warned by more experienced people not to tell them that it was my apartment, because they would be afraid that I would claim it. And they were apparently a situation that the person didn't come out altogether. Then I knock at the door, whatever, and a woman came out. And just right away, she figured that. And I said, don't be afraid, it's not my apartment. My cousin used to live there, and I would like to know if you know what happened to her. She said, was she Jewish? I said yes. Now don't be silly, it's very Jews who are still alive. And then she said, why are we standing in the hall? She said, come with me to my apartment. I have six rooms and a kitchen, and a maid's room. 

I am telling you, all-- every room was taken by a different family. From the bathroom, they made the kitchen, and they had a co-- common-- common kitchen, whatever you say. Excuse me. And then she said, let's come to my room. Her room happened to be my bedroom, and the same wallpapers were there. This I couldn't take it, and I started to cry. But the woman realized that I am not going after the apartment, because what for? She said to me, you are not a cousin, but never mind. I can tell you only who has your furniture. I said, OK, give me, but I didn't plan. What for? I didn't have a place to put it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you living at the time? 

SUBJECT: In Warsaw? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah 

SUBJECT: With my friends. I was always there. I was living in Breslau. But I stayed with my friends. Then it means this, what means to come to this apartment, it's like to come to your own grave or whatever. It's a tremendous experience, because I was happy there. I was comfortable in all respects. And all of a sudden, I had even to lie that it was mine. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So much had changed. 

SUBJECT: And then my-- the visa came, and we went to Paris. We stayed in Paris to work. I had to support the kid and the man whom I married later. We married, and then until the State Department was ready to accept us, we came to the United States of America. And as I say, that's the only country, and I can say it, because I traveled a lot, where, if you appreciate whatever, you don't take many things for granted as many Americans do, it's a beautiful country. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are there any stories that you forgot to tell us, or that we didn't ask you about, or that somehow we, that you think might be valuable for you to tell, or-- 

SUBJECT: All right, as I say, I have a son whom I saved by miracles, because we starved. He was sick with whatever, you name it. And I brought him here. He's a very-- he was a very gifted kid. And we came to Paris, and he was sick, and I was afraid that he caught TB and whatever. But whatever it was, [INAUDIBLE]. And I put him in a home. They were homes run by the Jewish organizations for semi-orphans. He was in this home. You people know Paris? Malmaison. You know where Malmaison? Malmaison is not far from, and this was the estate of Joséphine. It was a beautiful, neglected, but there was a little palace where [INAUDIBLE]. The kids lived there and went to school in the village. 

And he was very happy there. And he came, he didn't know one word French. But with kids, it's very easy. They learn. Then he went on to a camp on vacation with them. He came, I was shocked. He was-- he spoke French. And before, there is-- I don't know if you are aware of it. In France, they have two certificates. Like we have high school diploma, and they have the big bacho, where, when you graduate, you have two more years after high school. You don't have to have an exam to enter college or a university. 

When the kids graduate the first petit bacho, the parents are called to the mairie, to the city hall. And they ask me, because the kid should go further, because he is a very gifted kid. Or, if he will graduate with the petit bacho, he can go to a trade school. And of course, I said let him go. But we have to leave. But they said that he was a very-- and I was aware that I have bad- Look, in the States, in America, there are very big possibilities for young willing people to get scholarships, to get all kinds of help, financial help, to go to study. My son graduated City College with Phi Beta Kappa and never mind. He will be here, he will not claim me as a mother. And then he graduated. He got a fellowship in Columbus, Ohio and has a master's in mathematics. 

But his dream was medicine. He dropped, got a scholarship, and he's now a medical doctor, teaching at the Texas University in San Antonio. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any questions? Occur to you? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I haven't either. Why don't we stop at this point? It sounds like a happy ending. 

SUBJECT: OK, I'm glad. What will you do with it? 