LAUREL VLOCK: --or anything that you want to tell us. 

CREW: In about-- 

INTERVIEWER: Hm, it's bright. 

CREW: Maybe like 30 seconds. 

INTERVIEWER: Can we s-- can we start off, uh, with a little bit about where you-- where you grew up? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Yeah. I grew up in-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. 

INTERVIEWER: You know, whenever he says-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Whenever he says-- 

CREW: Just about 30 seconds, yeah, one sec. 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Bernice Sobotka, S-O-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Bernice. 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Yeah. First name Bernice, you got the last name. 

CREW: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. 

CREW: OK. Any time you're ready, Laurel. 

LAUREL VLOCK: OK. 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: OK. I grew up in Lodz, L-O-D-Z, Poland. I was born in Poland. In Lodz, I went to school. I went what you call here, in, um, I gymnasium. You know what gymnasium is? It's like a high school and like two years college. 

And, uh, then the war broke out. And the Germans came in. We knew, a part, what it's all about because, you know, Poland neighbors with Germany. So we had a pretty good idea. Because when they threw out the Jews from Germany that were originally Polish citizens, they brought them into Poland to a town [INAUDIBLE]. 

So from these people, we knew approximately what was going on. But we didn't know to the extent, which they didn't know at that time either what's going to happen with the gas chambers and concentration camps and all that. Well, when they came into Poland, we just couldn't imagine that it suddenly it can be that bad, that they're going to do the things they did. 

Because I don't think anybody's imagination can go that far. So in the beginning, naturally, there we couldn't go to stores. We couldn't ride the buses. We had to wear the yellow star. But we still could move around. They had a curfew in the evening, but, in general, we could move around. So we still tried to hustle and bustle. We still-- we got to live. We got to eat. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you at this time? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: I-- I was 20 years old. My father was a business man. But, uh, naturally, you know, nothing was going normal as it was. Which, later, little by little, they took everything away, anyhow. And one day-- they caught my father in the street. And they hitched him to a wagon, instead of a horse, with a whip, go fast. 

And my father had a beard, so they cut his beard. But they didn't cut it like you cut normally a beard, just a [INAUDIBLE] here a piece and there a piece with skin and all. And then, they liquidated everybody in the town and shipped us to ghettos. We just had to walk out just with what you had on you, nothing else. 

You left the apartment or your house, whatever you had, business, everything. And they put us in the area that was the ghetto later. I was young and I didn't like it. I said, I got to fight back. I'm not going to stay in Lodz. I said, I'm going to Warsaw. 

I go to Warsaw because they were talking about annexing our part to Germany where Warsaw, the area of Warsaw would be protected which means it would be a Polish government. I said, I go to Warsaw and I will see and get apartment, get settled, and I bring you all there. Well, I could not get apartment in Warsaw because everybody did the same thing. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go by yourself? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Yes, sir. I did more things than that by myself, believe you me. And I couldn't get apartment in Warsaw. So I took not far from Warsaw, the town is called Zyrardow, where, you know, all the linen in Poland came from that town. That was the major town for Polish linen. And I got apartment there. And I s-- tried, started to get, tried to get things together. In the meantime, I got a letter from my mother that my father is very sick, to come back 

INTERVIEWER: Ha-- Had your parents been opposed to your going to Warsaw? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: No. No, we were eight children with four sisters and four brothers. Three were married. And one brother lived in a different town. He was in Krakow. And the sister, my married sister, married brother lived in the same town. Each of them had one baby. 

Well, I got a letter my father's very sick so to come back. So I came back. My father had diabetes and myself and my sister. The ghetto was not closed then, which means it was not surrounded with guards and it was not fenced off or anything. So we dared to go out to the Polish people, tried to get insulin. 

We took our lives in our hands because if they caught as a Jewish, I don't have to tell you what would happen. But we loved our father and we didn't care. So luckily we did not get caught. But we didn't get-- we couldn't get enough what we needed. 

My father needed insulin twice a day. And we couldn't get it. And in March 1940, thank God, he died. At least I know where he is. As a matter of fact, after the war, we put up a monument. And in 1975-- 

INTERVIEWER: In-- in Lodz? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: In Lodz in the cemetery. And in 1975 I couldn't bring myself to go back to Poland. But my husband and my youngest son did. And my husband's father disappeared someplace in the Warsaw ghetto. So he thought maybe he'll find a grave or something. 

So they went back, my youngest son and my husband and my husband's brother. Which, he's dead now. But he lived in Sweden, Stockholm. I stayed back in Sweden. I had all the papers. I had all the visa-- I had the visa and all the papers. And when I got to Sweden, I said, I cannot bring myself to go back. I said, my father will forgive me. And I did not go back. 

But the three of them went back. And for eight days, they did nothing but look for graves. Because the Jewish cemetery in Lodz is overgrown. But you walk in there and you can't see the human being, you can't see nobody because everything is so overgrown. And they hired a couple of guys who helped them and they found the grave. 

INTERVIEWER: They found your father's grave? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Yes. My father, my grandfather's, too because the one next to another. My grandfather didn't-- my grandfather didn't know that my father's dead. We kept it from him for almost a year. We kept it from my grandfather 'til he started saying, how come that he isn't coming to see me? And then, finally he caught on that-- 

So we said, look, the ghetto's closed in the daytime, he's working. In the evening, you cannot, you know, after 5 o'clock, you could not go. But then he caught on. Anyhow, so he hired a couple of guys and they cleared it out. And then they send me pictures. How beautiful the graves look completely clear and, you know, the writing and everything. 

And while we were sitting, you know, shiva like, you know, eight days, they closed the ghetto. And I couldn't get out anymore. And that was it. My f-- my mother was not used to-- she used to-- she was a housewife. She was a mother and a housewife. She wasn't used to take over. 

They would, you know, in Europe, the men did all the finances and did everything. She didn't know from nothing. She didn't know. And then, during the war you-- I don't think too many people knew how to manage too begin with. So, in a sense, I took over. I found myself the strongest. And I, somehow, took over. 

INTERVIEWER: How many children were at home at that point? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Five. 

INTERVIEWER: Then, were you the oldest? 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: From the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Of the ones where were still left with your mother. 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Yes. I was the oldest. So I kind of took over. Then my-- my oldest brother's wife died. And he was left with the baby. So he lived with us, too. My sister was married and had a baby. So then we had to s-- you know, they closed the ghetto. 

And they opened up shops for us to work because that's the only way how we got food in the ghetto. As the Germans concerned, there were no babies, there were no children, and no elderly people in the ghetto. Because you could only get food on a cart that you are working. Everybody had to have a certificate that you are working. And that's how you got your food. 

But everybody, the whole ghetto-- it wasn't just that the parents, you know, divided and gave a little more to the children. But the whole ghetto was evenly divided according to members in the family. So let's say, if it would be just for the working people, would have gotten more. But it was all divided, for the elderly and for the children so everybody got their ration. 

Because everything was rationed. We got so much bread and so many potatoes, which were rotten. And in the beginning, we used to get a little meat. But then, naturally, little by little, everything was cut out, fats and meats. Later on, they gave us horse meat. 

The dead horses, they were shot. So we got some horse meat. People were killing dogs. People were eating rats. The rations they gave us were starvation ra-- the rations, I don't have to tell you. You walked down the street and you walked over corpses. 

And you just passed by praying that tomorrow you-- it won't be you. And there was little wagons going around the ghetto picking up the corpses from the streets. My younger brother couldn't take it any more, he said. They came out, the Germans came out that they're looking for young people to take-- send them to-- for labor. And they're going to get paid so much and so much per day. 

They will have all the food they want, all the clothes, and they get paid for six months or so. And they would-- And my younger brother said, I'm getting out. I cannot take it. I begged him. I said, to me, this looks like a trick. Please don't go. I said, I don't care where I die. It's here or there. I really don't care. And he did go. 

We gave him as little money as we had because the Germans when they came in, little by little, they stripped us of everything. Like, you know, as they went, they took away our homes and everything. We still smuggled through little jewelry and things, you know, or a fur coat. But later on, there was a decree in the ghetto that whoever is not going to deliver any fur coat or a piece of jewelry, gold or silver, was going to be shot. 

So everybody delivered it, right? So we had very little. But whatever little we had, the few marks we scraped together, sewed it in his coat. So in a pinch, he will have it. I don't know what happened to him, no idea. Never met anybody who could tell me what happened to that group. 

Then what they would do, they would cordon off a area in the ghetto and grab the people, put them on trucks, and ship them out. I had like some connections, let's say, in the higher up because my grandfather, he was a councilman. So and you heard of Rumkowski? He was a councilman with-- So he knew my grandfather well. So somehow I got, you know, connections. So I would go to him and every once in a while, I would get a little extra food for my grandfather. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Can-- Do you remember, can you describe the sounds? You talked about people being grabbed and taken. And I wonder if you remember the sounds. 

BERNICE SOBOTKA: Screaming. What kind of sound do you think you could hear? Screaming, running, trying to hide. I tell you, I tell you, how I did it, OK? First off, well, they would cordon off areas. What they did, the ghetto was divided by a main street which we were not allowed on because the trolley car was going through. So they built bridges. 

Like, here was the main street, here was the ghetto, here was the ghetto. They built a bridge so we can cross over from one area to the other. So through connections, I would find out that tomorrow they're planning. Because they notified the Jewish police. Because the Jewish police had to help them. Even if it was their own mother in that area, they had to do it. 

So sometimes, I would find out that they're going tomorrow, they're going to cordon off that area. So whoever-- if my sister lived in that area, I would caution her and tell her, bring her over to us to stay over night with us 'til that part cleared. Then, two, three days, they would cordon off another area. 

So anyhow, one day they would come in like, we lived in apartment homes, you know, in the ghetto in that area, there were apartment homes. And every once in a while, they would come and just get grab the children, put them on trucks, ship them out. They had-- the ghetto was organized like a little country where there were police, where there were firemen, where there are all kind of departments. 

Rumkowski loved children. And he organized like a little hotel for children to go for a few days and get better food. Like they had a little farm there that they grew everything, you know, vegetables and all that. And he sold that to get a little more milk. 

And if you had connections in the privilege, you could get a child in there for a few days, which meant a lot. My younger brother, he was a very young child. And like I said, I kind of took over. So I-- I was like the mother to him. And I got him in in that little place. Well, one night-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Can we interrupt here because we're going to change tapes? And we don't want to stop the story. Just to get a glass of water-- 