INTERVIEWER: Can you give me your full name, place of birth, and date of birth. 

WALTER STRAUSS: Walter Strauss. I was born on the 10th of October, 1924, in a little town by the name of Steinbach am Glan in Germany. This town was close to the French border, just about 20 miles from the border itself. And when Hitler came to power in 1933, I was nine years old. But since 1931, I was in a town by the name of Mannheim, population 300,000. Due to the fact that our town was very small in population and hardly any Jewish children were there and I didn't get the right education. And someone thought that would be better for me to be in a big town where I could get a good education. 

I went to Mannheim and I lived in a children's home there. It was an orphanage before, but later on it was a children's home. And I did get a tremendous education while I was in Mannheim. Now, coming back about the time of 1933, when Hitler came to power, I as a youngster did not know how really bad it would be. I heard my parents saying, I hope-- you hope that Hitler doesn't come to power, but I really was too young to understand what the party meant, the power by Hitler. 

So in 1933, everything seemed to be cozy for us because we as Jewish people in Germany were first Germans and then Jewish, like you would be an American and then your religion is the secondary. Because we had all the privileges in any other citizen of the German government. And Jewish people really had in that time prior to Hitler really every convenience, every right like anybody else. And so this changed. In 1933, it really did change. 

And naturally, I cannot talk too much about that because I was too young, really. If I would have been older, I would have known what was going really on in Germany, how the persecution started in 1933. But I was just too young. But in 1936-- I will give you one example of the freedom we as Jewish people had prior to Hitler's power. In 1936, when the Olympic games were, uh, staged in Berlin, I as a youngster who himself was an athlete-- I was very well-known as a youngster in the town that I was a tremendous athlete-- I was holding for the German people, the German athletes, to win as many medals as they could. It's really-- if you take it, it is unbelievable that a Jewish boy would still think so strong for the German people to win the Olympics. 

Because at that time, I felt already pressure in my school. This was a mixed school. In Germany, there were parochial schools also, but just your Jewish and Christian kids would go together. And just about that time, about a year later, we could not go to a Christian school anymore. We had to have only our own Jewish school. There was only one Jewish school in Mannheim by the name of [SPEAKING GERMAN] So amazing. What happened is how I was fighting for my rights because I was very well-liked among fellow students due to athletic ability like anyone else here. 

You know, when you go to college, you are a star-- you are a star. And I could-- I don't want to brag about it, I was one. And one day we went home. The-- the boys from this children's home, we always would go together. And my best friends before, non-Jewish boys, one came up and started to cuss-- curse me, said some bad words. And I told him, listen, don't you say that once more or I'm going to-- or you're going to hear something. 

And he did the same thing and we started to fight, which is really something unusually because I was in danger something would happened to me. I was a Jewish boy fighting a Hitler Youth, a young boy who belonged to the Hitler Youth. And we were fighting and fighting and eventually, I did win over him. I didn't think nothing about it, went home. From that time on, nothing was done to us anymore, which is unusually, really, in the Hitler time. 

I wanted to call now father in 1938, Crystal Night. I remember vividly I went-- wanted to go to school. School was about, oh, I would say 12 blocks from our home. And we went all together and we saw all along the streets every Jewish store had broken windows. And we didn't know what was going on. We come to the school. The gates were closed. 

The principal of the school told us, kids, please go home. Something is happening. Please go home and hide. We went back to the children's home and I remember exactly that we looked behind the curtains, seen what's going on in the street. We saw the Nazis smashing windows. And about a block and a half-- a block away-- was a dentist's office, a Jewish dentist. 

And we could see how they poke into the doors and smashing everything. This was just so-- it was so close. We-- we were young, we were scared what would happen. At 6 o'clock in the evening, everything stopped. They never touched this children's home, which was really a surprise for us. But we still didn't know what was going on. 

The next day, I found-- we found out exactly what it was. I also found out through my mother, which lived in that little town, that my dad was taken to Dachau. And I did not see my dad until in 1939 in May. I graduated from school in May of '39. My dad came by on the way home from Dachau to pick me up because I had ended my school. And at that time, really it is unbelievable. I went home and we were so poor because the Jewish people which were left over in Germany couldn't have no business anymore. 

They had to do highway building. The Autobahn was built by a lot of Jewish people, amongst them my father, prior to his imprisonment in Dachau. And I came home and I wanted to make money to buy a suit. I didn't have a suit for and I I would have been proud to have a suit. So what happened is my father was working right after his liberation from the concentration from Dachau. How working he was building barracks for the German Army close to the French border. 

I would say it was only about six miles from the French border. We ourself lived only about 20 miles away from the French border. Now, you imagine there were 3,000 workers. The work force consisted of 3,000 workers. Amongst them, only three Jewish people, my father, another man, and myself. And I was the youngest. I was only 14 years old. 

We got up-- my dad and I did get up at about 4 o'clock in the morning, walked about two to two and a half miles to the nearest railroad station in another town, boarded a train for a trip of about 10 miles, got out of the train, and had to walk quite a distance up a hill to the barracks. The workday was six till six. I was only 14 years old. 

I was a bricklayer's helper. I had to take a wheelbarrow full of bricks and deliver the bricks to the bricklayer. You could look over the hill to the French side and we could see the French troops. We did not know how close it was to war. On the way back, same routine, train-- walking to the train, riding a bicycle home. By the time I went to bed, it was 10 o'clock. And when 4 o'clock, the same routine. 

All of a sudden, it was end of August. We saw a lot of German troops move-- troop movements. Because I would say about 30 miles away was one of the largest group-- I would say bases for-- fighting bases for the German soldiers. When we saw one column of soldiers going by through our little town, we knew something was happening and it was thought the war had started. 

I had earned in those two months, about two months of work, 28 marks, which really for me was a great deal but was nothing really. And my mom and dad said, Walter, the war is starting up. You better go back to Mannheim-- it is, like I said, 60 miles away-- because you are safer, you're not so close to the war zone. That day when I left, I took my ma-- mother to the side and said, here, you have my 28 marks. Because I knew she could use it because I figured I would be still provided in the children's home. 

I came back to Mannheim and started to work a few days later in the Jewish cemetery to learn gardening. It was the only job available for me. In the meantime, the war-- while the war was going on, I had a hope maybe still to get out of Germany. I had not known at that time that that would be the last time I would have seen my parents when had said goodbye. I-- see, at that time, it was a funny deal. In Germany, they still let you-- at that time, that-- that you could emigrate to Palestine. 

So I went near Berlin on a farm, a kibbutz-- [SPEAKING GERMAN] they called it-- to prepare myself to emigrate to Israel to learn farming. I-- I didn't know that was really the beginning of hard labor and hardship in my life. Because soon later, soon afterwards, the-- those farm camps were taken over by the Gestapo. We were restricted of movement. We could not go anywhere else. 

We had to be stationed in a-- at that place. Actually, we had the [SPEAKING GERMAN] the band around our arms. And so what happened is we were harvesting everything, potatoes and so on, but we were starving for hunger, more or less because we were not allowed to eat what-- what we harvested. This was what the German people. I remember very good, it was already 1940, things got a little bit more difficult for us. We saw that they put a lot of pressure on the Jewish people. 

And we belonged to a Jewish organization, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And I do know how we ourself, we knew already we couldn't go to Palestine anymore. We prepared ourself for the worst, like you know when you sometimes have army soldiers preparing for survival. And we had planned everything we could. We packed our things. We had a backpack-- I think it's backpack what you call it, which we had everyone of us had put in medication and things like this just in case something would happen that we would be deported. 

Because we knew already at that time that lots of people were taken away, but where we didn't know. So I-- from one camp, I went to another camp. And then in 1942, was it, I went to the [SPEAKING GERMAN] camp, which was a big place. But the leader, a Gestapo man, was a very tough man on us youngsters because we were very young, only about 17, 18 years old. And I remember that we lived in barracks and we were hungry ad we stored potatoes. 

The way the potatoes stored in the field. I suppose [INAUDIBLE] we made-- I don't want to go into details about it, but we would go at night and steal those potatoes. We put them on the wooden stove and-- to-- to fry them. People were very hungry. And it was so bitter cold when the wooden stove would be not burning anymore in the morning, actually our stockings were frozen to the shoes because from working in the wet-- the snow and so on. 

All of a sudden, we could see already that, uh, that Berlin was starting to be bombed and could see the flashes and the whatever was going on in the Berlin because it was so close. And we had heard stories already what is going on. We knew that there were supposed to be some trains which gas had gas in them where people were taken away and gassed. It never occurred to us that this really was Auschwitz, where the gas chamber were. 

All of a sudden, a call came to the camp to get ready. Naturally, we got everything we could carry, provisions which we needed for survival, not knowing really what-- what-- what-- how it would end up. We came to Berlin and I don't know exactly what it was, I think it was the main synagogue, and we were assembled there not only from our camp, but from surrounding-- in from Berlin and so on. But one thing that I want to repeat. I forgot to tell you the day we left, all a sudden a group of workers came from the Ukraine. 

We were told they were to replace us and we would go to the Eastern Front-- you know, not the Eastern Front, but to east Germany to do labor. And then it dawned to us, something else is going-- going to be us-- going to happen to us. While we were in Berlin in the Sammelplatz what they called it, you know, where they assembled us all, they always told us, take everything you have along because you can use it. Like some people had gold and jewelry and so on. 

And then the day came at school we were taken to the train station in Berlin. The transport consisted of 1,000 Jewish people-- children, parents, you know, just an assortment of every age group and so on. We were loaded into freight cars and, uh, the difference is a freight car in Germany are much smaller than the freight cars here. So we were crowded, very badly crowded. I think the trip took about two days. It did get-- all a sudden, this train stopped. 

We didn't know where the destination was, but it was Auschwitz. It was unbelievable how they had organized to separate the people. The hollering went on, the Germans and [INAUDIBLE], everybody leave everything what they possess inside. You'll get it later on. We got out of the freight cars. 

In no time, I would say in-- in a few minutes, they had separated 1,000 people, women on one side, men on the other side. And it's-- it's well-known, you know, the one side meant death, the other side maybe going into the camp. But we didn't know. We really did not know. And they selected 300 men to be separated and we were loaded on trucks. And what had they done, they looked at the ones which were not too old and not children but which we were strong. And I never entered the Auschwitz main camp. 

We was taken about-- oh, I would say about six miles away to the Auschwitz [INAUDIBLE]. It was more or less where they needed us for slave labor. We were building a big chemical complex where they made-- wanted to build-- where they wanted to make synthetic rubber, the IG Farben Chemical Complex. We arrived in [SPEAKING GERMAN] in the rain. 

It was unbelievable again how precision everything was arranged. Off the tracks right away herded in a room where all our civil clothes taken off. We were shaved, all the hair removed-- bodily hair removed. And then they used naptha to clean our body to get us-- to rid us of fleas or lice or any other things. It went so fast, everything. And all the work was done by other prisoners. See, the guards would standby, but all the dirty work was done by fellow prisoners. We were naked, we took a shower. We were naked, running through cold rain that night to a tent. 

And then I did get my-- my number tattooed, which is 117022. This was supposed to be my name. I had no name anymore. That was it. Not knowing what really would happen to us, we were still dazed. We were taken to a barrack. I cannot ex-- this is very hard to remember how many people would we were, but it was pretty crowded. The next morning already marching on, going to work. 

The first thing when we got up, we had to get up around 4 o'clock or 4:30. We got dressed. They came in like a military barracks-- get up, get up. And you couldn't watch yourself really because there were hardly any sanitary facilities in this barrack. We had to go to what they call the [SPEAKING GERMAN], which is a place for role call. All the prisoners, I would say about 10-- between 10,000 and 12,000, we had to stand-- had to stand at attention. I don't know exactly how long because, you know, it's a long time past. 

We had to stand at attention. And the SS guards would go by and you had to holler your name out. They had the list where they would, uh, if you were present. And then the march started up to go to work. And when you were a new prisoner, they used to put you into the toughest labor detail. Now, it came in the factory which we were to build, I couldn't tell you exactly the-- how the distance was, maybe a mile, a mile and a half. 

I-- this is hard to say at this time. We had to walk and we had only prisoner garb. We had wooden shoes. But one thing is before I forget, wooden shoes were a tremendous help for us. They insulated our feet. It was very cold. Because wood insulates you and you get used to wooden shoes. It's a funny thing. 

We did go to work and my commander was the [INAUDIBLE] commander like [INAUDIBLE] with machines like the power and light company puts electric cables down. No, we didn't have machines. We had to dig the ditches; we had to carry the cables, which was tremendous heavy; lay the cables; and fill up the ditches again. I want to remind you-- tell you a story also of what happened on the march. We marched in I didn't know how many abreast, but you had to march a certain tempo, certain step. 

The guards next-- were going straight next to you with their guns drawn. And they had some funny things in their mind. They would take you-- take one prisoner just by chance and take his hat and throw it away. Now, you had to have a cap on. The man would step out of the line to retrieve his cap. That was the end of the man, the man was shot. 

This was just-- for them it was a game. We did work 12 hours a day, seven days a week. Only every second week at that time, we had a day off. A most amazing thing happened. The first six weeks-- when you were in a concentration camp, I think the most critical time of your life at that time was the first six weeks. I would say in the first six weeks that I-- I-- I would guess only that 60% to 70% of the people died, of the newcomers. 

The chances were so slim that you could survive the first six weeks. It's hard to tell. You could be the strongest person. It did didn't make no difference because starvation would set in because we didn't have nothing to eat. You would, uh, have only the clothes what you had on. This-- and you were working out in wind and weather. April it was pretty cold at that time because Poland it is a very cold climate at that time. I did get ill, diarrhea, I had a fever. 

I didn't want to go in the hospital. They had what they called [SPEAKING GERMAN], which is a hospital. But it's really not a hospital. It was a barrack where they had beds that you could be in the room. You didn't have to go to role call. But all they had to treat your with was aspirin, more or less. And what was the reason that people were afraid to go to that-- to the hospital? There was a rule at that time in 1943 if you were longer than two weeks in the hospital, a guard would pick you up and take you to the gas chambers. 

At this-- you know, how did I know about it because everybody knows that, you know, that people get killed. And so I was afraid to go. But my illness, my fever got so bad I couldn't walk anymore and I was taken to the hospital. Fate was in my favor, the fate of-- how would I say-- my illness more or less saved my life. You see, it was just the other way. When you got sick, that means the end of your life. 

Like I mentioned before, I belonged to the [SPEAKING GERMAN], a youth group. It turned out that the main nurse, but we would call a nurse here, he was a pharmacist. But he was also one of the leaders of the [SPEAKING GERMAN] in Germany. In fact, the man lives in California in Beverly Hills. And he knew that we belonged to a special group, the boys from this last camp. 

But I-- the reason he knew by the numbers when we came. See, you could tell by-- by the number what time of month, where you came from. This was still-- we knew-- I could tell from another prisoner's number where he came from-- from Poland or from Hungary or from Germany. And I got in this hospital. He saw my number. He said, don't you belong to that group from [SPEAKING GERMAN]? I said, yes. 

He said, don't worry. For two weeks I was in hospital. What did he do? He knew exactly when the trucks would come because the German officer, there was only one officer. He would tell him already, now let's prepare the people which have to go out-- number so-and-so, number so-and-so. You see what he did, he took me off the list and I was released to the main camp on the same day. The true fact was I never was released. 

I was only taken off the list. He had taken me from one room to the other. He kept it on for six weeks. After six weeks, he found a job for me in the same hospital. So it's really something unbelievable how other people die for me. It was just vise versa. But what I want to say in this particular deal, I want to mention something. 

People have asked me, how did you actually survive? How did anyone survive? And I can tell you one thing. You could be the strongest man, you could have the strongest even will to live, you could be a very religious and have prayed all your life. It really didn't help. It-- you could-- it wouldn't help because the malnutrition and the sufferings you had to go through somehow wouldn't help you to survive. You had to have luck. And this was in my case the system. 

My illness was my luck. It made me survive. Because as soon as you were in a hospital or anywhere working inside, you didn't have to work outside and wind and weather. That was already I would say 75% to help you survive. And something else, as long as you were in a concentration camp, there's more of a chance you had to survive. The reason is a person-- it's, you know, sometimes a human being doesn't think he can go on anymore and might give up. 

But somehow, you get used to hunger. It's unbelievable because you hardly had anything to eat. You had to work very hard. But you do get used to hunger. Same thing like they tell you right now while I am sitting here, I'm in tremendous pain from my illness. You also get used to pain. The one thing you don't get used to it is what's going to happen the next day. 

You just don't know how the next day goes on. The funny is also I think as long as time goes on, you get to a point that you don't have the real feeling anymore of a human being. You feel somehow completely different. In our case, it was even worse because we knew we had nobody who would save us. We knew exactly what was going on in the world, but we did not-- we-- we knew that there was nobody nearby to help us. 

The reason we knew so much about what was going on there in the world, next to our camp was a English prison, a war prisoner camp. I mean, captured English men. And they had a secret transmitter. And I don't know exactly the time when it was, it was in the summer of 1943 I believe-- yes. We were told, there will be an air attack by Allied forces, planes coming from Italy, and we should watch out that we wouldn't get caught while we were in the-- for the business we're in working in the-- the big complex to build that big factory. 

Now, I was at that time-- I remember exactly the day how it was. It was sunny day, blue skies. I was-- all of sudden, we heard a little noise of an airplane. And we could tell the difference between airplanes, American airplanes or English airplanes or German airplanes. It was a spotter plane. And we looked up and there was a little plane. Now, the a itself had fog equipment. 

That means the Germans could make fog so the planes overhead wouldn't see the camp or anything. All of a sudden, we hear the big noise of heavy airplanes. And this is amazing. We knew exactly those were the-- the planes coming from Italy to bomb the complex because the complex was ready to be starting up manufacturing of synthetic rubber. And you know the funny thing happened, they dropped 1,200 or 1,300 bombs that day. Two of those bombs accidentally fell in the camp. 

Luckily, they did not fall in the barracks. I also want to mention it happened on a Sunday. Because on that Sunday, only a token force was working in the factory. And we had 34 prisoners killed that time. The reason I know so much about how many prisoners are killed because the detail I worked in also was a detail which had to move dead people, pick up dead people, load them on the truck. 

Next to my room was a-- a room that the dead prisoners were always brought. And I remember those people, they were working in the cement detail, covered with cement, you know, bodies brought in. And the next day, the trucks came and take them away for burning. But we felt so safe. It's unbelievable. We knew they would not bomb the camp. 

The one thing that happened about-- it was just before Christmas 1943. Again we got a notice from the English because some of them did work together with us prisoners, there will be another bombing raid. But it was just prior to Christmas the bombing, it occurred. Again, all the facilities-- the main facilities-- were knocked out. The only bad thing for us, they knocked out the boiler system to heat-- which supplied the heat to our camp. 

So during two or three days in the bitter cold, we had no heat and nothing to eat because they didn't cook anything. This was 1943. And I want to mention something else. At that time, there was a deal which really is amazing I can talk about it, but you know, it's-- you lived through it. When people tried to escape, the-- the penalty for trying to escape was hanging. And our work detail also had the duty to move the dead bodies from the gallows. 

And they had a special routine when they do the hanging. It always was done on a Sunday afternoon when most business were not working. And I had three friends, three Polish Jewish prisoners which tried to escape. Now, how I was involved is a-- would be a long story. I want to make it very short. As I told you, I worked in the [GERMAN], the place where the new prisoners came in, were deloused, and so on, whatever it was. 

We also would disinfect the clothes of the rest of the prisoners. But when the new prisoners came in, they came all with civilian clothes. So we took the civilian clothes away and the Germans took it away. There were three-- those three fellow prisoners I had befriended, they were bricklayers and carpenters. And every so often, this room where the clothes was [INAUDIBLE] tremendous heat and disinfected would have some breaks and so they had to repair those breaks where the concrete wall would break apart a little bit. 

And they-- we were very good friends because after a while, you get-- you're-- you're-- among your fellow prisoners, you have certain prisoners you get befriend to. And they said, Walter, you know what, help us. We need some clothes to try to escape. Get us civil clothes. I did get the regular clothes for them. What happened is while they were working, on top of this bunker-- what they called a bunker-- was a little crawl space. And they-- I had put the civilian clothes for them up there. The deal was made if they wanted to escape, they could escape in one way. 

They were from Poland, they could speak Polish. But for me, it would have been impossible. Maybe I was even afraid to escape, you know, I don't know. But they could speak Polish. I couldn't speak Polish, so for me the chances to get through Poland would be just impossible. So the deal they made is an electrician, another prisoner, that he would shorten out that night the electrical system in the camp, which would-- would knock out electrified fences, the lights, and everything but the towers and everything all the lights would be out. 

Now, they told me they made an agreement that if they would get caught, they never would tell about my involvement. And they said just-- you have to trust your fellow prisoners. And through all bad luck, this other prisoner who was supposed to shorten out the electric fences and so on, he went to the German SS guards and told them about the planned escape of my three friends. They never got out of the camp. 

They were picked up in their barracks, interrogated-- where did you get your clothes? They said, we got it from the disinfection. How? Oh, you know, we worked on the bunker there, repaired it, and we stole the clothes. So I was waiting. It was about 2 o'clock in the morning, the SS guards came, woke me up, got me out of bed, took me back to the place. Did you give some of the prisoners clothes, civilian clothes? 

I acted dumb. You see, when you are-- while in the concentration camp, I can't compare it with the prison system. Prisoners, when they try to do something, they obviously have in their brains already an excuse for anything. They will do that. That's why I can understand when people are in prison here, in any prison, I do understand quite a bit about the system, how it works. And so we were prepared for everything. 

I don't-- I don't know a thing about it. I don't know a thing. And they, my three friends, did not tell about me. The fact is that the brother of one of the persons who was caught lives here in Beverly Hills, his sister lives with-- lives in Beverly Hills. And we knew-- were friends even very well after the war. And they were put then in isolation. There were little cubicles in the center of the camp especially for prisoners which were punished, tried to escape or other-- did other things. 

And they could not lay or sit, they could only stand. It made not difference if it was hot or cold. And I walked by-- naturally, you had to be careful because they maybe would watch me. And they said, we didn't tell. We didn't tell. And I went nonchalantly by without even looking at them. A week later, on a Sunday afternoon, three gallows were erected and just to make it short, they were hanged. 

We had like usually to march around-- all around the gallows while they were dangling from the ropes. An orchestra was playing, we had to sing songs. Just-- it was just like a carnival. And it was my duty and from our detail to take the three prisoners off, take their clothes off then when they came to a room-- you know, when they had carried them in the room, throw them down in the other room. 

The next day, the trucks came. You-- this what I want to bring out because I want the world to know how life is-- how life was in the concentration camp. Can you imagine if you picked up the dead prisoners? You just pick them up. They are stiff and you throw them on the truck just like you take a brick-- pick up a brick and throw them on top of a-- of a-- of a truck. It's really unbelievable that you can tell this without, you know, without breaking down. 

But this is a true fact. When you-- you are just not anymore a human being. You just are not a human being anymore. So in 1944, the penalty for escaping [INAUDIBLE] anymore. They stopped hanging later on at that time. Winter 1944, we knew already something was going on. The end of the world might be very shortly due because we found out that the Russian Army was closing in on Auschwitz. January 1945, the camp was liberated. 

Now, we-- I believe if we would have stayed in the hospital part, we would be freed the next day because all the sick prisoners were left behind and later on, we found out they-- they were liberated by the Russian Army. We-- our-- when our camp was liquidated, Auschwitz, the destination was Buchenwald. So our luck, the work detail of the hospital, we were all put together in one, uh, freight car. But imagine January of '45, bitter cold and those freight cars were open. 

And we were really, I think, about 100 prisoners, very crowded. It took us five days. And it is proven through-- how would I say-- they found out literature, this was one of the worst transports ever, that what we were on. We were three-- about 3,000 or 3,500 prisoners or more. And-- yeah, I think it was 3,000 prisoners. And I remember when we left, it was bitter cold. And we went through-- the trip was through to Czechoslovakia. 

And the first station we stopped was Prague. And we looked. We saw-- it was night at the time-- there was a bridge going across the railroad, uh, yard. We saw on top Czech civilians and they threw food down into the freight train. And, you know, we had nothing to eat in the train, the sanitation system is horrible. And many, many of our prisoners died. What did he do? 

While the train was moving, we would throw the dead bodies overboard. But before we did that, we would strip them of all their clothes because we needed the clothes for our own protection. After five days, uh, 2/3 of the prisoners were dead. We arrived in Buchenwald and there it started up again. The new-- you had-- you were a new prisoner in a new camp again. 

So we got into [INAUDIBLE], it was unbearable because now I had to go through the old routine again. But we did not know if we really would be getting killed right away or what because the camp was overcrowded. We were in the-- it's unbelievable. When we got in our barracks to sleep at night on wooden planks, it was so-- we couldn't even lay on our backs. We could only sideways. But you know, in the morning we had all the room in the world because so many prisoners had died overnight, which was unbelievable. 

To my luck, I was taken a few weeks later to another camp [SPEAKING GERMAN]. This camp consisted of 3,000 women prisoners and 80 men. We had to work in an ammunitions factory. And it was already the beginning of April. All of a sudden, we heard that American troops were closing in from one side and the Russian troops from the other side. 

Now, a friend of mine who was the leader of our-- of our work detail, he was with me and he was older, he had somehow-- I didn't know what he-- he got in good standing with one of the women guards. Because part of the guards were women, but mostly were older men, which-- because they didn't have no elite troops anymore in-- not in 1945. And she told him, listen, you're going to go on a transport. The camp going-- will be liquidated. How about if I help you to escape on the transport? 

I'll make a bargain with you. I help you and you help me when we are liberated. The deal was made. We were supposed-- the three of us, together with this German guard, she was a young woman in her 20s-- and-- to defect on the 22nd of April-- or no, on the 12th of April the camp was liquidated. This guard, she arranged that we would be on the truck where all the food was. It was for us supposed to be locked, but it wasn't locked. 

The same day the transport of 3,000 women and to 70-some men at the time, they marched. They were supposed to go to Dachau, which would be a tremendous march-- distance. They went the wrong way. They made a wrong turn and that same day, they were liberated by American troops. Our transport did go the right way, not knowing what happened to the transport. 

And this I wanted-- this is a very important fact of what I want to tell you. I had a chance to kill. Because on our truck, we were the three prisoners, this woman guard, and three older German guards. So [INAUDIBLE] all the people which were drafted 50, 60 years old. And we were going, driving there, an they fell asleep at night. And they had their guns right next to them. 

And you know what, all I had to do was take a gun and smash their heads in. You know, I couldn't do it. Do you know why? It had to do with my upbringing. I still had-- you know, I still had a-- a human feeling. I had-- I had somehow a feeling I can't do it. I believe to kill somebody is something which can only a-- certain people can do it. I couldn't do it. 

The only thing I can tell you, I believe if it would have been between life and death that I would have been attacked at that time by the guards, that they would have-- I maybe would try to kill them, yes. But in this case, I could not do it. Talking about this, I want to come back. I don't know if I reported before that I never had the feeling I would die. See, I wanted to tell you something. 

While I was in Auschwitz, I never had a feeling I would die. And the people had asked me after my liberation and I told them this, even my doctors and so on, why do you think you felt you never would die? I want you to know I was too young. I believe that what was the reason. I didn't have enough already-- I had not lived enough. I was-- I didn't have my own family. I believe if I would have been a little bit older and I would have had already a family, maybe children, I would have worried about what happened to them. 

But in my case, I had just-- I-- it's hard to explain. I just could not imagine I would die. It's a really amazing thing because of all the problems, all the sufferings and you feel no way you will die. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

WALTER STRAUSS: At that time, I was 18, you know. And by the time I was liberated, I was 20 and a half. But in this connection, I want to tell you something. The only time I was feeling fear of dying was the day I escaped, which is amazing. There I was afraid-- I was actually because I was not under a guard anymore. But this was the first time I felt, maybe I don't make it. Maybe now might the time that something is going to happen. During all-- during the two and a half years I was imprisoned, that feeling didn't come. 

But now, when I was-- had escaped on the transport-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me how that happened. 

WALTER STRAUSS: Oh, yeah. I want to tell you how this happened. There was-- we were [INAUDIBLE] our-- the trucks, we were a column of trucks, you know, not many, about three or four trucks. And we were going through-- through a German farm-- farmland. All of a sudden, an attack came, American dive bombers came, attack planes, and tried to strafe the trucks. So everyone there just jumped out of the trucks in the nearest wood. 

That was our chance to get away because there was a chaos. Nobody-- everyone was for himself, you know, on his own. And that was the 10th of April-- uh, 12th of April. Pardon me. It was the day I believe when Roosevelt passed away, the 12th of April, 1945. It took us 10 days to get through the lines because what happened is a tragedy really happened. That was the day the agreement was made that the American Army would stop and the Russian Army would take over. 

It took us 10 days and 10 nights. And you know what it means in April to sleep in pine-- under-- the pine needles covered us up in a tree, in a forest. And I remember vividly all of sudden, we heard some barking of a dog. And there were German soldiers, maybe 200, 300 yards away on the street. It was in a wood. 

But the-- the wind had shifted. I'm sure that's what it was because the dogs did not detect our-- detect us. And we shivered. And once [INAUDIBLE] see, this was Germany already. We were in Germany so we could talk. I remember when we stopped in a farmhouse that night and I-- my hair was a little bit-- had a little bit grown already. But we had civilian clothes on. 

But we never kept our-- took our hat off. Day and night we kept our hat on because we figured they would see that our hair is short. Maybe we covered arms always because the number would prove that we were prisoners. So some of the farm people were very nice. I don't-- the reason was because the guard, the women guard, she was in her SS uniform and the German population was very much afraid of SS at that time. 

We did-- so it was the ninth day and this was I think the hardest day of my-- our lives. The last day before our liberation, a little town and we went-- can you imagine you are about a mile away from freedom? We saw when we passed through that little town we had clear farmland ahead of us. On the other side, we could see American tanks. We walked. And overhead, all of a sudden comes an airplane spraying machine gun fire. 

So all we could do is to lay down in the, you know like a tractor makes some marks, to lay down. We couldn't go forward anymore. We had to turn back. We went back and what happened is first stop was the headquarters of this army detail. We went in, heil Hitler, honest truth. But they did not know that we were prisoners because how could be two prisoners with a woman who is a guard? 

She had a uniform on and amazingly, they never said, how about taking your cap off or so? So we told them a lie, and maybe it could have changed the whole setup that night. We told them a lie that we were wanted to go to the other town, we have our families there and we worked in this and this town, I don't know the names anymore, where we were. And do you know what happened? The Americans came there and they bombed our factory. 

And you know, we don't have no identification anymore. See, like I said, you've got to be prepared. You've got to to have lies left and right. You've got to know-- every situation you have to know to prepare yourself what you will say. To our luck, this girl, she had her uniform on and said she could to convince the army headquarters there, which was a-- it's a true fact there was bombings going on. So the men, the officers, said to us, how about staying overnight? Maybe things going to change. 

He ordered us to a farm-- to a farmer who had a big house. And the woman was sent to an old lady across the street. But we found out soon this would be maybe the end of us. When we came to his farmer, he didn't offer us any food. He was a Nazi. He had something-- he could detect why don't those two guys take their caps off? So he ordered us and he said, how about you sleep in-- in the barn next to the cows. 

So OK. But before we went to see this German SS guard, this woman. And there is something that happened. There was an old lady and we were talking, and all of a sudden she started to talk, you know, isn't that a shame what they did to the Jewish people here? Now, we didn't know was it a trap or wasn't. Could we tell her that we were Jewish escapees? We did not tell her. 

But what happened is when we went back to the farm and the farmer in the-- in the barn, we couldn't sleep. We slept on straw. The farmer could have given us a bed. Didn't give us anything. And we knew they would come early in the morning to milk the-- the cows. We got up before this happened. We went back to that old only on the second floor in that house and you know what, you wouldn't believe what happened. 

She said, you know, our troops moved out overnight. So then we-- we didn't even-- still didn't tell her that we were Jewish. We told this SS woman, now you change your uniform. She had her-- her luggage along. She had civilian clothes. She changed her uniform. Now, I could speak English. I had three years' English already, which was fortunate for me. 

You know what happened is the day before, when we could not go would, there was another single German soldiers-- soldier. We walked a straight line right to that tank. There was an isolated farmhouse, there were tanks. And before we got there, we raised our hands. I took-- we took our cap off the head and I said, don't shoot, don't shoot. We are from a concentration camp. 

They came to us and we showed them our number right away. So then they took us right away by Jeep into town, which was about 5,000 population, and we were interrogated. And it turned out this man who interrogated us was an American lieutenant who was born in Vienna. His name was Braeger. And my fellow prisoner, he was from Vienna. So he did not trust us. 

He said it was kind of fishy. How could you and this SS woman be hidden [INAUDIBLE]? Because at that time, they knew that some of the SS guards had shaved heads and things like this and acted as prisoners themself. He took us to interrogate us and he asked one question, do you know a name-- a man by the name of Braeger? 

My friend said, sure. Do you mean the book publisher Braeger from Vienna? Yes. You know what? This is-- sure, he was killed in Buchenwald. He was a very famous man. The Nazis killed him. He told him how he was killed. The lieutenant didn't say nothing. He said, I want you to be my guest tonight in the hotel. He already had given us a room, you know found a room for us. 

But they took that SS woman away. He said, we interrogate-- we interrogate you now and her and we will do anything for that woman because they ask us how she treated us and how she treated the other prisoners. We naturally spoke out for her. That night when we had dinner in a little room-- a dinner for us was a big dinner, for him it was just a plain meal. He said, now I want to tell you who I am. I'm the son of this man who was killed. 

And I had already heard the same story from another prisoner I had freed. The man lives in Colorado, this lieutenant. The [INAUDIBLE] which wouldn't believe it. When I came here to the United States, I was invited to some people which were from Vienna and this lieutenant was staying with one of the families here in Kansas City. This is [INAUDIBLE]. 

So this was how my liberation was. Do you have some more time? 

CREW: The tape is just out now. 

WALTER STRAUSS: See. Let me see. Did I have everything in it what I-- 

INTERVIEWER: You did. Yeah, absolutely everything. After-- 

WALTER STRAUSS: [INAUDIBLE] comes to get me up [INAUDIBLE]. 

CREW: Real silent. 

Now look right into the camera lens. 

