[STEADY SINE WAVE TEST TONE] INTERVIEWER: --circumstance, describe-- 

PETER GAY: I can be precise. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. I never answered. 

PETER GAY: Over 21. 

INTERVIEWER: That you-- that you-- your family circumstance, the town-- the place you lived. As full a description. OK. 

PETER GAY: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: You ready? 

PETER GAY: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling. 

PETER GAY: You're also-- anyway, you're welcome to ask. I mean, my name is Peter Gay, which it has been since 1943. Before that, it was Peter Frolich, and it was translated from that by court order. And that's a story we'll come to, I guess, a little later. 

I was born in Berlin. I went to school there. So-called Volksschule which is the general public school, from 6 to 10. Then went to gymnasium from '33 to '38, which is to say I-- I finished five years, which is-- it was obvious they had a Jewish school. There were Jewish kids in that school until the spring of '38, at which point whatever small remainder there was was-- was thrown out. 

And then I spent a year working-- about a year and a half working, I guess. And then on spring-- in the spring of '39-- oh, I should give you an exact date I was born, on June 20th, '23. So, when we left, which was April 27, 1939, I was going on 16. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me about your parents-- your family, what your tradition was in Berlin, your whole-- 

PETER GAY: Well, my parents-- like, as they used to say, a great many Berliners --didn't come from Berlin. Now, my father came from a little upper Silesian town called Kempen which was a German town that was given to Poland after World War I, which is one of the reason-- or the reason, rather, why he came then to America under the Polish quota. Because that was done by place of birth as it was at the time that you immigrated, or wanted to emigrate. 

My mother was born in Breslau, which of course was the capital of Silesia. 

And my father was a small businessman who left Kempen, went to Breslau, went to Frankfurt, met my mother in Breslau, I would say, sometime in 1921, at the wedding of my mother's older sister and his uncle. So that, when my parents married, they-- there was a kind of double relationship. And my two cousins-- the two children of my uncle and aunt --were my double-- my double cousins. 

He married her, I believe, I forget the exact-- I think it was in May, 1922, and then I was born, as I say, in June '23. At that point, he had already moved to Berlin. And that's where they then lived until-- until we left the country, in '39. 

He was a small businessman of a kind that is not really too well-known here. He was a kind of manufacture's representative, which was more than being a traveling salesman. That's to say he dealt in China, crystal ware, usually very good stuff, but also cheaper lines. And what he essentially did was to mediate between the manufacturer on the one side and the, say, department stores or the large specialty shops on the other. And his specialty was sort of negotiating prices and discovering what next year's collection should be. You know, this kind of-- there was as much fashion in this as there was in, you know, in the lady's garments, and that was a special field. 

And he worked and-- and did, ironically, very well after The Depression became a little attenuated, say, from-- I would judge from about '32, '33 on-- certainly from '34, '35 on, things got better for him. 

Now, the way in which he did this was to work with a Gentile partner. And it was a small firm. There were these-- these two partners, and there were two or three traveling salesman who worked under them. And so my father was a kind of-- not a born Berliner, but a-- somebody who, like thousands of other people, not just Jews, but others, had adopted the city. And he was very much at home there. My mother, same thing, you know. 

Breslau wasn't that far a few hours by train so small you have to remember again what a small country Germany was-- smaller now --and so travel back and forth was easy. My mother had four siblings, and so did my father. And of my mother's, most of them were actually in Berlin; my father's, most of them were in Breslau. And there was a fairly active visiting back and forth. 

My very first memory goes way, way back. I don't have a very good memory in general. My amnesia is pretty poor-- pretty-- pretty-- not poor, my amnesia's excellent. My memory is poor. 

But my very first memory is, in fact, of Breslau, in my grandparents' house looking over one of the squares, called The Ring, which was one of the nicer places, where they had their apartment on the second floor. 

So family life was very much-- it was very much a family life. That is, my father had a number of friends, most of whom, incidentally, were connected with sports. Germany was riddled with amateur sports organizations, light athletics, track and field, and football, soccer, which of course then was, as it now is, the national sport of Germany. 

And my father was not himself a very good athlete, but was one of those people, of whom there were quite a few, who are needed by these clubs. You know, to do bookkeeping, to volunteer to go on trips with the team and cheer, and would help with morale and so on. And on the consequence of this-- he had done this in Frankfurt and then he did it in Berlin --he had a number of friends who were football players, and some of them would come to the house. And I remember some of them. 

But mostly, life was essentially rather sort of quiet. We weren't exactly rich. In fact, we were, I feel, fairly strapped, ironically, until the middle '30s, when, I remember-- my father had a car, which was, in the '30s, either a luxury item or a business, and with him, it was a business expense --and he took us on a trip, a tour through Germany in late spring/early summer of '36, which was regarded as a pretty nice thing, a pretty nice kind of vacation. This is sort of the economic level you can think of. The gymnasium I went to was-- like all these gymnasia --not free, but on the other hand, it was not, you know, one of these immensely-expensive private schools. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there a Jewish identification in the family? Was it-- 

PETER GAY: No. My parents had officially left the Jewish religion. Now this-- in a state like Germany, including even the Weimar Republic, where this was much looser, much freer, had an official-- official categories. And these categories were needed because they had to do-- because of the taxes that you paid or did not pay, so that if you registered yourself as Catholic or Protestant or whatever, this meant that a certain rather minor proportion of your income tax would be funneled to that particular religion. 

Now you could become, by special act, what it was called, konfessionslos you know, simply "to leave." And that was done by of people, not just Jews. I mean, socialists, of course, did it wholesale. And in losing your-- losing your faith of the Marxists, let's say, would then make this official, as it were, by leaving any church whatsoever. And this goes back to the 19th century, this tradition. 

My parents did this. And that was, of course, my-- my upbringing as well. 

INTERVIEWER: And you didn't have to pay a tax, then? Is that it? 

PETER GAY: That's right. You were simply-- I mean, the tax was the same, but-- but nothing was given to-- to anybody. I've known people since the War-- one American suit in particular that I know of was a Protestant --who made some money in Germany, and declared herself to be Jewish, and her money's gone to the-- the Jewish communities now. That can be done. There's no particular difficulty. There was, in the Weimar Republic, more difficulty. So there was no-- if there was identification, it was-- it was accidental and slight. 

And as a matter of fact, I would put it, also, more positively-- or, if you wish, more negatively --my father was a very aggressive Atheist. So-- my mother was, but not perhaps so outspoken and so aggressive. Which meant that nothing was neutral about this. This was very important to him. And it was-- he was very anti-Jewish, for example. 

The first thing I remember about religion were jokes he told about Jews. And-- or true stories he told about Jews, which were very, very derogatory stories-- very derisive. And he once told me, or maybe more than once told me, for example, he'd been brought up Jewish-- not terribly religious. His mother, in fact, left a will-- he once told me --to everybody's surprise that she did not want, at her burial, to have anything religious said. And the instance, this is sort of how these things had gone back. But he said that he had been, as it were, converted to Atheism, or pulled out of any kind of Jewish religious, or ethic, or community, or whatever feelings you want to call them by what he thought he saw as a kid. You know, he thought that the most decent people were not religious in his town, and-- and he would tell these stories. 

And at 12, or something like that, he-- he pulled out. He lost his faith. And then, when he grew up, he simply made a kind of a, you know, consistent practice of this. And of course, that's how I grew up. 

There are lots of stories about this. I don't know how much we want to spend on this, but that was of-- you know, of some-- of some importance to him, important enough to make the point. You know, he doesn't just leave it alone. 

INTERVIEWER: What about other members of your family? 

PETER GAY: Well, that's what came up, you see. There's a category-- I don't know how many people you've interviewed who have my background. I suppose most people you've talked to have been people who have had something slightly different. 

There's a category-- again, a derisive --the so-called three-day Jew. I don't know, that phrase, Drei Tage Jude that's a German word --that was, again, a typical joke of my father's. But I think that was a general term. Drei Tage Juden were people who had no relation to religion, didn't know anything about it, but three days in the year, they would go to synagogue. All right. You can imagine which the three are. OK. 

Now, the fact is that I was not only-- I wasn't forbidden to go, but I was certainly not encouraged. Now, the crucial relatives in this were that uncle and aunt of mine, whom I mentioned, who had moved to Berlin, had a store where my mother-- my mother worked sometimes, times because she wasn't working, just to keep my aunt company and so on. They lived nearby in the western part of Berlin. 

And they-- they had this loyalty, this three-day loyalty. And they would insist that the boys-- now, there were these two cousins, one, three years older than I, the other, my age --that they go to synagogue those three days. 

Now, if any of the high holidays would happen to fall on a Sunday, which of course would happen, and I wanted to go to an important soccer game-- and you have to understand that every game was extremely important. I couldn't miss any of them. I was a great fan, and very well-informed. My father, in fact, kept two football weeklies. I mean, this is how seriously we took the matter. Incidentally, don't underestimate this for keeping me sane in the '30s. You know, this was one way in which one could sort of occupy oneself. 

Anyhow, I remember one particular Rosh Hashanah when this happened, when-- it was on Sunday, and it was whatever-- early in the season, soccer season, in September. It wasn't very far along, but there was a big game. And my two cousins wanted to go. And I wanted to go. With me, it was no problem. I just went. 

But my cousins wanted to go with me. And so they went to the synagogue, had their tickets punched-- I guess you had to have that --then said, oh, my God, we've forgotten our prayer books, rushed out and joined me, and we went to the game. And since my younger cousin, who was my age, could never keep anything quiet, this came up, and it was a tremendous fight-- not having to do with us, because we had-- my father and my mother had declared, sort of, their independence of this, and so we weren't criticized, but the kids really got it. So there was that. There was this kind of involvement. 

Also, one other thing I might mention, my father's youngest brother, who was a kind of-- a very nice fellow, who was a kind of ne'er do well, but never really got any kind of good job-- and my father kind of worried about him --had somewhat more religious feelings. It was not clear to me, and I don't remember. 

But he-- after-- he was one of the members of the family who actually got beaten up. And in '34, he decided that he would join one of those training groups to-- for-- for emigration to Israel, or Palestine. And in '36, he left for Palestine, where he met and married a-- another refugee-- a girl who came from a very religious family. And he simply just took it-- took it over. 

He's now in his late 70s, lives in Israel, and has a son who is very religious. They'd come to see us, and we had to sort of turn the house upside down for them, and so forth, so-- so there is this part-- there's-- that is there in the family, but it did not touch my parents. 

When my father died, and this was in this country, of course, in Denver, in January 1955, he left a letter-- disposition --of what he wanted done. And my-- and he left it, and my mother asked me to open it. And I opened it. And my mother thought he would then say something religious, about prayers being said, or whatever else. But no, he really stayed completely consistent. And there was nothing about religion at all. 

He asked that one or two people speak a few nice words at his funeral. And one of whom he mentioned was a friend-- who was a rabbi --and the other of whom was a friend who happened to be a Methodist minister. And the rabbi being out of town, it was the minister who did it. So my-- my father really was completely consistent through his entire life. And I think there were, incidentally, a number of those. I-- you know, it's very hard to know, of course, how-- the percentages are all possible to figure out, but there were quite a few like that, who had really, officially, gotten out, and never did get back in. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened when all of these edicts-- the Nuremberg Laws, and all of these edicts against Jews began to come out? Didn't that displace your family? 

PETER GAY: Well the Nuremberg Laws, which came in late '35, had one practical effect on us. We had to dismiss our maid, whom I was very close to, and whom we actually were very friendly with. And we had to let her go because the law said 40 years or over, I guess it was. And that struck us as, you know, ludicrous. 

INTERVIEWER: 40 years or over. What was that again? 

PETER GAY: You had-- the-- the maid had to be over 40 years old before she was allowed to stay. The kind of-- of course, it was a-- you know, it was a restriction, as there were other restrictions, as there had obviously been lots of-- lots of activity that I needn't-- well, I can tell you about. 

But whatever it was, it didn't set my father back to religion, or my mother, or me-- well, me, I had a brief bout with it, which is rather curious. 

I belonged to a-- let's call them a Jewish Boy Scouts group. I've forgotten the name of the group. And we had sort of gray uniforms. And-- a gray shirt, not very beautiful. But we had, also, the kind of thing that a lot of Boy Scout troops would have-- these neckerchiefs, you know, with the gray, and it would have a black border. And we would go out on tenting trips, and one or two-day tours around, and so on. 

And the leader of that group, who must have been, let's say, three or four years older than I-- I entered when I was about 10, stayed through 12, 13, I guess. In the-- this would have to be late in '35, early '36, he began talk to me about being Jewish. And I said, oh, I don't believe in any of this-- this stuff, and so forth. 

And he then began to argue that I really ought to have a Bar Mitzvah. And he tried all kinds of tacks, including the religious one, which I didn't want to buy, and he ended up with the loyalty one. I mean, we're all in this together. The Nazis are difficult. Life is hard, and so forth and so on. 

And I then came home-- I was dissuaded by this. I thought this made a lot of sense. I liked the group, and I liked him. I was 12 and 1/2, and it seemed to-- this seemed, to me, sensible. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember his name? 

PETER GAY: I think his-- I think his first name was Aaron. I've forgotten his last name. 

And he-- well, it was, you know, it was rather rational. It was not sort of-- he was not giving me a hard time, which I think made it all the easier. 

Anyway, I went home and reported this. And I said, I think I would like to have this Bar Mitzvah when I'm 13. And my father said to me, well, if you want this, really-- I mean, if you really think this is important to you, of course we'll do it. But if you want it only so you can get extra presents, we'll give you, instead, a nice birthday. Now make up your own mind. 

They-- they simply threw it back at me. They simply said, you decide. And this is very characteristic of my family, this rather rationalist kind of atmosphere in which they would sort of talk to me as though I were a grown-up. In retrospect, I would say, long before I was ready for it, but anyway, this is what they did. 

So this seemed very typical. And I took this to be, actually, a very good thing. I now don't. I now, in retrospect, think it was a great mis-- great mistake. I think they should have expressed their feelings, no matter how irrational. I think they should have jumped up and down and said-- if that's how they felt --this is a lot of rubbish, and we won't do it. But they burdened me with this decision, you see. 

So I brooded about this for a while, and I decided I really didn't believe in it. So I-- I said, no. And so my-- to that extent, you see this-- this remained-- I remained on the same, if you want, level, or something with my-- with my parents, especially my father was the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you-- 

PETER GAY: --spokesman. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think, in retrospect, that you should have-- that they should have taken a strong position against-- 

PETER GAY: Or for it. Well, this is-- this is irrespective of religion. 

INTERVIEWER: Or for it. One way or the other. 

PETER GAY: I mean, my my feeling now is that I was not old enough to know, and that I was being burdened all the time with all kinds of things I shouldn't be burdened with. But that's really a-- rather very subjective judgment. 

I would have, you know, it always felt better if they hadn't said, now look your-- as it were, old as we are, you-- you have the materials. You decide. 

At the time, I thought it was very nice, until long after that I decided that and other decisions they should have made. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: In the Boy Scout troop-- I have heard from others in Germany that there were encounters between Jewish Boy Scout troops and Boy Scout troops that were really masquerading as Boy Scout troops, but were, in truth, Nazi Youth. Did this occur? 

PETER GAY: No. No, the only adventure, if that's the right word I want, actually occurred on a Sunday, late in June 1934, when we were going to meet for one of those all-day trips. And we were all meeting at a given subway station, you know, in full regalia. 

And we got there-- several of us I remember converging there, and this group leader was there, and I noticed that he didn't have any-- he didn't have his necktie on. And he said, take off your tie and go home. You know, there's trouble. And that turned out to be the famous weekend, you know, the kind of purge that the Nazis-- in which they got rid of the-- the brownshirts. 

I forget the exact date, which is too bad. I should really know. Anyways, the last Sunday in June 1934, which is, in a certain sense, the-- what any, say, the really serious historians of Nazi Germany, would argue that this is the moment in which Hitler really took over, not only from other parties, but even within his own party. This-- this is the-- 

INTERVIEWER: What happened, and what did you see? 

PETER GAY: Well, I didn't see anything. The point was that, from Saturday night on, they had been singling out-- getting people Ernst Rohm who was the head of the Brown Shirts and so forth, and shooting them down. There had been undisclosed numbers of people being shot. We still don't know how many. 

And this had, I think, penetrated the-- either some morning papers, or maybe the radio, and one didn't know what this was-- it might-- in the end, it meant, of course, to the outside world, nothing at all. They were no-- I remember --no extra activity. There were no extra soldiers around, or cops around. 

But this-- this group leader was, I mean, worried that there might be some sort of disorder, or they might be-- well, he didn't know. I mean, nobody, after all, knew. So he simply set us home, and said, don't be so conspicuous. 

And by the time you took your-- your thing off, you were just wearing a, kind of, a gray shirt, you know. And so that was the only encounter, if that's what you call it, an encounter, of this group with the-- as it were, with the Nazi system. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember looking out of the window of-- you lived in an apartment, right. 

PETER GAY: Yeah, although-- yeah, in the back, not the front. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, do you ever remember looking out of a window and seeing people marching, or any signs of, let's say, organized activity by the-- 

PETER GAY: Oh, sure. Well, there was a lot of it. I mean, on the street, steadily, there were parades. There were events in school. For example, when the Nazis picked up their first bit of territory, which was with the plebiscite, when the Saarland was-- was happening, the League of Nations ward was voted in. 

I was in gymnasium. I guess I was in the [? [GERMAN], ?] which would be my second class. And there was a celebration, with a speech by Hitler, and so on. And the Jewish kids in-- in the school were asked not to participate. So I remember we hung around the courtyard while this was going on inside. And oh, sure, there would be parades, and so on. I would see it them in the street, sure. 

There was no-- I didn't feel particularly, you know, attracted to it, as it were, to search them out. These things sort of came and-- came and went. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. But there you were with a group of Jewish kids. You didn't have a real Jewish identification, yet you were asked not to be with the rest of your classmates. What did that say to you? What did that say to your parents? 

PETER GAY: Oh, well I mean, it said to them, as it-- what it said to a great many-- again, I'd say I don't know the numbers. And I've since listened to a great deal of hostility about this, especially from East European Jews who-- if I had, you know, a dollar for every time they said Hitler served you right, and that have not asked me the obvious answer, I would be a rich man. 

What did it say to me? It said to me that, in a sense, what my parents said to me, which was that-- the-- these people are running the country, and they are re-identifying people, and they are making-- they're classifying you as something. And that's it, you know. And the classification is, as it were, not wholly arbitrary for us, because at least there was, in our background, no nobody who was not Jewish in a-- to use that-- their-- their word, racially. 

You know, the Nazi search into-- into ancestry well, went back at least to-- to the generation of one's grandparents. But of course, if you were a Nazi official, then you were supposed to be clean, as it were, all the way back to about, let's say, 1800. 

And we would know people who had no idea, even a couple of Nazis, after all, who got into trouble over-- over this, that they discovered a Jewish grandfather, and were not to be-- this would be a quarter, let's say. This wouldn't keep you from being a citizen, but it would keep you from a high position, unless you were a friend of somebody's. That's-- you know, Milch, yeah, who was a friend of Goring's, that famous story. 

But in general, you know, it might ruin your career. So there was an enormous emphasis on ancestor research-- ancestor worship, and my parents didn't go through that. I mean, it was very clear to them that their parents were, in some sense of the word, Jewish. Yeah, I mean, there's no-- no doubt about that. 

INTERVIEWER: But this-- racial, you-- you use the word, racial. Jews aren't necessarily a race as-- 

PETER GAY: No, I'm just saying what they would say. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. OK. So I'm just wondering how you adjusted to this idea of-- of-- let's say, precipitously being a race-- part of a race, rather than part of a religious identification. 

PETER GAY: Well, I think that, um-- I think that the thing that people said to themselves-- and you have to remember, I was, you know, an early teenager, growing up, so I was absorbing things from the adult world --was that-- that this was a lot of rubbish, that this was a lot of nonsense. 

As-- after all, a great many refugees would later say that where they-- or something I've said in print --that where they were was Germany, and that Germany had in some sense been invaded by barbarians. They didn't accept this. The very notion of race seemed nonsensical. 

I don't know whether to everybody, because, after all, you know, that word has had a very funny history. And a lot of people say-- in the late 19th century, even the-- or 20th, you can document this. A lot of people use the word very loosely. They would-- you know, a phrase like, I don't know, we photographers are a funny race, a word like that would be used very freely. I mean, people meant some sort of group that had had permanent ethical, physical, other c-- characteristics seemed nonsensical. 

The political jokes we told were often-- you know, revolved around this. You know, what is an example? What is an Aryan? How do you find an Aryan? An Aryan-- how does-- how did it go --was as, you know, thin as Goring, as tall as Goebbels, and as blond as Hitler. I know it's-- roughly, you know. None of this humor was very good, but it did show you sort of-- 

It-- it didn't mean anything. If somebody was saying this about you, where unfortunately they were in control, and you're going to stick-- you were not going to stick around forever, but it meant nothing. It was nonsensical. 

What it meant in practice was there's some things you couldn't do. There were some friends who wouldn't-- that would cut out. But there were others who didn't, you know. There were others who also thought it was nonsensical, and who-- who stayed with it, and stayed with their Jewish friends, and who could never understand any of this, or never accepted any of this. I mean, there is, you know, a good deal of evidence that we-- you know, I can give you some of that later. 

But, in any case, I think that-- first there's the very loose use of the word, meaning simply a group identified by almost anything-- by profession, by hair color, by whatever. And there is certainly the feeling that this was-- that these were, you know, barbarians who were imposing certain ludicrous things on the country, like, for example, the Nuremberg Laws, which were taken-- although they were inconvenient --taken to be really crazy, you know. 

They were-- you see, one of the things that is very hard to understand, I think, and-- and somebody else who-- who will sit in this chair may tell the story differently. I only tell you from my experience. One thing that's very hard to understand is that one had an ongoing set of experiences, right, which were not the experiences that culminated in things later, that we knew about later. 

I mean, after even Kristallnacht-- which I went through, which I participated in and witnessed --was not exactly something that in 1933, '35, '36 even, we expected, necessarily. Well, it's-- one-- one can always argue, and of course, people have spilled a lot of ink, retrospectively, and I think most of them don't know what they're talking about. They're just essentially getting even with-- with German Jews for being so snotty to-- to the others. And it's a very familiar phenomenon, which, in the long run, makes me very impatient, is that-- that as though being assimilated was some sort of crime. The exper-- well, let me give you again, instead of being vague-- or-- or I'll be specific. 

I went to the Goethe-Gymmasium, which opened-- the academic year was roughly April to April. The Nazis had been in power, in other words, for about 2 and 1/2 months. Came to power in Berlin, Germany, on the 30th of January, of course, '33. 

I was getting-- I was 10-- getting onto 10. I was a little ahead of my time. I was about three, four months ahead. I was going to go to gynasium. OK, now, there were Jewish schools then. Never occurred to my father to send me to one; never occurred to me to ask to go to one. 

This one was the sort-- the Goethe Real Gymnasium was not far from where we lived. I could walk there. And that-- that was it. Now it turned out that one of the very early things the Nazis had done had been to lay down the edict that Jews, as they defined them, were to be accepted in gymnasium only by the percentage of the population-- so that meant, in Berlin, about 4% or 5%, or whatever it was --but that children of wounded veterans, or war veterans in general, were exempted. And my father was just that. My father had been wounded fairly severely in World War I, had the Iron Cross, but was in fact an invalid. I mean, not-- he wasn't very invalid, but he had two shots in the right arm. And he had a pension, and he had certain privileges-- ride first class on a train with second class ticket-- things of that sort. And therefore. I simply was admitted without any questions. There was no quarter for me. 

And I came in. And the first two years were a kind of common track. We all did Latin. No, excuse me, I'm sorry, we all did French. Sorry. That's-- this is getting ahead of the story. We all did French together. 

And after two years, there was a, kind of like a Y track. You could go one or the other. You could go the classical route into Latin, or you can do the modern route and do English. So my parents and I sat down in, I guess, the winter of thirty-- late '34, getting ready to apply, and said, oh, English would be good. You know, we, even then, we had a thought-- it wasn't very clear, then, --but probably wouldn't stay in Germany. I mean, we weren't exactly comfortable there, you know. But there was no deadline for us. No dateline. That was set later. And I'll come to that. 

Anyway, so-- and I wanted to learn English, so we said, all right, I'll be registered for English. And then the director of the gymnasium, early in the spring, looking over the, you know, the applications, called up my father. I still remember his name. His name was Kuatt. 

And he called up my father and said-- asked him to come to the director's office. And so my father went, thinking-- well, not knowing what it was about. And then this man said-- you have to remember this was spring of '35, right --your son is very bright, a very good student, and I don't think you ought to fool around with this modern stuff, he really belongs in our better group, which is the kids taking Latin. Enter him in the Latin side. 

My father came home and said, look, you know, you're doing very well, apparently. You know, and so I did Latin . Now, you may say that's just an incident. But there are lots of instance like this, which I could tell you, which suggest something that's extremely important of the study of the history of this period, namely how unbelievably complicated it was. How-- or, if to use sort of, you know, vulgar language of, you know, modern language, how-- how conflicting the signals were. 

You got all kinds of signals. Obviously, the government said you are, you know, scum, and you can't be this, and we can't be that, and so forth. On the other hand, a great many other people said, nonsense, I don't believe in this. And Herr Kuatt said I should go and do Latin. 

So I think there is that kind of thing that-- that one might keep in mind. And obviously I was marked off. I was-- I was Jewish, you know. I-- I was somewhat-- for example, I was never-- I'm trying to remember. In those five years in gymnasium I was never teased very much by any of my fellow students. I was never beaten up. I was never dragged, as they-- the sort of favorite threats were to others, and what happened to my cousin, in front of those kiosks where they had Der Sturmer exhibited, they had this-- this-- this famous anti-Semitic weekly, never. 

The only anti-Semitism I really experienced in class was an occasional, but really very occasional remarks by, I think, two of my teachers. One doing, kind of, history, and he would get rather sarcastic, and one doing French, who on-- I remember, on one occasion got very mad at one of my fellow students in class who happened to be Jewish, and he said something about this being typical Jewish way of dealing with language or something like that. They were very isolated. They were very rare. 

Now, I think that I, you know, instinctively, without saying very much, but-- hung back in class. I was-- I was clearly the best in the class, at least to my mind. And in retrospect I would say that was true. I tended to be number two. There was another kid there. And I sort of let him be number one, as it were. 

But-- and of course it was a very schizophrenic existence, in a way. But, you know, I went to the 1936 Olympics. As late as spring-- with my father, in fact. As late as spring '38, I went to a great soccer game, the English-German national game, with, in fact, a friend of ours who had gotten tickets-- two tickets. My father stayed home so I could go. And this friend, being a humble journalist, not Jewish, was very-- was to be very important for us in getting us passage later. 

So the two of us sat in the-- in the Nazi Olympic stadium, and we watched this great game. This was spring of '38, you know. All this was possible. 

INTERVIEWER: I have been told that in-- you didn't mention biology class. You only mentioned French, and-- I forgot the other class. But-- 

PETER GAY: History, or whatever-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, but in biology class, I have heard that Jews were singled out for racial characteristics. Is-- did you-- 

PETER GAY: I don't remember that. Now, of course I had only five years of humanistic gymnasium. I'm trying to remember what science we had. I think all we had was rather basic mathematics leading on to it. See, there is a kind of-- it's what happens of Nazis anyway put an end to this. There is a kind of rather natural cutoff point, after five years, where some people might want to leave, you know, when they're 15. 

Although most people who go to gymnasium essentially want to go through, well, I can tell you, I'll give you another example of-- of something special that occurred to me. We had singing class, music where we did a lot-- it was a fair amount of singing. And while I do not remember any anti-Semitic songs, I do remember the-- something that I myself was aware of, that they played and sang the Lorelei, the famous song, with words by Heine, with Heine-- the name Heine --being blocked out. And it said, you know, composed-- not composed, I mean, you know, lyrics by unknown. Folk song, or something like that. So there was that. I remember that from my music class. I know it was Heine, perfectly well. 

But it was not a it would be wrong to think it would-- as a series of humiliations, torments, disagreeable moments-- I was, I think, cautious and somewhat withdrawn, I suppose. My cousin-- my younger cousin --the one who was my age. The one who couldn't keep his mouth shut, who very ingenuously made a lot of trouble for himself by letting things go that should have been private and between us, or among the three of us. Anyway, he was in-- not in my class --he was in my parallel class, and I saw a lot of him. Very, very charming, and I saw him. 

And-- but it-- it-- now, clearly, what I'm giving you is a very superficial view of the matter. You know, I must have hear other things. 

INTERVIEWER: You never were asked to sing the Horst Wessel song. 

PETER GAY: I don't think so. I don't see where I would have had the-- I don't remember it. I don't think so. I mean, I think that this would be done at these very celebrations-- of which there weren't really that many --from which we were, in any case, excluded. 

As a matter of fact, I would think, without having a very precise memory now, that we would have been asked not to if we'd been around. I think they would have made a-- made a point of that. 

At the Olympics, where we happened to be sitting in a kind of a Hungarian enclave, because my father bought the tickets in-- in Budapest, four years before, we-- you know what you do after, you know, when they have the victory parade, and then people stand there, and so forth. When the Germans wanted, they did a fair number of times, actually, they would, of course, people-- but the Horst Wessel song-- one of the two, either they play both national anthems. And then we would just get up like everybody else, but not do anything, not sing, not make-- hit the salute or whatever else. 

INTERVIEWER: Even when they-- you would get up, even though they would say, the Jewish blood flows from the knife, in that song. 

PETER GAY: Well, I don't-- no, as I say, we were, as it were, camouflaged, you know, as something else. 

INTERVIEWER: The song was camouflaged? 

PETER GAY: No no. We were. We were, as it were, Hungarians. That's how we saw ourselves, at least for the occasion, which was very, you know, gratifying. 

INTERVIEWER: Very what? 

PETER GAY: Gratifying. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- how-- 

PETER GAY: To be underground, to be there. See, you have to remember this. You can't-- you can-- one can, but at least I didn't take a kind of stance, which is, in a way, very principled, you know, during the Olympics. How old was I? I was 13. I wanted to see them. You know? And, I had very-- I was very excited. I was-- it was very typical for any span-- sports fan, as I was very-- I had favorites, and I adopted the Americans. 

You always adopt-- I mean. I've never known anybody who goes to a game and is neutral. You adopt something. And I adopted the Americans, which was very-- the-- the extent of my rebellion, if you want to call it that, you know. But the-- the-- the point was to be there and see these things happening, you know, so I did. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think about the black American who-- 

PETER GAY: Oh, the Jesse Owens thing? Well, Jesse O-- the-- the thing was, I-- I had no-- again, you know, about black inferiority. You know, that seemed to me a lot of nonsense, too, because it came from them. I mean, I paid no-- I won't say I paid no attention, but it certainly-- I didn't believe any of this. 

The thing about Jesse Owens was that he was a very interesting athlete to watch. And that was with me me. I was really a connoisseur. And by the age of 13 I knew a lot about-- about these things. And he was a very elegant sportsman. He ran and jumped very beautifully. It was quite remarkable, and distinct from any of the other people, who were labored. I mean, it was always-- always seemed to do everything without any effort. And he was quite a wonderful, you know, athlete to watch. But I don't think I had the opposite notion, either, that-- that blacks are naturally athletes and they're closer, you know, to the animal, that kind of nonsense which one got. 

PETER GAY: Well, they were-- you know, they were runners, jumpers, and so forth. And the main thing that interested me in this partisanship was that he was, you know, an American, and he was doing-- running away, doing this incredible thing, winning four gold medals. So that's essentially what mattered. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think of, um, the Mein Kampf book. I mean, uh, what did-- I mean, things were materializing pretty much the way he had outlined it in that book. Had-- did your father read it? Did your-- 

PETER GAY: Did my father read it? I don't know. I don't know whether he did or not. Uh, I-- I don't know. I don't-- I certainly didn't. I-- I didn't. I mean, the-- the-- the view was that whatever came from the government was a lie, you know? And, uh, well, uh, the question, of course, always is this. Why didn't you take it seriously, and so on, but that-- that already gets to the edge of the accusation, which I find so unhistorical, you see, on the part of others. 

It's very easy for people to sit there and say, why didn't you do this, and why didn't you do that? Is it really more important to find out why people did or did not do certain things in their-- on their-- in their own terms. Um, the Nazi program struck a lot of people and not in Germany only afterall, and-- insane, you know, quite insane. And it was not really until the spring of '38, uh-- not that we decided to get out. That was something we had decided earlier. We decided two years before in '36, but it was not really until the spring of '38 that the Nazis began to do certain things to close in on Jews in certain ways that-- that suggested something rather more than it was already-- was already there. Okay. 

There was very widespread feeling lasting I don't know how long that the regime wouldn't last. That was, again, not just a Jewish notion. That was a very wide spread notion. I knew-- I knew people then. I know people now, looking back, saying we never thought he would make it, you know? 

And I don't mean Munich. I mean, let's say the spring before Munich would be-- I would think I'd say by about the time that I-- I was forced to leave the gymnasium, which would-- would be about April. I forget the exact time, but April, '38. At that point, uh, we were, uh, pretty clear that, you know, this-- the future would be very grim. We'd been clear enough earlier to say we want to get, uh, moving-- want to get out, but there the-- you know, we were simply more leisurely about the deadline than, uh-- than would now seem, you know, rational. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say we, who was we? 

PETER GAY: We meant essentially my father, my mother, my uncle, my aunt, and my two cousins, plus the rest of the immediate family, which is to say my father's-- let's see. My father had two sisters from Breslau and a brother in Magdeburg who was married to a gentile woman and who had no thought of leaving, and who, in fact, survived the war and was not picked up until early 1945, and then not sent to an extermination camp, but to a concentration camp nearby. And, uh, did relatively-- I mean, relatively well. 

Um, my, uh-- my two aunts in Breslau weren't involved so much in the immediate decisions because they weren't there, and they had their own circles more, and so on, but the Berlin crew-- so my father, my mother, my uncle, my aunt-- then my-- there was a younger brother of my aunt's and then an older brother of my mother's that would be a third. Then, um-- and he would be in on it, and we would talk. Now, the way in which this was done was this. Um, in the summer of '40-- I mean '30-- '36-- summer of '36. I would gather-- I'm not sure-- maybe after the Olympics, around that time an uncle of mine came to visit. 

Now, this uncle who was actually a brother of my mother's-- he had in early- in the early 1920s-- around 1922 in Breslau when he was a young man met an American girl, and had married her, and had gone to the United States with her to a small town in Florida that almost nobody knows, because it's not either on the Jewish retirement trail or on the Disneyland trail. It's called Quincy. It's a tiny town, where she, and her brothers, and sisters-- she had several siblings around Moultrie, Georgia and various other places-- owned Bainbridge, Georgia a very prosperous hardware stores. 

They had been started by her father, who had-- was a, the guy was a peddler in the 1880s who had come from Silesia, had gone to this part of the country to be grown selling nails and hammers, and ended up, when he died, leaving five very flourishing hardware stores. And my aunt owned one of them, although she didn't work there-- my aunt to be. 

Anyway, so my uncle married her. He came to the United States, and this uncle would periodically come back to visit. And I remember him in 1929-- still very sad, because I couldn't see him, because I was suffering from scarlet fever, which was in those days a deadly disease, and he wasn't allowed in. And he came again in 1936. 

In 1936, he came to visit his mother, who was living in Berlin, in fact, with my aunt, a very lovely woman, very nice woman. I liked her a lot-- who I saw a lot of, and who was suffering from diabetes, I remember the very careful arrangement she made with her food, and the weighing her bread, and smearing the butter on. And she was not terribly well, so he came to see her. 

And when he was there, while he was there, we had a kind of family conclave about what to do. And all this, of course, in the light of later events sounds ludicrously thin, and-- but whatever, let me give it to you as the event was. Uh, we decided there was simply no point in staying in the country, that this was-- uh, the regime was, uh, if not that deadly, horrendous, and that things would narrow down, and narrow down. 

I remember our father was making a very good living with a gentile partner who was very cooperative and very helpful, and the two of them did regular business together. Uh, I've printed this fact. Uh, the-- this-- this partner, his name was Peltz. As they say, he looked very Jewish, and he would sometimes go around, and my father would sometimes go around traveling, and they would say to my father, why don't you get rid of Jew, Peltz, and you'd have a better firm? 

Uh, he was all the anti-Jewish cliches you want. He was fat, and he was curly haired, and he had a hooked nose, and he was greasy, and all these lovely things. My father was blue eyed, not blond, grey haired, but, uh, really-- but anyway, so my father was doing all right. But the point was we agreed that we weren't going to stay. 

So then a kind of schedule was set up. The first person to leave ought to be my cousin, Hans, who then came over and changed his name to Jack. Because he was three years older, he was then-- how old was he? He was 16, and he was very close to graduating from his gymnasium, and there would be no future for him in Germany. So he ought to come right over, and in '37, in fact, he left. 

The second and third to leave would have been my cousin, Edgar, and I. And the idea was to have us leave probably '30-- late '38, early '39, something like that. And then when we had been acclimated in America, the rest of the family would follow. This was a kind of-- I don't remember any of our precise timetable, but it was something like that. And the only part of the timetable that was really very faithfully kept was my cou-- first-- my oldest cousin, who, in fact, left, and went to Quincy, and went to school, and learned English, and eventually ended up in the American Army, and came back to Germany fighting in the Battle of the Bulge, and so forth. 

And, um, so, uh, uh, that part of the-- and-- and what I'm saying is that, by '36-- by the summer of '36, immigration was determined on, uh-- and at-- in '36, it was still fairly easy, because the, uh, um-- he had a very good affidavit. As you will remember, the affidavits depended very largely on either size of the money or closeness of relation, and he had a wonderful combination. He had, you know, a blood uncle, and-- and aunt, and a lot of money around. So there was no problem, and he simply-- if I remember, he just simply left whenever he wanted to. You know, had his work done with the consulate. 

Um, by '38, of course, this is going to become harder, and, uh, uh-- because for one thing, there was this tremendous rush, and all this was done, you know, by numbers, and by the time we got ourselves registered for America, there were about something like 250,000 people ahead of us. It would've have been roughly nine years of waiting, which, of course, then we didn't do. So anyway, what you-- what you really see in this, uh, story, which I, you know, take credit for, but I'm um, I'm not apologetic for either is this kind of timetable, this informal timetable in which the youngsters would go first, and the parents would come after. 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? And you said that you experienced-- participated in Kristallnacht. 

PETER GAY: Participated, not, uh-- rather passively. Yeah. Well, uh, the, um-- my cousin went in '37. By '38, it was becoming clearer and clearer that we really wanted to get out faster and that we shouldn't hold to any timetable. At that point, my parents registered at the American consulate. The, uh, uh, affidavits were made out for all of us in the same good conditions, but at that point, we were, of course, way behind. 

My father was on the Polish court in any case, although I think some assimilation to, uh-- because of this business with his hometown, as I mentioned earlier being on Polish lands. My mother was in the German quarter. After the Anschluss, the German quarter increased from 25,000 to 28,000, and we would be amalgamated into the Austrian quarter into that. And at that point, in other words, the idea of going directly to the United States was out of the question, right? I mean, you, uh-- you simply waited for every number to be acted on. Even if half of them had dropped out, there would still have been a five year wait or a four year wait, and even that, at that point, struck us as un-- unsatisfactory. 

So at that point, my father began to look around for other countries that would take us, and, uh, that, of course, was not, uh, very easy to come by. Um, the, um-- the one thing that he tried to do was to-- with another family-- to get into England, and I still remember we were turned down. Actually though because someone intervened there. It made it more urgent, but the application was earlier-- the day before Christmas. So it was the 24th of December, I happen to remember, '38 that we were turned down. 

So at that point, of course, uh, it became-- my father felt, you know, some people would say too late, but well, at that point, as he had all summer, that it was imperative to get out. And we were constantly in touch with our, uh, relatives in the United States, and, uh, they then began to look around on their score. And they were willing to-- I mean, they were very generous. They didn't even ask about money. They simply went ahead, and looked, and found Havana, Cuba willingly became the refuge. 

Now, because my role in Kristallnacht is, uh-- participate is, uh, hardly the word since that means acted, but, um, I was working. After I got out of school in spring of '38, I went briefly for a couple of months to a kind of trade school, which was horrendous, which I couldn't bear, and which I dropped out of. And at that point, uh, it was a very widespread feeling among Jews who were still there in Germany that, uh, you ought to learn something-- something practical. 

My mother, who was a very good seamstress-- or pretty good seamstress already was doing work on improving her sewing. My aunt, who had a store, was learning candy making. This kind of stuff was being done. All of us were studying English. I was-- I-- I know English thanks to the director, after all. 

It was not until something incredible like December of '37 or January of '38 that I began studying English at all. So I didn't-- you know, I had private lessons. And then I went-- briefly went to a school just before we emigrated to pick up some kind of rapid more English. 

Anyway, so I-- I got a job. Not a job. It was really sort of-- I was employed to be a kind of apprentice, errand boy, spokesman for a couple who-- of deaf mutes. And he was a dental technician. You know, he made, you know, plates and things. And they had always had somebody like that-- a speaking person who could answer the phone, for example. But they had us-- and I remember they had a kind of lab where you molded these things, and, uh, uh, the only thing I remember-- the only technical thing that I remember that it was any good is that, if you want to stick your hand in hot water to fish something out and you don't have any rubber gloves, the way you do it is first to put your hand in cold water for about a half a minute-- very, very cold water, and then it gives you about 15 seconds. That's what I've learned. 

Anyway, they were rigged up with these-- with these lights, you know? And when the lights went on, the phone was ringing, and then I would answer the phone, and take orders. I would bike around. I had a bike. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they Jewish? 

PETER GAY: Yeah. Well, um, they didn't survive. Who wanted them? You know, I'm sure. I don't remember their names. Uh, anyway I worked there, and I had a bicycle, and I would go to dentists, and make deliveries, and pick things up, and also learned a little bit of this stuff. 

I forget how long it was-- how many months that was. It was some months I did this-- maybe six months, eight months, or something. And one day in November in the morning, late morning, my father called him and said there's a lot of trouble in town. I think you should come home. 

INTERVIEWER: You were living with these people? 

PETER GAY: No, I was with-- I was living-- I was living at home. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. 

PETER GAY: But I biked over. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I see. 

PETER GAY: Uh, the extent of-- oh, I don't know. You look back on it now-- three miles, maybe-- something like that-- into town. They lived near-- I don't know if you know Berlin, but they lived near, uh, a great department store called [INAUDIBLE], which was a Jewish owned store still. It had not yet been turned over. And he said there's been a lot of-- there is a lot of trouble. Be careful, but I want you to come home. 

And, uh, so I said, OK, and I told my employers that things were wrong, and I-- I was required to go home. So I climbed on my bike and went home. And I rode through not only, um, the residential districts, but also the business district, including-- uh, I forget exactly how this worked, but anyhow I went past this great department store and saw this kind of tremendous shambles, you know and thought what had happened. 

Uh, uh, Kristallnacht was different from town to town, you know? In most of the smaller cities, uh-- I mean, not all. Some of the bigger cities were more like Berlin. Uh, in the morning of that day, the, uh, uh, people got picked up-- men mainly. I don't remember women-- hearing of women-- including very young ones. Teenagers and so on got picked up and taken off to various concentration camps. 

In Berlin, this was very selective, partly because there was still a large number of Jews there, or whatever reason it was more selective. I didn't know anything much about that. All I saw was something had seemed to gone crazy, you know? It was sort of, uh-- you were simply driving-- or rather-- I was riding, rather, along on my bicycle in my, uh, whatever I was wearing. I certainly wasn't wearing any Boy Scout uniform-- um, seeing these sort of windows having been stashed and so on. 

Now, there had been a kind of preparation for that. Uh, I don't know how much you've heard about this event. Uh, have-- have you heard much about this at all? The preparation has been to, um-- to-- again, I don't know whether this was countrywide, but it was certainly in Berlin, and I believe it was in all the other major cities, as well, that owners of stores who were Jewish had to put their name on to the window in large letters. It was very bureaucratically done, um, you know, like this-- 8 inches, or 10 inches, or something like that in white paint. 

And, uh, the reasoning that been offered for this is it was several-- several weeks before. So it happened to my uncle and aunt with that store. The reason that this happened was-- so they said-- was because so many Jews were concealing themselves behind neutral names, or gentile names, or whatever. And this was to be a, uh, unmasking, you know? And, uh, now this, of course, served-- in case you-- your lists didn't work out, there's a very good guide for the yahoos who did all the battering in, and smashing of the windows, and trampling around the displays, and making general sort of, uh, um-- no, you know, raising hell. 

Then of course there was the-- the burning of the synagogues came also on that day, but the stores were identified doubly in a sense, because clearly they had their lists, but then there were also the, uh-- as I say, the owner's name. So I saw that, and I, uh, rode home. And as I came to my house-- now, the house was a very typical Berlin, uh, apartment house. That is, uh, it-- you have to visualize it like a square doughnut, if you want, you know? With a square courtyard in the middle. So people live in front, and two sides, and back. 

And downstairs, there was this-- the super had an apartment, and as I came into the house, um, there was the sort of super's wife standing there crying. I asked her what was the matter, and she said-- said-- oh, now I can't remember his name. I'll think of it later. But anyway, they've come to get mister so-and-so. 

Um, now, he was a banker who had been forcibly retired. He was Jewish. He was not that old-- with whom I had become very friendly, and whose son I knew, and who I remember particularly had always lent me Dickens, and I was a great lover of Dickens, whom I read in German. I read nearly all of Dickens in German. There was a wonderful German edition with the, uh-- all the illustrations, uh, with all the Cruickshank, and the Phiz, and all the other. 

Anyway, she said that, and she was very upset. They had-- they had come to get him. So I went upstairs to our apartment, where my mother was, and my father was gone, she said, he's off. He's gone, and he's in hiding. And, uh, for a week we were in touch with him by phone. Uh, now, he had been hidden by a-- an employee of his. This is one of those travelers whom I mentioned earlier, whose name was Damian Busser, who was a-- who had become very friendly with my father, who was a kind of vehement, very-- 