INTERVIEWER 1: Excuse me. Could you state your name, please? 

HELEN KOPMAN: My name is Helen Kopman. I don't want to be famous. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is it Clockman? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Kopman. K-O-P-M-A-N. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Kopman. Thank you. OK. We're ready whenever you are. You are. 

Gorgeous 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, he could just come and slip in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Right. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It doesn't matter. Here he is. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just moment. One second. I've forgotten. You must sign this. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's a release form. Just quickly. I'm sorry. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Where? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right here. And I'll fill it in later. 

HELEN KOPMAN: You know, I don't see-- 

[INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't leave, please. 

HELEN KOPMAN: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tell us where you lived and what your family was like before the-- before the war began? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, in 1939, I was 15 years old. And I come from Warsaw. I lived in Warsaw and I was born there. I come from a family, had three brothers. And I was the only girl. My mother and father and that's where I lived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you father do? 

HELEN KOPMAN: My father had a grocery store. And we living in Warsaw. That's all I knew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was school like? What were you friends like? 

HELEN KOPMAN: We lived-- you know, Warsaw, the Jews lived separately. And I lived-- I happened to live on Mila. I was born in Mila 4. But when the ghettos started, I was in the-- in the-- I lived in Mila 18 with a resistance movement. This was a few years later. 

But 1939, just before we started school-- September 1st, as a matter of fact, I think it was-- the war started. And I think Warsaw, from all these cities, from all the other places which I have heard and heard about, I think Warsaw was really one of the places that was the worst hit, because Poland gave in right away. I mean, when the Germans attacked Poland, they somehow couldn't hold the Germans back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew, I think, that the Germans had been hurting Jews up to this point. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew they were coming. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you stay? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, you know, first of all, I know a lot of people cannot understand this. The communication we have today wasn't available then. Number-- There were several reasons, which people didn't react. First of all, we felt that if there's gonna be a war, it's gonna be like a blitzkrieg. It's gonna last maybe a month or so and then it's gonna be over. So we felt, well, if it's only going to last for a little while, the Jews will survive. They always somehow do. We didn't think it's gonna last long, first of all. 

Number two, we didn't believe what he said-- what he said or what-- what he's gonna do, that it's gonna really happen. You know, like, just-- we didn't believe it. And my parents were-- lived in Warsaw all their life. They had four children. And I guess by the time we really realized what's gonna happen, it was too late. We couldn't leave. 

So we were caught, like millions of others. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you afraid? 

HELEN KOPMAN: I was very afraid. I remember I was very afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think about? 

HELEN KOPMAN: The unknown frightened me. I remember that I was just petrified. And this what happened in Warsaw. They didn't-- the-- the Germans came in-- the whole Poland fell, except for Warsaw. In Warsaw, they decided to take a stand. 

So at night, they shot the heavy artillery and then in the daytime they had the bombs flying all over. It was just-- Warsaw was very, very destroyed. But somehow, we managed. You know, we were hiding in the basement. And a lot of people got killed. And I think they-- they fought over Warsaw, like three weeks. Not quite maybe-- maybe three weeks. And they bombed the border. And there was no electricity. There was no gas. And then, the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 3: At that time, you were Polish. 

HELEN KOPMAN: I was Polish. I was Jewish. I was living in there. 

INTERVIEWER 3: But if Poland was fighting against the Germans-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: That's right. This is 1939 I'm talking. And All right. I lived in-- I told you, Mila, Mila. And the Jews felt more secure. We lived all, like, in the ghetto. And I liked it there. I felt very secure there. And that's all I knew was Jewish people. But when the war broke out, I was really very scared. 

INTERVIEWER 4: You were 15 years old. You must have had friends, a social life. What happened? Everything just stopped, disrupted? 

HELEN KOPMAN: I guess it did. That's all you were interested, is how the next-- how are you gonna survive the next day? What's gonna happen next? And after the-- after the initial, you know, attack, then we didn't have any water. So we drank the water from the-- from the Vistula. I know there was the river. And we took the water out. And they were throwing in dead bodies and horses. 

There was a typhus epidemic. And I remember my father got very sick and my brother. They were very, very ill. They had the typhus. And just conditions were terrible. But slowly, you know-- the Germans really-- people don't realize. They really did use psychological catchphrases to-- to-- so we didn't realize what-- what-- what was going on and what's gonna happen. 

But in the beginning, they organized a ghetto. And they pushed all the people from the small little towns, they pushed us in in about, I don't know how many square blocks, and they built up walls around the Warsaw ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You watched them the build the walls? 

HELEN KOPMAN: I watched them build the walls. And we watched-- and we watched-- you know, and we didn't have no choice. At that time, it was already really too late. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't think about sneaking out from the wall? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Where would you sneak? The Pol-- the Polish people were not our friends. And you couldn't make-- you were trapped. I don't know if anybody can feel this feeling. You know, with all the freedom we have today, nobody can feel this feeling of being trapped. We were really being trapped. Besides, I wouldn't have left my family. Maybe I could have gone. My mother suggested, you know, my accent in Polish was good, because I was born there. She said, maybe you could hide. But I wouldn't leave my family. I wouldn't leave them. 

But my two brothers, my two older brothers, you know, they were very young. And they were very impetuous and they-- and they just wouldn't-- they couldn't cope with the Germans. Like, you know, when you walked on the sidewalks and a German walked by, you had to walk down. You couldn't walk on the same side. And they attacked you without provocation. 

And they were-- they just said, I'm not gonna take this. I'm not gonna let anybody spit on me and abuse me. And I don't-- I'm sure you know, some other people have told you that Poland divided in two. The Russians took half of Poland and Germany took half. 

So my brothers decided that they're gonna go over on the Russian side and they left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did they did make that decision? 

HELEN KOPMAN: They made the decision, because they felt that they wouldn't be able to-- they wouldn't do what the-- they didn't want to be humiliated. They couldn't-- they couldn't stand it. They were very young people. And you know, people when they were rebellious. And they said, I'm not gonna-- I'm gonna spit back or I'm gonna hit them back. I'm not gonna take this. So we had a family conference and my parents decided that maybe it would be better if my two older brothers leave. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did they consider also the whole family going over to the Russian side? 

HELEN KOPMAN: No. I don't know why not. I don't know why not. I really don't know. I know that they decided to leave. I'm telling you, we didn't expect it's gonna happen-- it's gonna be so bad. We felt it's gonna be over very soon. The world is gonna speak up. And they're gonna-- we're gonna realize. 

We didn't. My brothers left. And then, I became the oldest in the family. You know, I-- and I had a younger brother than myself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did-- were your brothers able to keep in touch with you at all? 

HELEN KOPMAN: We got a few letters. Here and there people smuggled them, who were going and coming, you know smuggled, out of the ghetto. But not much really. I know that they went to Bialystok. And I know that they perished there. I know that they were killed there. I found this out later, after the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Oh, I really find this very difficult. Must we talk about it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not if you can't. 

HELEN KOPMAN: You see, when-- the later on, when-- when the Germans started to attack Russia, a lot of people went back to Russia, went deep into Russia. And they didn't-- I don't know why they didn't, to this date, maybe they wanted to come back and reunite with the family or whatever. And then, the Russians-- the Germans took over. And they-- they had to dig their own graves. And they got killed. 

INTERVIEWER 3: And maybe they wanted to come back and be close to you. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yes. I have the feeling that they did. And I wish they wouldn't. I wished they would've gone back, because a lot of people did survive in Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was happening to you? 

HELEN KOPMAN: To me, I was a very, very much, very sheltered little girl. And when the World War broke out, I grew up overnight. I just really did. My parents were not even 40 years old, my mother and my father. They were young people. 

And my father went out one day to the drugstore to get some medicine and never came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Never came back? 

HELEN KOPMAN: You know, the Germans went out. They drove these trucks around. And they picked up people. And there was a blockade, you called it, like a blockade. So he went out to the drugstore and he never came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He went out in the ghetto? 

HELEN KOPMAN: In the ghetto. Was quiet. You know, when there was-- when we knew that the Germans were coming, we didn't go out on the streets. But nothing was happening. And the drugstore was, like, from here to the end of the building. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did anybody see him? 

HELEN KOPMAN: No. He never came back. So we assumed that, you know-- there was a lot of people. They were catching people like a dog catcher. You know when a dog catcher goes out and catches dogs. Anybody they saw on the street, they picked up. So my father was picked up. 

INTERVIEWER 3: But you don't know? You didn't-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: Oh, we know. We know he was picked up. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you-- did anyone witness it? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah. The people told us that he-- he just went out and he never came back. And then, my mother and my younger brother was left with myself. And my mother was very dependent on my father. She really was. And she-- she went to pieces when they took him away. She really-- she didn't care. She really didn't care if she lived or not. 

So I really had to watch over her, because she kind of, like, resigned. And You know, there was a curfew. And you couldn't go out. And she-- she didn't care. She-- she-- she just-- she really wanted to die. But somehow I-- I was able to, you know, to watch over her. 

And then, we needed papers, working papers. Anybody who didn't have working papers, just couldn't live. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You said something that you overnight grew up. What did a girl of 16 think-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: I grew up. I became really so strong. I didn't know that I was able to do all the things I did. I just did it. I remember we had some-- my mother had a diamond ring. My father's. This was my father's ring. And I wanted to get papers for my mother and my brother. 

I remember I went over to a German and I said to him, I'll give you a diamond ring. Give me papers for my paper for my mother. A girl of 15? Who would dare do that? I did. And he did give me the papers. And they did buy a little time for-- for them. You know, without papers, you just didn't have a chance in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you think then that when they took your father away that you wouldn't see him again? Did your mother think that she would not-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: You see, at that time, really-- this was in 1939. My father was taken away in 1941 or '42 maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had lived in the ghetto, under the Germans for three years? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah. There was hunger and starvation. And you talk about my friends, I have a very good-- very good friends of mine, which we grew up in the same-- they were living next door. There were four girls. And all night, they were crying they were hungry. And I used to steal food from wherever we could from our house. And I brought it over to them. It was unbelievable, the moans and the groans of hunger. It was just unbearable to see. And it's just so little we could do, because we still-- we had so little ourselves. 

It was very sad. I don't know how I survived it. I really don't know. But then you're in it, you just find strength to do it, because, you know-- you just do it the best you can. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you hear any news from the outside? Was there anyway of you knowing? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Then, we-- you see, in 1942, there-- most of the people from Warsaw were sent to Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know what Treblinka was? 

HELEN KOPMAN: No. We didn't. But we-- people, some, very few, very few were able to escape from there. As a matter of fact, my cousin's husband-- I had a cousin. And he was sent to Treblinka. And then, they made the people undressed. And he jumped in in a wagon with the clothes. And he came back to the Warsaw ghetto. And he was telling us that Treblinka is a camp that they just destroy people. 

So since then, you know, we were trying to buy arms. We were trying to get some ammunition to defend ourselves, not to go so passive. Because when the Germans came in what they did is put out big-- every day, a different law came up. And they said, if you go voluntarily, and you go to the work camp, we give you food, we give you shelter. And you're just gonna work. You're gonna go into a working camp and you're gonna be OK. 

So a lot of people were starving. They didn't have any food in the ghetto. So a lot of people went voluntarily, because they thought, so what. So I will work. It's gonna last a little while. I'm gonna survive. You know, like Jews always survived. But it was all deceiving. It wasn't working camp. Those were really death camps. 

INTERVIEWER 3: How did-- you mentioned the resistance. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, you see, in 1942, we started to realize what's happening. So we tried to buy ammunition. But who was gonna sell us ammunition? 

INTERVIEWER 3: We? You-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: I mean, I was-- I was aged 17, 18 years. The money we had, we were able to get together, we were trying to buy ammunition from the Polish. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Was it an organization-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: It was a Polish organization. 

INTERVIEWER 3: No, your. 

HELEN KOPMAN: I was part of it, somewhat. Not that involved with it. I-- I had all my energies to-- to-- to just keep my mother and my brother together. But I lived in the same house. So there was a lot going on. And we also had ammunition. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you see in your house. 

It was Mila 18, I understand. 

HELEN KOPMAN: You see, Mila 18, what happened is in 1939, when they bombed Warsaw, this building was bombed, hollowed out in the middle. The bomb hit it in the middle. So the bunker was on the bottom. And we were hiding up on the third floor-- on the fourth floor. It was big. You know, Warsaw was a big city with big apartments. 

So what we did is we had to go up with a rope to pull ourselves up to hide there. But you couldn't get up there. It was completely-- you know what. You know, you-- you-- you-- you understand what I'm saying. The middle-- middle building was hollowed out in the middle. 

INTERVIEWER 3: So no stairs? 

HELEN KOPMAN: There was no stairs. So we had to, in the bunker-- the resistance bunker was at Mila 18. And they were on the bottom. So we were very involved with it. They were all young people. 

You know Mordecai Anielewicz. 

And the other bunch of people, they were all living there. And this was in 1942, beginning of 1943. We were able to obtain some guns, few, very little ammunition. It's just there was no one to-- there was no one, no one who wanted to help the Jews. Just-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did this organization need-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: Oh, yes. They met-- they-- we met and we-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Can you describe such a meeting? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, there was-- first of all, there was the Jewish-- what do you call it? 

[? [POLISH] ?] 

I don't know how you call that in-- in-- in English. It was like-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Community. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Communities, yeah. And we tried to help with the food. And we tried to help with the sick. And I'm sure-- I don't know. Did I ever mentioned Dr. Korczak? Did you ever hear about Dr. Korczak? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Did you hear about that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: He saved the children. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

HELEN KOPMAN: He didn't save. He was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: He tried. 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah. He was the head of the orphanage in Warsaw. And he could have saved himself. But he chose to go with the children. And he did. He went with the children. And you know, the Jewish organization try to-- they try to give people food, but it was-- it was like we couldn't. There was nothing. There was very little. But people cooperated and they tried to help each other. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Personally, how-- what could you hear, see, do? And-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: What I saw? Wherever I saw, I saw misery. Wherever I went, I saw people laying on the streets, dying. Like you see the kids in Cambodia now, you see, that's-- when I look at those pictures, I get such a pain. Wherever you saw, you saw just agony and pain. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER 3: In-- in the white resistance movement or in the black resistance movement, nonarmed resistance. What did you see? How did-- how did know the group were trying to smuggle them food or medicines or help something for-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: We saw it. I said-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you see? You know? 

HELEN KOPMAN: How did I-- what do you mean? What did I see? There was-- in through the sewers-- through the sewer, some of the Polish-- there was the AK, the Polish resistance too to the Germans. They were trying to bring in some ammunition. You had to pay it in gold. 

So people got together and we got gold piec-- whatever we got and we paid. But was nothing, very little. Very little came in. Some of them were honest. Some of them were not honest. You had to pay in advance. And they said to him, look, we're gonna deliver you 20 rifles or 20 revolvers. And you gave him the gold. And some of them came in. And some of them didn't. It was just-- we were at their mercy. And with the food, the same thing. 

HELEN KOPMAN: You said they smuggled it in through the sewers. Were these sewers large enough for people-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, it wasn't that large enough. But you know, you managed. You were able to bring some stuff in. Some people were hiding themself in the sewers too, because later on, when the Germans really set up-- this is 1943-- I was taking-- I was living in the ghetto til 1943-- May 9-- May-- May 10th, you know when the Jewish Warsaw Uprising was. I was taking out almost one of the last people from the Warsaw ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where are you fighting with arms? 

HELEN KOPMAN: We were fight-- you know, what we did in the Warsaw ghetto, which is-- a lot of people don't know and they feel that we went, really, very passive. But if you want to look at history, and I'm sure you know enough, that countries like France or Belgium or Holland, they went in a few days. The Germans came in and took over. The Warsaw Ghetto was holding out for four weeks. Even Poland didn't hold out for four weeks. We were holding out for four weeks. The Germans were really afraid to come into the Warsaw ghetto. 

What we did is we-- when they-- they-- they came in with tanks. And they decided to liquidate the Warsaw ghetto. And this was 1943, Passover. And we all were prepared. Few people left about that time was maybe, I would say-- you know, in Poland, we had three million Jews living. And in Warsaw, I would say maybe a million or maybe more. I'm not-- you know, my memory's not that-- that great. But I would say more than a million Jews lived in Warsaw. And by that time, were maybe 20,000 people left, when I'm talking 1943-- maybe 30. 

And the Germans decided to liquidate the boards together. And when they came in to the Warsaw ghetto, we didn't have much ammunition so we threw the Molotov-- Molotov cocktails on the tanks. And a lot of Germans got killed. So what we did, we took away their ammunition. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Can you describe the incidents that you saw or heard about? 

HELEN KOPMAN: I saw. I lived in it. I was right there. Yeah. 

b-b-been, maybe, threw --a 

The people threw-- a bottle of gasoline on the tank and the tank was burning. And the Germans got killed in it. And the Germans walking around the tank. So we took their ammunitions. We had their-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Who went out to grab them? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Young people. I myself didn't, no. But I saw it with my own eyes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you make the Molotov cocktails? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Yeah, with gasoline. Gasoline. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where did they get the gasoline? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Well, this, we got. We had the gasoline-- we had. I don't know how they got it. We got it. We had it. You know, we were burning-- we were living on gasoline. We didn't have electricity. So we had the kerosene. And we filled up the bottles and we threw them at the tanks. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you assume you were going to die? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Oh, yes. At that point we were all ready. We were psychologically prepared to just get killed rather than to be taken to the concentration camps. So we didn't care-- I remember, I picked up a helmet on the street, a German helmet. And people were walking around with the German helmets, you know, and-- and-- and-- and what the Germans did, they were afraid to come into the apartments. So they threw in bombs and they burned the buildings. The whole ghetto was burning for weeks. That's the way they smoked out the people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your mother now? 

HELEN KOPMAN: This is another one which is very hard. You see, my mother was with me and my border. And one day, when the Germans came in-- this was at the very end of the Warsaw ghetto-- 

I want you to know my mother wasn't even 40 years old, neither was my father. But my mother was-- the Germans were coming. And we had to pull ourselves up on that rope, I told you, in the building. And she couldn't make it. So she went into the bunker below with the resistance. It wasn't exactly-- there were several bunkers. We didn't make big bunkers, because we didn't want it. If the Germans will come in, we should have-- not all the people should be caught. So we-- we had like five different bunkers downstairs and we were hiding upstairs, maybe 50, 60 people upstairs. 

My mother couldn't make the rope, because the Germans were coming very rapidly. And she was hiding downstairs. And after they left, the Germans, I went to look for her and she was gone. They came in to that particular bunker and they took her out with the rest of the people. They didn't close the door or something. They didn't-- they-- they were able to find it. 

Because we had such clever traps that you couldn't even know that they were people living there, something. But the Germans got wise and they learned the tricks. So they came and they took her. And a few days later-- a few days later, we were taken out from the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your brother? 

HELEN KOPMAN: My brother was with me. And so this was really the very end of the Warsaw ghetto. Everything was beginning. You just couldn't stay in the buildings. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you get food? How did you-- were you-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: We prepared ourselves of-- you know, we ate very little. Look, you can survive. You'd be surp-- you know, I was-- after the Warsaw ghetto, I was a year and a half in concentration camp. I was in Majdanek, in a Auschwitz, for a year and a half. This is in 1943. I weighed maybe 50, 60 pounds when I was liberated. 

You'd be surprised how much a human being can take. It's just amazing. I think it had more to do with your mental ability to survive than the physical, because if you talk about strong people, I don't think I ever was such a healthy-- you know, I always had pneumonia. I was always sick. 

INTERVIEWER 3: The final round-up after the resistance was broken what do you-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: So this is what they-- yeah, they came-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: What do you remember? 

HELEN KOPMAN: They came-- you know, we were upstairs, I told you. They came with a fire truck. And with a ladder, they took us all down. So it was my brother, myself. At that time, I was met my husband and his sisters. We were all hiding there, maybe 50 people-- 40 people, 50 people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is all that was left? 

HELEN KOPMAN: And the bunker downstairs. Mordecai Anielewicz, I guess a couple of days later, he wrapped himself around in a Jewish flag. And he was burned right in the ghetto. It was burning. Everything was burning. You couldn't stay there. They-- they smoked us out. People had to get out from the houses and couldn't hide. 

And then, not only on top of this, after the houses were burning, they came in and they demolished them. So even if you were hiding, the people got suffocated underneath. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said you were married. 

HELEN KOPMAN: I was. i-- I got married in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

HELEN KOPMAN: My father, before he was taken away, he felt like I was very young-- he wanted to protect me. You know, a lot of people got married in the ghetto. Amazingly, everybody got married, because you felt, well, you're gonna die anyway, might as well-- you wanted to attach yourself to someone. You wanted to be-- have some connections with somebody else. 

And my father was afraid if something was gonna happen to him, I should have someone to help me to take care of me. So I married. I was 16 years old when I was married. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did your father pick out the young man? 

HELEN KOPMAN: You know, he was interested. He came in to-- my father had a grocery store. My husband had a bakery. So he came in and he knew me. And I would have never met under ordinary circumstances. I don't think it would have ever happened. But my father felt, look, he was 10 years older than I am and he will take care of me. 

And-- and we had it better, because he was-- his father was in the bakery business. So you know, people used to bring down mink coat, diamond for a loaf of bread. So he had food. And my father felt that I'm gonna be well taken care of, if I marry him. So I was married in the ghetto. Sounds strange, but a lot of people married in the ghetto. You'd be surprised, really. 

So I was with his family, and my brother. We were together. And my mother was taken a few days before. And then, they took us all to Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your husband too? 

HELEN KOPMAN: My husband too, myself. So but when we went to Majdanek, this was just-- it was terrible. As much as I experienced bad after-- but this was-- they put us in cattle cars. And they pushed in I don't know how many people. But they really wanted us to die. 

And we were in this-- those wagons. I don't know how many people were there. But my brother died in my arms. My younger brother was-- and my husband's two sisters, there was not oxygen for all those people. And they kept us in those wagons for days. They wanted us to die in the wagons. You know, the cattle cars with very little windows? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old was your brother? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Maybe 13. 

Not even bar mitzvah. 

So you know, when my brother died in my arms, I said to myself, I'm gonna live. I must be the only one survivor from my family. I've gonna live. I made up my mind that I'm gonna defy Hitler. I'm not gonna give in. Because he wants me to die, I'm gonna live. I'm gonna just be very, very strong. 

And I went to Majdanek. And this is the interesting story, because when I came to Majdanek, and I went to-- they put me in a block with 500 other women-- somebody told me my mother is there. My mother was taken a few days before as I told you. 

So I went to see her. And you know, my mother was there. So it's like I lost her twice really. But she was very, very lost. She was last. She was very passive. She was very lost. And you know, they gave you one portion of bread and one portion of soup for the day. And I-- my mother became very skinny. And she was thin and she was very, you know, lost. 

So I used to bring her my soup to her. And I just cut off a little piece of bread. And I said to her, you know, somebody gave it to me. Eat it. And I used to give it to her and run out, because if she would say to me, eat a little bit, I would eat. I was very hungry. But I felt that she needs it more than-- you know, I was younger. She needs it more than myself. So I used to give her the soup and run out, because I didn't want to be tempted, that I should eat with her. And she was in the ghetto for-- she was in the camp with me for about maybe six weeks, two months. 

Every few weeks they used to-- we select-- you know, have selections. And one day just before they took me to Auschwitz, I walked down with her and she went one way and I went the other way. And I-- I had a friend, which we were hiding out in the ghetto together, we were childhood friends for many, many years. She didn't let me. She pulled me back. I said how can I let her go. And she said, Helen, you're not gonna help her. You know, where she's going. And I stayed. 

And then, we-- I went to Auschwitz. They sent us to Auschwitz. And I was-- I was the only one left from the whole family. My husband was separated. From the beginning, the men were different. And at Majdanek, one of my husband's sister was with me. And she was such a strong girl, a beautiful young woman, maybe 25, 26. 

And we slept on the same bunk. And she developed diarrhea and she was very very cold. She only wanted me to lay next to her to warm her body. But she-- she just didn't feel anything. She was-- she had very like-- I don't know what you call it, dysentery or something. It was just awful. I had to lay next to her, because she was dying. And she said, Helen, please, stay next me. You know, warm me. And she was the last one. She went too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: She died in the bed. 

HELEN KOPMAN: She lied in my arms, just like my brother did. It wasn't a bed, it was a bunk for five people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did it have a mattress? 

HELEN KOPMAN: Straw. And she was laying there and she was-- the smell was so awful. I was dying. But she was so scared. She was all-- that's all. She was crying, I should stay with her. So I did. I stayed til she became cold and stiff in my arms. 

INTERVIEWER 2: She had to lie there sick-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: She had to lie sick and-- and-- and-- and she was-- she was just the most beautiful girl you could ever imagine. Beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No one could help her, but you? 

HELEN KOPMAN: We couldn't even-- if you said that you were sick, then you sure-- for sure to go die. So I was hiding her, because she couldn't get up from bed. So I was kind of-- a few more days, I thought maybe she will get over it, you know? But once you get this-- you know, when you had this-- this-- the runs, you just couldn't stop it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But the Germans inspected those camps. And how come they didn't smell it or-- 

HELEN KOPMAN: They-- they did-- some of the, you know, a block-- a block was 500 people in a block. And some of the women who were the-- the leaders of this-- 