CREW: You both just look at each other for just a minute. Look at each other. 

LEON NELSON: Oh. 

CREW: And over here at the interviewer. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Sure. 

CREW: And you can begin the questions. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Nelson, would you please give me your full name, and date of birth, and the place of your birth, and your last street address. 

LEON NELSON: My name is Leon Nelson. From where I came? Poland, Malawa. I was born 1910, November 15. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was your last street address in Malawa? 

LEON NELSON: Malawa, I cannot remember the street-- 

INTERVIEWER: You don't remember the last street address? Can you tell me something about your family? How large your family was, whether you had brothers and sisters? 

LEON NELSON: My family, my family was 145 people. Parents, father, mother, sisters, brothers, uncles, nephews, nieces. All of us to get together, about 145. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your immediate family? How many brothers and sisters did you have? 

LEON NELSON: Five. 

INTERVIEWER: Five? 

LEON NELSON: I lost all of them. 

INTERVIEWER: Lost all of them? 

LEON NELSON: All of them. And I lost my first-- first wife, and four kids too. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your father's occupation? 

LEON NELSON: A-- there was a dairy company. Dairy, they make milk, you know, cows, butter, everything, cheese. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you marry for the first time? 

LEON NELSON: I married in 1929. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had how many children? 

LEON NELSON: Four. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, Mrs. Ne-- 

CREW: Hold. Just for a minute. Also, when you're reacting to questions, just react visually. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't-- 

CREW: All right. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Nelson, can you tell me your full name, and date of birth? 

MOLLIE NELSON: OK, my name is Mollie Nelson. I was born August 5th, 1923, in Malawa, Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: Present-- present address, 12818 Cherry, Kansas City, Missouri. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the date of your birth? 

MOLLIE NELSON: August 5th, 1923. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your last street address in Malawa? 

MOLLIE NELSON: [? [SPEAKING POLISH]. ?] It's in Polish, [? [SPEAKING POLISH]. ?] I don't know how to spell it now, I forgot already. [? [SPEAKING POLISH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me something about your family. How many brothers and sisters did you have? 

MOLLIE NELSON: We were a family of 10. I had eight brothers and sisters. Just two left. I've got a sister, she's in Kansas City. My father and mother and sisters and brothers, all gone. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me something about your situation in Poland in the 1930s? 

MOLLIE NELSON: Well, I was seven years old at the time, and I was born 1923. I don't remember too much. But I remember when the war broke out, 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: And Mr. Nelson, what about you? You were working before the war broke out? You had a wife, and four children. 

LEON NELSON: Four children. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your occupation? 

LEON NELSON: Shoe shop. Shoe-- shoe business. I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was life for you like? 

LEON NELSON: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: In the years just before the war. 

LEON NELSON: Well, It was a very nice, good life, because we got parents, we got the father and mother, we got the wife and children, everybody. And the relatives, so this was very nice. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your situation as Jews like? 

LEON NELSON: Well, not bad. Not bad, just-- 

INTERVIEWER: But not so good, either? 

LEON NELSON: Well, the main thing, we had the families. If you got nothing too much life, you go to father, you go to mother, you go to the uncle, you go to nieces, you've got a nephew. And this was how all the thinking, was the life, it was so different here. 

INTERVIEWER: This all changed at the time the war broke out. 

LEON NELSON: Well, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me what happened when the war broke out. 

LEON NELSON: In 1939, the war broke out, and I was working the shoemaker business-- in my house. Because in Europe, is a difference. Here, you got to have in stores, you got to have a rent. Over there, a little kitchen, a little room, and you have to work in this kind. 

So in 1939, when the war broke out, and about two weeks later, they ordered from Berlin to put on, you know, the-- the stars. Before in medals, then they changed to the stars, the yellow stars, in the back and the front, because they can recognize who is Jewish, who is not Jewish. 

So we put in this kind of thing. And we couldn't go not in the sidewalk, we have to walk in the street, with the cows and the horses going. Not in the sidewalk, we could not go. Just forget it. So then, you have to go to work every day, every morning, we have got to go to work, 6 o'clock, to night, 6 o'clock. And come home working for the Gestapo just for nothing. 

They beat us, we're working, shoe shop, carpenting, everything for them just, for free. So, and a little while later, came the order, all of you-- all the people, Jewish people, they got to concentrate you in one place, in a field, they got to bring in everything what they got-- diamonds, gold, money, everything to bring it. And they put in a park, and everybody's got to take off everything, naked. 

And they make you, a bar, to jumping three, four feet high. And somebody couldn't jump it, they beat them up, and they fall down, and they died. So there was a whole day they kept us. Everybody's got to put on, in the boxes, the money, the diamonds, everything. And then about 8 o'clock night, they let us go home. So that's it. 

Then, two weeks later, came to order, everybody's got to put on, you know-- in a shopping center, all the Jewish they want send, you know, God be-- we don't know where we going send. Three trucks of us filled with people, they would send us. So and then came some-- some Gestapo, you know, offizieren they said, well, all the Juden, they going back home. All right. 

It was a terrible thing. And then, ghetto, started the ghetto. In 1941 started the ghetto. Nobody can go out. It was one-- one gate. You can go out, or just-- you got to have a receipt. You can go out, or you can go to work. And people, they go to work, and they come home. And some people, they've got nothing to eat. They brought a few potatoes in the packets. 

So the Gestapo check them, you know, by the door, and 10 days later, they hang them, four, three. And then, the Jewish government, do you know this, it was police, and the other thing, you know. They took care of our ghetto. They hung all 17 in one second, by ropes, and they took away the tables, and dead [INAUDIBLE], that's it. 

So they ordered, if somebody will start crying, then we'll do some other thing. 10 days later, came from Berlin, taking hundred-- hundred people, taking, you know, and they killed them. One group, they killed them with machine guns. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Can I interrupt? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Those 16-- there were 16 people that were hanged. That was in my street. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah. 

MOLLIE NELSON: My window was facing those people. And we had to-- and after they were hanged, they didn't take them off. They were hanging there for three nights, days and nights, and our window was facing them. We have to watch, day and night. Nobody could sleep. 

But I was going to tell you, when they came in-- the Nazis came in 1939-- the first thing what they-- what they did, they came into our houses, apartments, and they took everything out. Whether they needed linens, towels, everything. For us, they didn't leave anything. This was in my situation, but they did every-- in all the houses the same thing. . 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me more about the conditions in the ghetto as time went on. 

MOLLIE NELSON: The ghetto-- they build a wall-- that was also on my street. They build a wall from bricks. 

LEON NELSON: 14 to 15 feet high. 

MOLLIE NELSON: So there's was one way you can go out. And then they put broken glasses, bottles, so whoever wants to go out, jump out, would cut themselves. 

INTERVIEWER: What was life in the ghetto like, as time went on? 

LEON NELSON: We've got nothing to eat. And one night, the Gestapo came in, they say, all the Jewish people, all over, we're leaving you notice to Madagascar. Yeah, we was happy, with our families, we will go to Madagascar. And so that's-- and just six months later came, you know, order from Berlin to send us, you know, to the concentration camp. 

MOLLIE NELSON: There were three-- 

LEON NELSON: Excuse me. And before, before they sent us, you know, to Auschwitz, we-- they make you know-- what they call them-- they ring the bell. All the Jewish people, they got to come in, you know, the field. And shoemakers and tailors, they got to be separate. Because other people, they have the shovels, they can go. 

So with me, a lot happened, and I got two friends, they took care of this kind of thing. They was working, you know, with the Jewish people in the ghetto. And I took a shovel. I'm a shoemaker, and I don't like something, God told me something-- it will be wrong to go with the shoemakers, 100 of them. 

So they put down, you know, to four, the shoe makers, in the tailors. And the two guys when they're taking care of the whole thing, they look me, you know, from the bottom to the top. How he knows, you know, to stay here? Because I was feeling what they mean. So I took the shovel, and everybody's march out, you know, from the ghetto, to work. 

15 minutes later, they took them, all of them there and they arrest them. And 10 days later, they shoot them, you know, in the ghetto. They killed them. Yeah. I was-- when I went up, we moved out, you know, from the shoemakers, and stayed with them, with the tailors, I would be dead. There's no question about this. 

So this-- this is for the ghetto, it was very rough, very rough. People died for hunger, there was a commissar, a Jewish commissar, they took him out from the ghetto this morning, they killed him. He was married to a girl, and when he-- they killed him, the whole ghetto was-- that's it. So, in 1942, came the order, we got to leave, you know, to-- to Auschwitz. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And there were three transports. The first transport was-- the first transport was father, mother, children under age of 14. That's when my mother and father, and sisters and brothers went. But I remember distinctly, very much. They took my mother and father. My mother took my little brother. And I had a little sister, she was 11. I said, Mother, leave her with me. OK, she left her. They took these people to a-- I don't know how to say it in English. 

LEON NELSON: A mill. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Where they're making flours, what do you say in English? A ma-- 

LEON NELSON: Mill. You know, to make, you know-- the room, you know, they-- they make the flours, you know, the-- the bread. 

INTERVIEWER: A mill. 

MOLLIE NELSON: A mill, yeah. And they had those people, those people all night. The next day, they were marching. My little sister, she was crying, "I want to go to my mother and father." I had to take her. As my mother and father were marching, the little [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] take her to my mother. 

Just-- and we knew where they're going. We knew. Right straight to the gas chamber. We knew it. To the [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you had information about the chambers, or the concentration camps in ghetto. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yes, we knew. We knew it. I had a very smart mother and father. She says, you kids are young, they'll take you maybe to work. But we know that we will be going. 

LEON NELSON: They went straight to-- to Treblinka. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Straight through. You know, they were not regular trains, they were, you know, trains from-- 

LEON NELSON: Cows, cows. 

MOLLIE NELSON: You know what I mean. 

LEON NELSON: Horses. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And the rest, yeah. Then came the second transport-- us. So I was left with-- 

LEON NELSON: No, we went to the third. 

MOLLIE NELSON: My sister. 

LEON NELSON: We went to the third. It was a second-- a second, the first, the second, we was with the third, 2,000 people. Yeah, we came to Auschwitz, yeah. 2,000-- we went together in the same train. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yeah, so we were left, myself, now the sister, she's in Kansas City, and another sister, that-- she didn't live through-- and a brother. 

INTERVIEWER: You were both on the same train. 

MOLLIE NELSON: On the same. 

INTERVIEWER: Your wife, your first wife, and your four children-- 

LEON NELSON: All together, in the same train, yeah. Yes, that's-- 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you were got to-- 

LEON NELSON: Well, we came in in 1942, to Auschwitz. Mine-- all of my family-- father and mother, sisters and brothers, all were leaving together. And we came in 1942, November the 15th, to Auschwitz, 12 o'clock, with the train. And they come-- women, older people, women, children, right. Young people between thirties, 25, 20, to the left. 

We was 2,000 people. So they took 1,600 people just straight to the gas chamber. Straight to the gas chamber. And us, they took them just-- you know, we left from Auschwitz five miles. So they put in just, you know, in a room, in a house, and then they showered us in this-- because we checked each other, the hint We say, well, we have to say goodbye. They took them over to the gas chambers, we will go too. 

So we start to say Kaddish, and to-- and we start to cry, you know, all of us, the 200 people-- no, 400 people. So we went together and this kind of thing, and they released us, and we went to Auschwitz. We came into Auschwitz, I came in, in the room. And I was so thirsty, I had gotten no little water, nothing. 

And I go, you know, to a fellow, and I tell him, please give me-- give me a cup of coffee, for a drink. He-- hit me, you know, once, he hit me twice. "You want coffee? You'll die here. You'll die here." So that's it. That's it all. 

Then I make up my mind, after two weeks in concentration camp, in Auschwitz, I make up my mind to go off the wires, to kill me. Just, you know, I want-- because I say, my all family is not no more. I have a nephew lives, you know-- me and him, just two of us, from 145 people. He lives in Sacramento. He's my brother's son. 

And I say, Emil I want to tell you something. Tomorrow-- tomorrow morning, I'll go off the wires, because it was electric wires. You catch the wires, you-- you die. And then the Gestapo, on the top, they-- they kill you. So, he said, well, you go today. Tomorrow, I'll go next day. 

So we arrive into Auschwitz-- of the field. And it takes about 25 minute, 30 minutes, they called, who is shoemakers, and who is tailors-- take apart. So I stepped down with all. One Gestapo man came to me, he said, what you, from beruf. And I say, a shoe meister. He said, OK, he wrote in my number, everything, all right. 

And so it took a long time till they take me, you know, to the shop. In the meantime, we have to go 30, 40 feet, in the top, of the high of the back of the hills, cutting the grass. You have shoulders, one-- one rope here, the other guy in the back. And they beat us, the coppers, and the Gestapo, they beat us. You know, to go so fast around, and fast up. Down is not so bad, to go-- 

So I make up my mind, and then I escape. I got-- they make a selection and I escape. I escaped, they catch me, all right. Then let me go to the concentration camp. The second time, they want me taken to the gas chamber, 'cause I was so skinny, you know, bones and everything. 

And I escaped. I went in a field, I make a hole. I went to a tree, I cut off the leaves, and I covered it up. And I was two days over there, two days. I was-- I was feeling, I'm going to die. And I say, my goodness, I make up my mind. I say, what will happen will happen, I'll go out. 

There's no question about this. It's a very-- very other way to die, we die for hunger. This is the roughest thing, to die for hunger. There's no question about this. Because I feel my mother in concentration camp, she died from hunger. 

So I escape all over there, and I go out. Two hours later, two Gestapo people, they came to me. And they say to me, what are you doing here? And I say, I cannot speak in German, I talked in Polish, and they cannot understand. I talk Jewish, he did not understand. Just, you know, I couldn't speak so very well German. 

And so they took me, locked me up in a room, with rats, with water, with cement, in a basement. And next morning, they came to pick me up. They picked me up, and took me, you know, to the gas chamber-- the third time. So when I came in, I was the sixty man to go into the gas chamber. 

One Gestapo man, his name was Stolten What his name? Upstairs, what's his name? He knows him too. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Doesn't make any difference. 

LEON NELSON: No, no, it's Walter. Walter, we went together. We was together. And I know, and he knows the name, you Wal Stolten. And he asked me, can't you take measure? Are you a shoemaker? Yeah. Can't you take measure? Jawohl, Herr Arbeitsdienstfuhrer. 

They took me out, and took me, you know, to the factory. And I was working for three and a half years in the same place. Oh, this place, it was a quarter of a mile from the gas chamber. Sometime, we are recommended-- recommended, you know, for night to working, and then we saw. Because the-- in the day, it was not so-- people, they do all the thing, with the gas chamber, and they burn them-- everything just in the night. From 6 o'clock in the evening, to 6 o'clock in the morning. Because people not taking attention to this. 

So when we was working in the night, we saw what's going on. It was before they make the chimneys. It was a field, they make the big holes, they put down wood, and then gas, with a match, and they burn, you know, this kind. They took little children, a month old, two months old, six months old, a year, two year. They took them by hand, took them by leg, took them by ear, and they threw them in fire alive-- no question for this. 

Then later on, came-- came the chimneys, because they put them in, the old ones, they burn them up. And that's it, they just were ashes. And that's what's-- that's what happened in Auschwitz, in the years. Because I was three and a half years, I know. I was working by this kind of thing, I saw it was going on. Now there's people stronger than-- stronger than steel, that can just keep the whole thing. 

So, and when we left, then they came in, a Polish fella came to me, and said, Leon, your wife, your children is gone. They was with the ashes, I saw it. Because he was from the same city where I came. They send him, you know, six months before, a Polish guy. He makes something, you know, wrong. They sent him, you know, to Auschwitz. 

And he told me, Leon, forget about your family, every-- everybody in your family is gone, all is ashes. That is the life in Auschwitz. And then in 1945-- yeah, and before this time, think, I make for the biggest man, Gestapo man, Schwartz I make him a pair boots. And I came in in the office to him. And look like police boots here in America. 

And I make them a pair boots. And I ask him-- I got guts-- because I say, my goodness, what's it matter? Today, tomorrow, anyway, anytime, I got to go. What's it matter? I got guts, and I ask him, why'd you take all the Jewish people, and me, just my person let stay alive? 

He said, "Du black dog." Black dog-- I got, you know, black, you know, dark hair. You black dog, I like you. If I didn't like you, and I don't need you, you go to the gas chamber with all the Jewish people. And that is the reason I'm alive. But I came-- but I said, why? 

MOLLIE NELSON: They needed him, so they spared his life. 

LEON NELSON: And then in 1945, February the 18th, they sent us, you know, to all over. We went to Hamburg, Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Sachsenhausen, Gross-Rosen, to Bergen-Belsen. And then, in Bergen-Belsen, I became my liberation from the-- from general Montgomery, from the English troops. 

In the first-- arrived in, you know, a captain, a Jewish captain, with a Jewish [INAUDIBLE] in the hand. And he said, Gott, Gott ist geschickt. God sent me. And our help, he was. He went to all over, he said, stands up, don't you cry, kids, everything is-- all is just, you're liberated. All [INAUDIBLE] free. And just I went about three weeks in-- in Bergen-Belsen. 

Then I left from Bergen-Belsen, I want to go back to Poland. Maybe I can find somebody. So I came to the elbow-- this is between Russia and England, the elbow-- and I cross the-- this kind of thing. And so the life is going on. And I didn't-- we didn't got not too much to eat, by the English troops. 

Me and other three boys, we escaped from the English zone at night, because we could not escape them. Or if the wires, because what's it matter? We are hungry, we got nothing to-- by the English, we got nothing to eat by them. So we escaped, all the four of us. A whole night, till next morning, we came in to General Patton in his office. 

And when we came to the office, to General Patton, a captain is by the door. And he ask us-- ask us, where [INAUDIBLE] you are, from where did you come. We told him we came from concentration camp. We started speaking German to them. Because before I couldn't speak, well, after the four years, I learn the Russian speaking, and I learn German talking. 

So he went to the general, he said, general, four boys, they came from concentration camp, they want to see you, general. He said, let him in. So he let us in, all the four of us. And he ordered-- and he started to cry like a baby, General Patton. Not too many people saw Patton, I saw him. And he started to crying like a baby. 

He talks, he said, you can understand English? No. He speaks with us, you know, in German. We talked with him maybe about two hours. Then he ordered the captain, you go across the street, kick out these German people. Give them just, you know, the four, you know, the four of them, you know, this house. And they ordered to send food, and clothes, and everything for three and a half month. 

Yeah. So, and this is-- this is-- this is not the end. Just we went, we are-- you will ask my wife? 

INTERVIEWER: I think I'd like to ask your wife to come back to-- 

LEON NELSON: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: When you went to Auschwitz, and what your situation was. And then we'll come back to the end of the war. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah. 

MOLLIE NELSON: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Talk about that. How old were you when you came to Auschwitz, and what was your situation? What happened to your family? 

MOLLIE NELSON: OK. My family, mother and father, and sisters and brothers, through age of 14, were gone. We knew it. Then they took us, the transport took us to Auschwitz. We came in-- you know, had to take the clothes off, and there's like, a shower. 

And they gave us-- we had to take everything off. Just-- just undress. It was cold. No brassieres. It was terrible. We were three sisters. I was 20 years old, my other sister was 17, and the third one was 14. After that, they took us to the barracks. They gave us-- the beds were one, two, three, like-- beds. 

LEON NELSON: Beds, like military. 

MOLLIE NELSON: I was the oldest, from my sisters, and I knew that when I was called, they all were called. So what I did, I cut from my blanket, a piece. And I wrapped around myself, and I wrapped around my sister, the other sister, with a-- I found a safety pin. Because when you called here, you called all of them. 

So this is one thing. And then, we had to go to work. No-- from Birkenau, we were there for three days. We didn't go to work, they didn't take us out, we just were laying on those beds. And the food, just a piece of bread in the morning, lunch, a little soup. You can hardly-- you were looking for a little potato, you couldn't find it. 

In the evening, coffee with another piece of bread. That was for three days. After the third day, they transferred us to a camp-- the name was Budy-- not far from Auschwitz. And the people who arrived before us told me, you're going to Budy, I don't think you'll come out from over there. Because whoever does something wrong in Auschwitz, they send them to that camp, Budy. 

So all three of us, we went there. The work, we had to do men's work. We were making highways, yes. We were working with-- with trains. We were making-- 

INTERVIEWER: Rails. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Rails. And they were steel-- steel rail-- I don't know how to say in English. We had to put on stones, and, and-- 

LEON NELSON: Sand. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Sand and rocks with a shovel. We were three sisters, I was the oldest. It was like piece work. I was stronger. When I was finished, and behind me, was SS woman. She was watching us, how fast we're doing. Excuse me. 

When I saw that my si-- the next one, my sister, her machine wasn't full, and mine was already. I went over there, and I filled hers up. Then the third one, was part of the machine full. I went over there. This was the first 10 days. The third sister, the younger one-- every morning, we had to go out to be counted. It was 4 o'clock 

LEON NELSON: How many? Go out. 

MOLLIE NELSON: We have to-- from the barracks, we had to come out, 4 o'clock in the morning, to be counted. How many we are, maybe somebody escaped. And as we were going, at 4 o'clock in the morning, cold. We were wearing-- Holland, you know from Holland, the wooden shoes. 

My little third sister, she was delicate that her wooden shoes fell off her feet. One morning she couldn't get up from her bed. And she says, you go to work. I'll stay just today. I'll go tomorrow. But that SS woman knew that we were three sisters. And she came over there where we worked. 

She asked-- she asked me, where is your little sister? I said, in German, Frau Oberseher, she's-- she's sick today, she'll be back tomorrow. She told me in German, she was-- she was very pretty girl. She says ist mir so schade, dies Madchen. That means, I'm so sorry for her. 

Because she knew if she was left in the barracks, she won't come out. Because every morning, a lot of people couldn't go to work, they were sick. Every morning, ambulance came to pick up the sick people, and the people who died. That morning, my little sister couldn't go out. I gave her my shoes, my sister gave her the-- she couldn't. 

After we were finished-- we were finished in the work, we had to go back to the barracks, so far. And after you came to the barrack, before you went in, there was a kitchen that you had to go in, and get some food. That little soup that you had, and then a piece of bread. I didn't go there. I went straight, I was rushing straight to the barrack. 

Because I-- And I was calling-- in Polish, [? [SPEAKING POLISH]. ?] There was another lady from the same hometown, she says, you don't have no [? [SPEAKING POLISH] ?] no more. She voluntarily went into the ambulance. So-- so there was left two, me and my sister. 

Working for the-- we came in in 1942, for three years. But before the war ended-- I guess it was three months before-- the Germans knew that the allies were near, so they took us out from the-- from. Auschwitz. 

LEON NELSON: Russia-- Russia came to Auschwitz. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yeah, there. They took us out from Auschwitz, and they were-- we were walking with them day and night. 

LEON NELSON: 110-- 110 miles. 

MOLLIE NELSON: In Germany someplace, I don't remember even the towns. Day and night, and they were taking us to a different camp, but the other camps were filled up. Finally, they took us to Ravensbrück, there they have enough space for us to be there. And we were there for a few-- few days. And they took us out again. 

There was no trains. We were walking. We were sleeping outside the houses, on the steps outside-- in the cold, in the fields. Finally, in May-- I don't remember the date, but I know in May, 1945-- we were in a field, at night, we were asleep in the field. 

And everybody had to eat something, we didn't-- they gave us a loaf of bread before the tri-- before they took us out from Auschwitz. They knew that we're going to walk, and walk, so they gave them a loaf of bread, and this had to last for so many days. So while we were walking, we found potato in the fields. So we went to a potato-- or we ate the raw potatoes. And some of the vegetables, you know, from the field. 

As-- and then came the day-- the day again, light. We had to go walking again. As we were walking-- that was already summer. I mean, yeah, May. I see an SS man on a-- on a horse. And coming over to our SS man, who was going with us, watching us, they were talking. 

As they were finishing talking, the other one left. And we turned around-- oh, Nazi-- I didn't see them no more. No, before he left, before he disappeared, after he was through with that other one, with that-- 

LEON NELSON: Horse. 

MOLLIE NELSON: With that horse, with the SS man was on the horse-- he says, you're going to be liberated pretty soon. Did you see the-- you see, there as a white flag, and I'll take you over there, and you'll be liberated. And he was a nice man, even in that Nazi-- he was a nice man. And I said, come with us, we'll tell-- and he said, over there, there's American, and you're going to be liberated. 

And then I said, you come with us, we'll tell him that you were very nice to us. But he disappeared. And that's how we got liberated, myself and my sister. 

INTERVIEWER: How much did you weigh? 

MOLLIE NELSON: I was all swollen up, swollen. Then I lost a lot of it. Swollen, from my face, the whole body was swollen up. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were your feelings when you were liberated? I was feeling-- we couldn't believe it. We couldn't believe it that we are alive. Nobody knew that we're going to come out alive, nobody. One dies today-- even the camp, I saw a girl, in from my own town, she's dead. 

We knew that she's going to be dead-- she's dead today, I'll be dead tomorrow. I just pass by. There are no more feelings. Because we knew we won't come out. This was something that-- there's-- I can't describe it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you believe that you wouldn't come out? 

LEON NELSON: No. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Nobody believed. 

LEON NELSON: Nobody. Because before-- before we went to Bergen-Belsen, we had just, you know, in our-- in our train, there were the Gypsies, the German Gypsies. And they want kill us. So I hang by up in the top. And next morning, when it was lightening, you know, daylight, so they let us go. And then we went to, you know, to the concentra-- to the camp. So that's the reason I'm alive. 

Or no, no-- after the war, I came back to my city. I came back. And nobody's there, just-- just a few boys, they came back. Our city was 11,000 Jewish people. After the war, it was 33 boys and girls. About four girls, and about 22, 23 of us, you know, men. And this was the whole thing. We start a new life. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Well, when-- he came back before. 

LEON NELSON: I came back in June. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And the Polish government gave-- see, all our houses were gone, so they gave a hotel, they gave us a hotel. How do I know? Because I came later. And then-- then I came. After we were liberated, we had to walk again, ourselves. But we went-- there was no transportation. No trains, no nothing. We had to walk. 

We walked back to Poland, to my hometown. But I couldn't go to my hometown. I was just-- not too far from another town. 

LEON NELSON: In the same town-- in the same town David Ben-Gurion. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yeah. Plonsk. 

LEON NELSON: Plonsk. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Plonsk, I was there with my sister. And then I-- I saw two Polish men that my family had business with them. My father and mother, we had-- he was a cap maker, and a hat maker. And they had business with those two people. And they recognized us. 

Are you alive? Are you alive? Yes. Would you like to go back to Malawa? I said, yes, we sure-- we sure would, we'd like to go. And he took us, on a horse and buggy. Yeah, he took us. But before I came back with my sister to Malawa, he was already there. The Polish people gave them a hotel, and they were living there. That's how I met my husband. 

And we were there till 1945-- just a few months. One night-- we were already married-- after three months, we married. One night, the Polish-- 

LEON NELSON: Poor people. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Learn every-- Polish, a lot of Polish people-- learned everything what the Gestapo did. At night, I took him out, my brother Lo. 

LEON NELSON: Another friend. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And another, another boy that-- a survivor. 

LEON NELSON: In Cuba, he's in. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Took out to a park. 

LEON NELSON: They want kill us. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Give me the money. If not, you're going to get killed. But he was the older one, he was a little smarter. And he brought them back to our apartment, you know, from, in a hotel. And they gave him everything what he made, you know. He had business-- I mean, shoe making business. 

LEON NELSON: Four people. Five people used to work for him. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Were working for him already. And they took the money, and they left. And they-- they got their lives. After that, I said, Leon, it's no good to stay there. We have to go back to Germany. We went back to Germany. Mm-hmm. Went back to Germany in 1946. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Went back, yeah, by the end of 1945. 

LEON NELSON: In May, '46. 

MOLLIE NELSON: '46. 

LEON NELSON: We left to Germany. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And we were there till 1949. Two days before 1950, we arrived United States, because my husband had some relatives here, and they brought us to United States. 

LEON NELSON: Before. 

MOLLIE NELSON: "You will love United States." 

LEON NELSON: But before, we got, you know, the papers to go to Israel. My uncle, my mother's brother used to listen to St. Louis. He sent us a letter in a telegram not to go. He will-- he will bring us over here. So they went to Paul Olman and Paul Olman signed the papers. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yeah, Paul Olman was our sponsor. 

LEON NELSON: Sponsor. And then I came to the United States. We came to a lovely country. I tell my wife all the time, we never-- we-- we never lose nothing. I came to the United States with $2.33. Is a question, how we got the $2.33? My uncle sent us, you know, to New Orleans-- $11. So we-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: For the train. 

LEON NELSON: For the train, you know, to come in to eat something. So we got $11. The Jewish family service, they get us, you know, the $11 when we step down from the ship. And then we took the train, take us 18 hours to come in from-- from New Orleans to Kansas City. Because here, and my mother's sister, she used to live here. 

So we spent $9.33. So that left me with about $2, and I promised my wife, all the time, we will have the $2, no question. This is the loveliest country, the best country in the whole wide world, there's no question about it. 

MOLLIE NELSON: We were all over before we came to United States, all over Europe, everywhere. But this is the best one. 

LEON NELSON: We went to Israel in 1973. I love Israel, we went for a vacation. Because for us, is exists just two countries-- America and Israel. 

MOLLIE NELSON: The first is United States, the next is Israel. 

LEON NELSON: Because we have a nice life, and we make a nice living. Without money we came. We have a new home, we have two cars, and we make a nice living. She's working, and I'm working. We try the best. 

MOLLIE NELSON: We have a son, and we got two grandchildren. 

LEON NELSON: Two grandchildren. 

MOLLIE NELSON: And that's a precious thing. 

LEON NELSON: This is our life. I ask-- I ask my wife when she came to-- before she was my wife, I ask her, honey, what you think to do? You will marry me? She said, yeah, I'll marry you. 

[LAUGHING] 

And so that's it, you know. Start our new life, and our new generation, because we couldn't believe we will bring a generation no more. Because this thing what we-- what happen, nobody can believe in this kind, nobody. The Holocaust-- few years ago, I didn't watch this. Because I was there all over, and God took care of me. He took me out. She was watching this kind. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yes. 

LEON NELSON: Because-- because the Holocaust is not just, you know, not even a-- a little thing, of a [INAUDIBLE], nothing. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Well, they could show everything. 

LEON NELSON: For us, for us, because I was there. I saw what's happened, and what's going on. I was older from my wife, she was young. And a lot of people, they don't know-- to be three and a half years in Auschwitz, you got the feeling something what's happen over there. It's impossible to believe. Impossible. And that's it. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Ourselves-- we cannot believe ourselves. 

LEON NELSON: No, no. 

MOLLIE NELSON: We went through so much, and we are alive. And we can look that way, how we look now-- it's impossible. I wouldn't believe it myself. It would happen to somebody else, if I wasn't there. So thank God. 

LEON NELSON: We lost a nation, from 6 million Jewish people. A whole nation, Europe is gone, clean, that's it. And just that's happen in our time. I wish we could not have no more. 

MOLLIE NELSON: I hope so. 

LEON NELSON: I like we have Israel, she'll taking care. And that's what happened, you know, in 1939. That's-- Israel will tell, you know, let my people go. Why did-- you tell the Russian to now let my people go. And we love-- we like it, we like Israel. I'm telling the truth. Because we were suffer for long, over there. We love the land. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Oh, you mean to say if Israel would be established, it would be-- 1939, it would be different. Well, thank God it was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you in 1939 have any idea of what might happen? 

MOLLIE NELSON: No. 

LEON NELSON: No, nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any question of this-- 

LEON NELSON: No, nobody. 

INTERVIEWER: Happening, or going anyplace else? 

LEON NELSON: No, no. 

MOLLIE NELSON: No. 

INTERVIEWER: You had no idea. 

MOLLIE NELSON: No idea. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you first begin to realize? 

LEON NELSON: When we was in Auschwitz-- Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: That in fact, you might be exterminated. 

MOLLIE NELSON: In the ghetto. There's a lot of trouble going around. That-- first they said they're going to take us to Madagascar. And then they said-- they knew that there's some gas chambers, and camps, concentration camps. And we knew. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you believe that? 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yes. 

LEON NELSON: We believe it. They said, you know, you go to Madagascar, everybody was happy. We was-- we was dancing, you know, in the ghetto, the same like-- like the proclamation of Medina is in Israel, you know the 25th anniversary, we went to Israel-- they was dancing in the street. The same thing, we was dancing-- we will go, with the families, with the children. 

We going all to Madagascar. OK, we will work, and we will make a nice living, you know. Good, better, stay over there. So they change, you know, from Madagascar to the gas chamber, to Auschwitz, Treblinka, Majdanek, Buchenwald, Sachsenhausen, Gross-Rosen. I went to Israel, over there, '73, we saw, you know, the chambers, with everything. 

And I start to say Kaddish-- there was 2,000 people inside. And the first time in my life, I broke me down, in the middle of the Kaddish. And then I-- a minute, two minutes later, I start to finish my Kaddish. And all the people was crying. Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Majdanek, Treblinka, Chelmno, all of the names, you know. 

MOLLIE NELSON: You know, and Israel, the link. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever break down in the camps? 

LEON NELSON: No 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any time when you didn't want to go on. 

LEON NELSON: No I was-- I never been [INAUDIBLE] in all of the two and a half years. 

MOLLIE NELSON: You did have-- didn't say that you had almost-- you wanted to go on the wires. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah, I say. I say-- this is-- this is not broke down. This, I make up my mind to go. Because my life, it was so miserable. Because I got nobody. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Well, I knew that all my family's gone. But I knew maybe I can pull through. And I wanted so bad for my two sisters to pull through, but one couldn't, one. And I worked hard, but I didn't believe that-- when they took us to the camp-- you asked me whether we knew in the ghetto, that we go-- we knew something, later on, but we didn't know that it's going to be so bad. 

LEON NELSON: And about two years ago, '70, November 3. In '75-- '76. We received a letter from the Jewish Federation from here, and they invite us, me my wife, to come and speak-- you know, it was a convention for the American children, between 16 and 18 years old, from the high schools. There was a convention here, in Milbas hotel. Not Milbas President's Hotel. 

And we went and we spoke to the kids, 500 children was there. And we was-- we was very happy to talk to them. They asked me a question, how-- why I go out from the house? And I say, listen. When you ask a question, why do you go out? They with airplanes, with tanks, with everything they got, we didn't got nothing, even a little knife, nothing. They took us away everything. So the kid, the children is so-- 

INTERVIEWER: From Auschwitz, you went several places before-- 

LEON NELSON: Yeah, I went-- Yeah, I went to Buchenwald, Sachsenhausen, Gross-Rosen, Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did you spend in those places? 

LEON NELSON: Oh, two weeks, three weeks, four. The most, I was in Auschwitz, because I was working for them. 

INTERVIEWER: And did you continue, then, your trade in these other places too? 

LEON NELSON: No. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

LEON NELSON: No, I didn't got no time. Just, we laid down in the beds, and that's it. We would look, just, you know, for death, and that's it. It was other-- other gas chambers too, like in-- in Dora-Nordhausen. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Majdanek. 

LEON NELSON: Majdonek. It was, all over, it was-- you know, we laid down and that's it. Because I got a few friends, they help each other, and today give-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: We're waiting for death. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have food? 

LEON NELSON: No. No. When I had my liberation, I weighed just, you know, 92 pounds. Now I weigh 175. It's a long story, believe me. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Happened. And I hope it doesn't happen no more. 

LEON NELSON: Oh. 

MOLLIE NELSON: I hope. 

[SIGHING] 

LEON NELSON: I don't wish this, even to my enemies, like this kind what's happened with us. 

INTERVIEWER: Are there any other particular experiences from Auschwitz, or the camp, that stand out in your mind. 

LEON NELSON: Well, let me tell you something, so many years-- I never goes out from my mind. I talk to the family every night, because I got in my mind, and I never can forget this kind of thing what's-- what's happened, today. 

MOLLIE NELSON: It was hard labor. That's hard labor. Hard labor, and that's all it is. 

LEON NELSON: Well, the three and a half years, I was not working so hard. You know, I got food, I got everything, because they need me. I was working them. I make the shoes, I make boots in the factory. So in the other things, in the other camps, it was better off. I didn't got nothing to do, just lay down and look into the sky, and that's it. Every morning, every hour, every minute, you are ready to go, that's it. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me something about the Jewish officials in the camp who also had a privileged position. What were they like? 

[SIGHING] 

LEON NELSON: Well. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Some were OK. 

LEON NELSON: It's very hard to say something. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Some of them were OK. Some of them were collaborators. 

LEON NELSON: It's very-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: Everybody's looking for themself. 

LEON NELSON: It's very hard to say. I know, because you see, they say a horse has got a long tongue, he cannot speak. People got a shorter, and can't-- cannot speak. You see, cannot speak enough. Because largely was-- it was wrong. They was thinking, they will take me into the gas chamber, he will be alive. Some people, lots of them. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Not too many. 

LEON NELSON: Even, even-- that's it. Better not to say this. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the Germans, you said some of them treated you better than others. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Yeah. Some would treat us with a very, some of them. 

LEON NELSON: They helped us, some of them. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Other-- if-- if there wouldn't be good Germans, we wouldn't be alive. 

LEON NELSON: No, no. 

MOLLIE NELSON: They had to be some of them good. 

LEON NELSON: No. 

MOLLIE NELSON: If they'll all be bad, we'd be-- we wouldn't be alive. 

LEON NELSON: Before I went to the-- to the shoe shop, you know, to the factory with the shoes. I was working in one-- he was not from the Gestapo, he was from the Wehrmacht, from the 1940 war. There was an old man, 56 years old. And then I was three days, I had got nothing to eat. I was so hungry. 

He came to me and said young-- young fella, you are hungry? And I say, yeah. So he went, two breads, you know, under the tree. And he said, I'll keep over there, you go take-- take them, and you can all, you know, to tell everybody to give up his bread. And he told me one thing-- check nobody can see. If not I'll be-- I'll be dead. So, lovely-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: So he couldn't give him personally, he just put the bread under the tree, and you go get it. 

LEON NELSON: Yeah, he was not the Gestapo. He was out in the Wehrmacht, a soldier. Old fellow. So many of us-- I remember, when we left Auschwitz with the train, we came to Austria. The women, the German women, they brought us coffee, bread, you know to give us, to the train. And the Gestapo, they shoot them. They shoot them, they never let us-- let us take, you know, the coffee. And they-- 

MOLLIE NELSON: And after we liberated, they treat us very nicely, the German people. 

LEON NELSON: Better-- better than Poland. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Better than Poland, yes. 

LEON NELSON: We got no-- we couldn't stay in Poland. They were-- one night, we was walking both, you know, in our street-- they want shoot me, us. 

MOLLIE NELSON: That's right, they were shooting after us. Yeah, on the street, we-- were taking a walk. Yeah, in the hotel, outside. We were taking a walk, and they were shooting at us. 

LEON NELSON: Oh, it was worse than Germany. 

MOLLIE NELSON: That's right, much worse. Most of them had to leave Poland. We went back to a Germany, most of us went back to Germany. 

LEON NELSON: We was in Germany 1946, '47, '48, '49. Two days before 1950, we arrive into the United States, to Kansas City. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: That's it. 

CREW: OK, just be seated. Could you both look right into the lanes, please, right here? Now look at each other. 

LEON NELSON: Hi, honey. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Hello. Long time no see. 

CREW: OK, real silent, now. If you look at each other, please? 

MOLLIE NELSON: Oh, OK. 

CREW: Real quiet. OK, look back at the interviewer. OK, real quiet. Now, back at each other. OK, now right into the camera lens. Right in here. 

All right. Look at each other, please. And at the interviewer. Right here. And right into the camera lens. And back to each other. That's it, thank you. 

MOLLIE NELSON: Thank you. 

LEON NELSON: Thank you, very much. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's take this-- 

CREW: Where to focus. 