SUBJECT: We-- we stayed together, the group of 200 of us who had been selected from the-- from that transport, and we were all young, healthy people. I mean, we had been selected once over again when we were in the bath house, we had been selected naked. You know, that's true. 

And again, they wanted to send my mother off, and they-- and then they asked her whether she had somebody there, and she said she had a daughter. They let her pass. There were about three women at her age in the group. The rest of us was all very young. 

I only later heard that they had shaved us because-- there was a lot of lice, body lice, in the camps, and there was a lot of typhus. There was nothing in Theresienstadt where we had to come from, but-- I think partly they did it to just dehumanize us. That was one of the things. 

Another thing was it really is like a brand. There wasn't-- when we later-- in Germany, with the shaven heads, you couldn't run away very well because you were very obviously a runaway. So I think they had dual purpose in that. Triple purpose. 

The-- and the last day then, I actually was in Auschwitz only one week, and then I was shipped off again. This was in October '45, and they were already breaking up Auschwitz. They-- the Russians were pretty close at the time. They were moving in. 

And the last day, we were standing outside from before dawn in the morning to dark at night, and I just didn't think I could stand anymore. It was really-- my back was playing up, and we kind of huddled together and supported each other, because we really couldn't stand. 

And I-- then we were given a piece of bread and a piece of margarine and a piece of salami for the trip. And there was-- it was given to us like that. Nothing to hold it in or keep it in. So the bread we kept, but the margarine and the meat I ate, and I got very sick. Threw up immediately. 

And I also arrived in the camp in-- in Germany was pretty high temperature. I had a reaction. And they had kind-- we were-- well, the trip was quite something else again. This was now in-- no, this was still cattle cars. This was in, still, the open cars. 

I got moved around several times. It's a little confusing. And we had two soldiers with us in the-- in the wagon. And that-- they really saved our sanity. Because for one thing, they were-- we had to take turns sitting, because there wasn't enough room for everybody to sit. 

And they would open the door, and they would empty the buckets and bring water. You know? And so I don't know how long that took anymore. I've forgotten that. 

I really lived through all that time trying very hard not to think and not to feel, and this wasn't happening to me, and this wasn't possible. I just-- it seemed-- it was unreal. It was a dream. And I'd wake up. Tomorrow, the war would be over, and I would be back in our house in Prague, and it would be all over. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you aware that the war was coming so close? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think Roosevelt died while I was in Auschwitz. And that rumor came through. There was illegal BBC Radio received in camps. Prisoners had radios, you know, and rumors were rife. They were always going around. 

And we thought that would be end. No. When did he die? I forget now. I was-- I don't know where I was when that happened. But maybe not. 

So we were following the war, and we helped I mean, by that time, you heard of all these strategic retreats the Germans were doing. We knew what that meant. 

But the whole extent of what had happened didn't hit us till after the war. I mean, like, out-- out of my mother's family, out of-- there's a-- it's strange. There were 13 people in my mother's family, and all she had was married-- four married sisters and two brothers with their daughters and sons and wives and husbands. 13 went into camp, nobody came back. 

And I had a group of young people. We used to meet in Prague just before camps. Social group. And out of the-- all my age. And out of this group of 13, one came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did your mother survive? 

SUBJECT: My mother survived with me. Yeah. We were together the whole time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Afterwards, I mean, like, the first few years, later, now, how did you deal? 

SUBJECT: Well, defenses are high. You know, I just pushed it away. I decided I couldn't think about it. I couldn't cope with it. And I think it's no more than five years now that I can even touch on it. I really was so busy adjusting and repressing and living, and I just didn't want to. 

I never told anybody. I-- when I met my husband, who was also from Czechoslovakia, and spent his four years in Japanese camp, we did exchange information. But I think that's the only time I ever mentioned it. I never mentioned it to my children. They never-- I never talked to them about it. They practically don't know that I was in a camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what stayed with you? 

SUBJECT: What stayed with me? The defensiveness. The not wanting to feel. Not wanting to be involved. What I'm very aware now is, of course, the lack of family. And I-- that I have been always aware of. 

I mean, ever since I came to this country, I have this feeling of being a waif. Of being alone in the world, which I am. My husband lost his parents. He had one brother, who has died since. Of course, my husband died, and I have no family left. There is-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You say your children don't know. Don't you have a number of something? Didn't they do that? 

SUBJECT: No. I was there-- at that time, the-- the camp was enough dissolution that they didn't number anymore. And I wasn't there long enough. You had to be an established member to become and get a number. I mean, they know, but they know no details. They know that I was in the war in Europe, but that's all they know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were shipped to another-- you were-- came to another camp after that? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And another one, and another one. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they were-- 

SUBJECT: They were better. Anything was better than Auschwitz. For one thing, they were work camps. They were not extermination camps. There was a small factory, and we had dry and heated sleeping quarters. That was a big advantage. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think that if you had stayed in Auschwitz, even without going to the gas chambers, that you might not have survived, just out of getting-- just out of exposure or-- 

SUBJECT: Absolutely possible. In Auschwitz, there was really two kinds of people who didn't-- very soon. I mean, who didn't go straight into the gas oven for any number of reasons. Those who had a chance to live very quickly divided into groups. 

The ones who really had the will to live swear anything, and the ones who gave up, who psychologically gave up-- there was a name for them. They were called Muselmann, and they died. They just gave up. They just gave up and died. 

INTERVIEWER 1: On that day, night, when there was an appell. It was the last day you were huddled together. What did you think? You would make it, not make it? 

SUBJECT: I was beginning to doubt that I would make it. Because I simply couldn't stand anymore, and I couldn't see how I was going to get out of this. And I guess by that time, I already had the temperature. I was sick, too. I arrived in Germany with a high of 42 degrees, which I don't know what Celsius, which is quite a bit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you imagine your death? 

SUBJECT: Did I mention it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you imagine your death? 

SUBJECT: [SIGHS] 

I suppose I just thought I'd fall down and be dead. I think that, not being able to stand anymore, that was all, as far-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What would happen afterwards? To your mother, other people? 

SUBJECT: I don't know that I thought about that in any specific way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were the Germans like? The German guards, the Germans that you encountered in Auschwitz. What were they like to you? What did you feel then? 

SUBJECT: I never saw a German. They were-- well, they were walking past an individual here, and say, you know, the camp Kommandos, the kapos, were all old, long-term political prisoners. They had been there for five and six years, and they were running the camp. 

I saw the Germans at the railway station, and then we had the two soldiers in the train with us, in the wagon with us. And then in Germany, in that camp that I was, there was one German woman. Actually, the guard we had in that camp in Germany were kids. 

They were 14, 15-year-old boys with guns and some-- there was no-- when we were in Germany in '45, there was-- there were no adult men available anymore. This-- there-- they weren't around. The-- all of Germany consisted of women and children and old people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you saying that in Auschwitz, the guards that kept all of these people from running away and everything, were-- 

SUBJECT: No, no. No, no. The-- the supervisory person there. The guards around the perimeter of the wire. I never got near the wire. The wire was electric, and you that, and you weren't allowed to approach it within 60 feet or something like that. So I-- I knew there were watchtowers manned by Germans with machine guns, but I never got near them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? If you can't crawl that 60 feet then what? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was against the rules. Then somebody would beat you up. Throw you back. You know, push you away. There were people who committed suicide by running into the electric wire. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see anyone? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't see that. I heard about it. Thank God I didn't see that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel about the Germans emotionally? On an emotional level? 

SUBJECT: To this-- to this day, I cannot really hear German. I have not changed about that at all. I mean, when I hear the language, it just does something to my insides. They turn over. And the Prussian German, I can take the Austrian, you know? But the Prussian German, I can't-- can't hear. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And this was your mother language. 

SUBJECT: Well, no. My mother language really was Czech. I grew up bilingually, but I never spoke the Prussian German, anyway. If anything, I spoke the Prague German, which is not real Prussian. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The supervisors, people that were-- that were ordering you around or making you uncomfortable, were very often, you indicate they were other Jews, or they were political prisoners. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you deal with that? 

SUBJECT: [SIGHS] 

Well, you know, some of them were better, and some of them were worse. Some of them tried to protect us. Like one-- the roll call didn't work, and one woman-- I don't know whether she-- I-- you know, I was in a haze. I really was. 

One woman made us-- made the whole several hundred people kneel down and somebody-- and raped, kneeling, for this roll call to work. And somebody-- another woman came back, and-- this was all women in the women's camp-- and yelled at her and made us get up again. You know. 

And so-- and the-- we had two kapos with us who came with us to Germany. And then I really felt it-- I mean, they really tried to mediate and help as much as they could. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What does that word you're using, ka something, that came up? 

SUBJECT: Kapo. That's an Italian expression for head. And I don't know how they came to be named that way. It's-- I don't know where that came from. But that's what they were called in camps. 

And even more recently, there was somebody in New York being prosecuted. A kapo from the camps. A woman. They found her just recently. I forget the name. She was living in New Jersey somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you saw any of them today, the woman that made you kneel. 

SUBJECT: I wouldn't recognize them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about if you recognized them. What-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know what I could do, would do. I have not played with these ideas. I have not really, somehow, had dreams of revenge. It's too big. How do you revenge yourself on that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you feel though about people who are tracking down ex-Nazis? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I-- if I can-- could help them, can help them, I certainly would. If I had any information that would help any court, I certainly would. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you-- I'm sorry, go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Think of something, you know you mentioned the family that was-- didn't come back. Any particular members, cousins? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I had two girl cousins that-- you know, we had one-- we lived in the city, and we had an apartment upstairs. And these two girls had-- and this was my mother's brother and his wife. And these two girls lived downstairs, and they were practically my sisters. You know, we did everything together. 

And I more or less lived with them, and they didn't come back. They were younger than I was. And I had kind of a high school sweetheart, a boyfriend, whom I had had for five years, six years by the time I went to camp. And he was a highly gifted individual, musical and academically, and he did everything. He didn't come back. 

Those were the things that hurt, is my, you know, personal. Of course, my mother never got over the loss of her siblings. She really didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And who do you think of, and of those people, how. 

SUBJECT: How do I think of them? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of the three people that you mentioned, who do you think of nowadays? 

SUBJECT: Who do I-- I think of the three of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You think of them? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I mean. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

SUBJECT: What do I think? I mean, my cousins, these two girls, were so young. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are there memories that-? 

SUBJECT: Well, I have photographs of them, somehow, you know? And that still helps to see. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you look at them at their photographs? 

SUBJECT: Well, I go through photographs. I-- I do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then what do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I remember the vacations we used to spend together. We used to go swimming in the river. And I remember this younger girl once doing somersaults when she was naked. [LAUGHS] Which wasn't-- you know. It was kind of funny incident. And I have a photograph of the whole family, and the youngest girl is sitting on her father's back. Yeah. He's lying on his stomach, and she's sitting on his back. And. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you keep photographs when you had nothing to carry anything in? 

SUBJECT: They-- there is. They stayed behind. We left stuff with-- when we left Prague, we-- our cleaning woman took a lot of-- a couple of suitcases with junk, and then we got those back. And that was-- that's where they were. We saved nothing. We came back naked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are there any physical problems that you have sustained now as a result of this kind of abuse? 

SUBJECT: Well, I-- I had a-- I had a slipped disk, which I had operated fairly soon after-- you know, after the war, which is fine now. Other than that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nightmares? 

SUBJECT: Not really. I don't dream, which I know is the one question which nobody believes me. I don't dream. I guess that's the way I cope with my nightmares. I don't dream. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you dreamt before? 

SUBJECT: I assume so. I can't really remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the day of liberation? 

SUBJECT: Well, I do remember that we didn't really have a-- exact-- exact day. At that day, we were being shunted around in open cattle-- in open coal cars. You know, by that time, there was no roofs, and we were in those cars for a week. 

They had-- had to evacuate this labor or this work camp where we were in. And there-- we-- the destination was Mauthausen, which was another extermination camp. But by that time, the railways in Germany didn't work anymore. This was April '45. And they returned us to Theresienstadt. 

And by the time we got there, this was first week of May, '45, there was a quarantine there because there was a lot of typhus and cholera there. Typhoid. And the Red Cross was in charge. And they wouldn't let us leave because there was-- there was a quarantine because of all that sickness, you know? 

These-- they had sent thousands and thousands of people from all parts of Germany back to Theresienstadt. And as a matter of fact, that was the first time I saw these photographs, these-- you know, you see these piles of corpses, the photographs of the pile of corpses. I think everybody has seen by now. 

But I think the much more horrible thing is to see these corpses walk. And that was for the first time I saw them. Because women don't look that way. That somehow men get emaciated. Women don't. 

Women get bloated and other-- I was bloated. But I wasn't emaciated. But these men. And we had no more to eat than they had, the last six months in Germany. We had one soup a day and one slice of bread. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So that was liberation for you? 

SUBJECT: Walking into this typhoid and cholera ridden place was liberation for me. And then they wanted us to stay there. And we were healthy, you know, and the chances that we'd catch something there were really pretty good. So we got Red Cross passes in there. 

And I walk by-- this camp was, at that time, guarded by Czech gendarmes because of the quarantine. So I walked up to a Czech gendarme and said, "do you want to buy cigarettes" in Czech. You know, there were so many different nationalities there, that anybody who could spoke-- speak Czech to a Czech gendarme was in. 

And he said, he said, well, the trip to Prague costs so-- so much and so much. I said, yes. I need two tickets. So he gave me money for two tickets. I gave him a packet of cigarettes. And we joined a laundry crowd that was taking laundry out of the camp, and smuggled our way out of the camp, and went back to Prague. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any other feelings about liberation? 

SUBJECT: It was all such a dream. Such an unreality. I really don't know. Again, when I came to Prague, there was fighting there. The street cars weren't running. 

We took-- went to the Red Cross, and they tried to lodge us in a hotel on the other side of park, and my mother said, we can't walk there. How are we going to get there? So they gave us one closer by. 

And we went in the hotel, and we got two wide beds, with sheets and linens and blankets. And there was hot and warm and running water in the room. And I-- I didn't know it could feel that way. 

And we both got sick. We both were in bed with a high temperature. And there was no public transport and nobody to call and no food. And so then we remembered somebody from the friends we had at the end of the-- and-- with my temperature, I picked myself up and walked over there, because my mother was sicker than I. And she gave us tea and toast. That was liberation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Back to you as a young girl had to walk past soldiers, past men. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Completely shaved, naked. Well, we can't. We have to do the um - but I want the answer. I mean, what did that do to you? Or didn't it? Have you blocked it out so much? 

SUBJECT: No, I really haven't blocked it out. I-- I had a hard time. I remember, after the war, we had men visiting us, and I all of a sudden started fixing my stockings. And lifted my skirt and fixed my stockings. I didn't-- my mother had to tell me that it was inappropriate. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [CHUCKLES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I-- I-- I just want to hold you and tell you I want to be your family. I don't want you to be alone. I just don't. That's just how I feel. I just don't. I can't stand that you do feel like that. Really. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. I appreciate it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: I-- and I think I've pretty much covered what there is to say. I don't think anymore details would be interesting. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Maybe you can tell us how people can cope with something like this and not be-- I don't know. I mean, she's just-- I mean, I've always-- I've just known it was very [INAUDIBLE]. 