[LONG TONE SOUND] INTERVIEWER: Your name, where you were born. 

SUBJECT: My name is Jake Pepper born in Poland. Koniecpol, a small town. My father was a tailor. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? What year? 

SUBJECT: 1915. It's already in the progress. 

INTERVIEWER: And your-- 

SUBJECT: My father was a tailor. We got eight children, and he worked very hard all his life, from 5 o'clock in the morning 'til 12 o'clock at night to make ends meet. And he try-- when I got eight years old, he trained me right away to go to the trade, to help him out-- his financial burden. And I was not education-- not of anything, and I see that the responsibility kind lies on my shoulders. 

INTERVIEWER: You were the oldest? 

SUBJECT: I was, though, the second from the oldest. My sister was older. She-- she got killed, too. But that's the way I started out that trade, and particular, my father was a very, very good tailor. And he is a good teacher. Told us the right thing to do, and which always was in our mind to do the right thing. He said if you make a suit for a penny over a dollar, make it right or don't make it at all. So we brought up in that way, and keep the family together, which we respect him. Very grateful, because he was a very smart man. People came to him for ideas. What-- for divorces or whatever circumstances comes out, he was kind of a guy that you can rely on. 

And later on-- 

INTERVIEWER: And you work, making suits? 

SUBJECT: I work with him to making suits, right away. 

INTERVIEWER: What was a regular day like for you? 

SUBJECT: For me, the regular day, like his. 6 o'clock in the morning. 

INTERVIEWER: What will you do in the morning? 

SUBJECT: I get up. 

INTERVIEWER: And? 

SUBJECT: And I wash myself and go to-- to the job-- to work. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] that was the first priority. [INAUDIBLE] He put down the towels, the [INAUDIBLE], and he was very religious. You know, Europe they own lots of those You cannot-- on Saturdays he took me to the shul by the hand. And that's the way we know about it. We respect him. And he-- and he talk something we got to listen. When he buys-- when he does something decide to make-- buy us some material. He did not ask if I like it or not. He liked it to be. If he likes it then we like it too. 

So really my mother and she is busy taking care of all the children. You know and-- and that's what she's raising till on and on and on and on. The bigger I got, the more I got experience, the more I was involved in this financial burden. I tried to see that how quicker to make the garment. How quicker to-- to see that isn't the right way. And you know, technology like the saying I find other ways. 

INTERVIEWER: How big was the town? What kind of town was it? 

SUBJECT: The town was a 55,000 Jews in the town where I was a boy and worked. Because my father was born in a small town, but later on when he saw there is no future for the kids, he moved himself to the big city. And he left the wife with the children in the small town. And through somebody he gives money to she should take care of herself till he find room in the big town. And so then we moved in the big city. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you when you moved? 

SUBJECT: I was about eight years old. Eight years old so. 

INTERVIEWER: So before the war? You went a shtetl. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. So that's what I know till the end of it. He always taught us the right way. Then-- 

INTERVIEWER: There were 55,000 Jews. And how many non-Jews? 

SUBJECT: In Czestochowa 

INTERVIEWER: How many non-jews? 

SUBJECT: Oh. There was three times more. You know, the Jews were always the minority. Was 55,000 Jews. A a very nice city, which was beautiful. It was beautiful to live on it. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember pictures of it, what it looked like? 

SUBJECT: The city? Oh. Yeah. You know-- 

INTERVIEWER: I don't know. 

SUBJECT: A big, a big nice downtown with trees, parks, and the street. It was a beautiful city. Nice stores, was nice clothing stores, nice shoe stores. Was market every Tuesday and Friday. People live there that way. Till I became bigger and bigger and bigger we lived already in formals. Then I was already older, 15 years old. I was older. 

And I was already the most important man to his help. Because I was kind to provide or work. I used to take away his carving. I used to take away everything to take out his headache, like say. And 16 years or 17 years old I was already a full tailor. And my youngest brothers after me would run the shop by ourselves. And my father would take away all the work, what he used to do, we took it away from him. He just did the cutting. You know? And it was hard for eight children to support. And he had to work day and night. 

So fact is in 1930-- before 1939, when the war broke out, we sent him away even for vacation. 

INTERVIEWER: You sent father away? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We sent him away to vacation. But the bosses what they gave out us the work did not know that my father on vacation. Why? Because if they would know that we are going to handle the suits then he doesn't have no confidence that is going to be right. So while he was away we make him the all suits. And he give-- my father get back he didn't even know. He said lately you're giving out nice work. So he was very pleased with it. So we really happy. And then what happened? 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother? 

SUBJECT: My mother was only a housewife, to take care of the whole thing. She was busy with the children, you know, cooking and washing. Sundays she washed all the clothes, you know, of all the children, cooking and everything else. And that's it. In 1939, Hitler came in and then started out. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see in the beginning? 

SUBJECT: In 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Well, 1939, when Hitler came in, when Hitler gave an ultimatum to Czechoslovakia and they said that we need to go to Poland and he should let us go, out the corridor, you know, to go to Poland from Czechoslovakia. Poland said we not even going to give you one boat. So next hour, the Germans was-- was in-- in the city. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you remember it for you? What did you hear, see, as the war began? 

SUBJECT: I hear right away the airplanes going low, bombing all around. The Polish the Polish government start even to-- to take to the army, to close. They have no chance. They even have no chance to put on the clothes in the army. The Germans will see it. So we escaped to that town for 30 miles where my father was born. And over there the whole family run like, you know, running like day and night. In the meantime, the Germans come in in the millions. They came in, they surround the whole thing. And they came in that shtetl too. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember them coming in? 

SUBJECT: Oh. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you see? 

SUBJECT: I see a guy who was a retarded boy. And the Germans ask him some questions, where to go to the Jewish agency, or something. He made fun of them. He was retarded. They shot him through the hand. When he shot him through the hand he start to cry. He make he's hollering. And over there, is right away our synagogue. You know? 

Nobody could go out help him because we were hiding and looking through the window what happens. In the meantime, was a big market over there, you know, like in the small towns, was a big market. And they settle up the whole trucks and stay there. We went out from that house and they chased up everybody from the houses, the Germans. 

We went seven miles after that, which we didn't have nothing to eat. We find some carrots on the-- on the field. Or we find a chicken, or we find something, that we kill and we eat it. This-- this took six, seven days till settle down. And we went back to our big city in Czestochowa And we went back into Czestochowa everything was gone. They robbed everything. We have got nothing left. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- do you remember coming back and what you saw? What you found? 

SUBJECT: What I found is dead dead people around, or wherever you want to see. The Germans surrounding every house and everything like that. And they established a quiet. Notices to be quiet down and to calm down and everything like that. They didn't start up right away to say like killing the Jews. They just settled up for weeks and so on, until we make everything living like that. Then finally they-- they start to make a big ghetto. When they start-- 

INTERVIEWER: How-- how did they start? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: I remember like for instance, Jews used to live like all around, surrounding, suburbs and everything. So they made the law all the Jews, whatever they lived in-- 

INTERVIEWER: How do you know about this law? 

SUBJECT: The law? There was a notice. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the notice? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They said all the Jews surrounding have to come in-- in that place. Why? Because for instance, we had four rooms. We cannot no live no more than four rooms. We got to live one room and share four families in the four rooms. There was no more privacy. That's what happened. And that's the way we lived all the way. 

We went to burg-- The people in the ghetto was a was you could buy for two You could do something, help yourself, all other ways. Was not so hard because was a Jewish community. The Germans need some people to go to work. And we-- we go to work. We come back with bread. We had priority to stay in the line to get our bread. And that's the way it is. But and now you want to know about them before the ghetto. The big ghetto liquidation is day after Yom Kippur-- 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

SUBJECT: 1942. Think the day after Yom Kippur, September-- 

INTERVIEWER: You had been in the ghetto for a year? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: One year? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. '41-- '41 '42, two years. But when the ghetto Yom Kippur, they let us pray. Whatever we praying, they let us pray. Nothing happened. We come home, nothing happened. In 7:00 in the morning, loudspeakers with horns talked in Jewish, German, in Polish "Alle austreten zehn minuten" 

10 minutes time you have to be out. You don't know where you go, what they want to do, whatever they want to do. You don't know nothing about. Was a panic. 

Because we lived in a four floor apartment. and all of them was Jews. And they come with-- with rifles. Out-raus-raus-raus-raus-raus for one block around the corner was a metallurgy you know, they made metal over there, which was a good, big, big place. So six Germans, the Gestapo, lined up the people. Where, what, I don't know. I lined up with my mother, with my father, with my brothers all together. It was a mish-mosh anyway because you don't know that time what happen. Because there was screaming and hollering. This child got lost. And everybody was looking for somebody. 

In the meantime, the Germans the Germans take left, one left, one right. My sister had a baby. She was three-- three years old. She said, give up the baby. 

INTERVIEWER: Who said? 

SUBJECT: My sister had a baby. Give up the baby. She said she won't give up. 

INTERVIEWER: Who said that to her? 

SUBJECT: The Gestapo. The Gestapo with the line, he make the selection. He said, give up the baby. She said-- 

INTERVIEWER: You watched that? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I watched that and see in front of my eyes. And everything and she said no. So she took her away with the baby together. So one was left, one was right. I was already on the left. Because the left means to go to Treblinka. Now we know. Because that time we didn't know what happened at Treblinka. Who knew what a Treblink is. This was the crematoriums where they sent away [INAUDIBLE]. So when I made a suit four or five weeks before. I made a suit and I show the pass. I show the pass. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Tepper, everything is important. Everything-- 

SUBJECT: What-- that's what I come to that stage now. 

INTERVIEWER: You're going to fast. Look, it's the morning. People are rounded up. 

SUBJECT: I said-- At 7:00 in the morning-- 7:00 in the morning and they after Yom Kippur we all told to get out from the apartments with bullhorns in Jewish and in Polish and in German. So while we were going over there, people, my father, and mother, and my brothers, we got to be separated. Because the Germans chasing to the line, to stay in the line. We cannot keep ourselves in one package. So we really did not see already each other at that particular moment. So what I remember is when I already was to put to the left-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who put you to the left? 

SUBJECT: The Gestapo point to me-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe who it was? 

SUBJECT: He was a big, tall, like murderer he was looking. And he pushed everybody. And he said left. Or links, links. You cannot talk and explain nothing. Links, links. I saw already I am to the left. So at that point, I don't no my family. I see all the people in the same way. They have no time to explain. There are other people have passes. 

They turn down a path. They don't want to look at it. Happens I was the lucky guy, which he was really looking on my pass, which I showed him that I work for General from the Luftwaffe, Stefens. So he knew that general and he said, rechts. So I was keeping away from the left to the right. And then everybody went in, in that metalworking, in that factory. In this factory we all go get it over there together. 

INTERVIEWER: You were all-- you were on the left, on the way to the train. 

SUBJECT: Left was to the train, this means to go to Treblinka. The right is to the concentration camps, which we find that out. We didn't know at that time what left is Treblinka. But in the inside was already dark because was no light. And I start when I came in to holler where is my brother Shlamic? Where Berken? Where is Yentl? Or where is Shamshu? Nobody else had one brother answer me. And I know he is here. 

INTERVIEWER: On the right side. 

SUBJECT: On the right side. So they gathering for the day. They make a selection, say for instance, about 6,000. Because they was in the ghetto maybe about 50,000. They couldn't make it in one day. It took weeks till they straighten up themselves to liquidate this ghetto. So at that-- that time we are already they are organized to send us away to a factory, which they was a factory where they made leather, you know, leather for shoes. So they start to rebuild that factory. And we put us-- over there they put us in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think about happened to you family when you only found your brother? 

SUBJECT: Well, when I find my brother I already kept with him together and keep-- kept with him all the time. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think of the rest of your family? 

SUBJECT: Of the rest of the family you didn't think nothing. You know they are gone. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew? 

SUBJECT: You knew. Because we lived in that stage what you see that the panic was so big and they took them away then we know that they went to the train. Treblinka we didn't know. We find out later on. We find out because people escape. 

INTERVIEWER: So what do you think happened to them? 

SUBJECT: They took them over there. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think then happened to them? 

SUBJECT: I was positive sure they killed them. They exterminate them. That's what I was sure. I know-- I knew already I lost them. Because if they would have live, they would be in that right hand side, in that factory. And if they are not in the right hand side then this means they are gone. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the last time you saw mother, father-- 

SUBJECT: I saw the last time when-- when we stood in the line. We kissed each goodbye. And then they didn't let us even stay together, the Germans. The Gestapo was against even kissing goodbye or anything. Just disappear. And that's it. And I couldn't think of anything else. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember your father last? 

SUBJECT: My father I did not see it because he was a-- he was away and I can see he was a short, little fellow. And I didn't see him and I didn't hear nothing from him since all the time I didn't hear from. I never heard of him. So that's what was about the liquidation of the ghetto. Then they put us over there to work in that factory. They give the work according they build up the factory. They demolished the old factory. They want to make a new factory for nomination. All right? So the German came there a [INAUDIBLE]. He's a foreman, a German SS. 

INTERVIEWER: What does he look like? 

SUBJECT: A murderer. 

INTERVIEWER: What does he look like? 

SUBJECT: Fat. He looked like about 230 pounds. He looked rough, tough. And anything you could mention, he killed even a policeman with a hammer over the head, this man in cold blood. He was a good soccer game player. And I know the father our store from materials. The best materials of the suits. When I was that time in that he took six months to settle up the work. 

He gave me a ceiling to chop down a ceiling he gave me a hammer. I'm a delicate man. I'm a tailor. How could I work with the heavy work with a hammer. The hammer is was heavier than I am. He ate good steaks. He is strong. He the hammer down. And he-- and he give a punch and boom comes everything down. I not can knock down. It bangs me back in my head. 

So if I didn't make that [INAUDIBLE] he mark with a pencil. Today you have to-- to make that-- that gun. I didn't do anything. I didn't get the soup either. You know? So I had to do something else. And he did-- I didn't eat this soup the whole time. And I couldn't chop it down. And I got beaten, and he give me another-- another work. So when he gave me another work, stones to carry, stones to the buildings and everything like that. So finally, Mr. Rosenberg, William Rosenberg, which you know, he used to work before 1939 he used to work in a factory where they make tracks. It's to go from that camp to the other camp is to walk maybe about eight miles. 

So finally, they came from the other factory ask for 200 people. You know? Whoever wants to go there. So as Rosenberger knew that place, so and I was his friend, I stick with him, which my brother this brother this brother was two. And he had even a good job. But if I go seven miles away and Rosenberg is our friends I don't want to keep him out. So I took him with me. Which if I would know I wouldn't take him anyway. Because he got killed later on. So I worked over there for nice days. Because of this factory we worked over there, you know, the tracks. 

Then they took us like you go of skiing to chop stones on their little carriages. You know, the little carriages where you go skiing too? They took us over there with carriages and a wire So our whole day we loaded in stones, chopped stones. And the way back. So we go on and off, on and off, every day. We chop stones. 

So at that time the ghetto was still going on with the liquidation of the rest of the people. So not six weeks later the ghetto was already finished. They still have remnants to send the rest of the people to Treblinka, which they was over there, people what they supposed to go to Treblinka, in a special place. Whoever is left, they call them they keep them. 

INTERVIEWER: They gathered the people. 

SUBJECT: They gathered the people around until they find a transport so they will ship them to that place in Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER: Those are the last people-- 

SUBJECT: The last people. 

INTERVIEWER: --in the ghetto. 

SUBJECT: Right. So the last people were there. So the Germans said in this factory where I work is the heavy buildings. You know, you've got to be tall. You've got to know carpentering. You've got to know everything. So the commission from the Germans went over there in that place where they supposed to go to Treblinka. 

They said who was a carpenter? Even somebody who was not a carpenter and they just want to get out. He said I am a carpenter. I'm a toolmaker. Anything. So at that time they take 100 people out. Even we came home from that place with the stones and everything at night they took us in another place and they exchange. 

INTERVIEWER: They took some of your people-- 

SUBJECT: Exchange. 

INTERVIEWER: Put them into the-- 

SUBJECT: They brought these people from that place but they should go to Treblinka you know, the exchange. So they took my brother and William Rosenberg. 

INTERVIEWER: And William? 

SUBJECT: With the whole 104 people because he was short. They want tall people. I was tall. My brother was short. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember how they selected? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe in night what-- how they selected? 

SUBJECT: They came. The Germans said to the foreman. The name is Landau. He said, you select me 104 people. So he know this guy. He know this guy. He can do it. So my brother was short. He said you go. Rosenberg was short. You go. He couldn't make the 104, 104 people. 

So he took and chopped it off to 104 no matter what he is short or whether he was tall. The German don't want to have no patience to wait till this foreman will select for him. So at that point they replace. That 104 people went to Treblinka. And these people remain in the shop. And this was the replacement. So at that time, when they replaced at night they said this 104 people that they sleep. You know, we slept over there where horses was. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me did you know-- did those people know where they were being taken? 

SUBJECT: These people at that point they knew that they going take it-- they've been-- they've been trapped. They know they've been trapped. Because when they took him in that place of replacement to ghetto was already empty. And there is six months the ghetto empty not to show one visible man walking, which they took Rosenberg the 104 people in that same place. 

And this Mr. Rosenberg they had another two days to be shipped. Rosenberg said that night to my brother, "Shlamic" he said, "I'm not going to be here. You hold me by the jacket. Because I'm going to escape." Rosenberg opened up the wall and bricks and he jumped roofs, tunnels. And he, three days later, what do you know, I happened to see a dream. I said, "He came to the factory." No combed hair, white like a piece of chalk. 

He wasn't not even he was tired and everything. And I said to myself what do I do now? We come to people when we go home from work. So I said, "Here it is my coat, which I haven't got another coat to cover myself with night. It was November. And you going to sleep in this factory till somebody is going to escape. So you would be replaced. 

And that's exactly the was it was. After three days two brother in laws escaped. So I said, "Rosenberg, if you're going to go now in between the group there will be only one escape. They squeal it. Mr. Rosenberg, austragen. 

INTERVIEWER: Who squealed it? Do you know? 

SUBJECT: I don't-- I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Somebody told the Germans. 

SUBJECT: Somebody told the Germans that he switched in to that factory illegal. How he comes in because a Jew has to be guarded. How he switched in that factory? So finally, when he said austragen. He said, how you came over here the pfeiffe. It was a big assessment. 

The dog was big as a shepherd with a big horse. We know that he is gone. I would say a million-- a million dollars he's gone. He said, "How did you come in in that place?" Well, he has an excuse. Said well, I worked here before. And I don't want the Germans should lose production. He got somehow snitched it out from him that he happens to say listen, he said, "For now you all right. If next time, you're going to escape you're going to be shot." 

INTERVIEWER: Rosenberg said that he had run away and come back? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He ran away. 

INTERVIEWER: That's what he said. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He said that he is came over there. He run away. That's all. So at that moment-- 

INTERVIEWER: He came back to help the German production. 

SUBJECT: He had an excuse to get himself alive. so he said he came because he knew that he is important, which he's important. 

INTERVIEWER: To help the Germans win the war. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He is important. He made an excuse. He made an excuse. So he said, well, if once more it's going to happen-- 

INTERVIEWER: What happen what? 

SUBJECT: If he's going to run away again. 

INTERVIEWER: I see. 

SUBJECT: If you're going to run away again you're going to get shot. And my brother that time when he ran away from that place he was chicken. He was afraid at night. And he remained over there. And he went to Treblinka. And that's what happened. Until up now he is here, Rosenberg. And this is my best friend. 

And finally-- finally, after he ran away we still go six miles back and forth to work. You know? We went to the ghetto for de-licing. You know? Because they have over there a mobile place. We-- we have to go they get-- at that time they start to make a small ghetto. From that big ghetto they made a small ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was what month? What year? 

SUBJECT: This was 1943. The small ghetto was already '43. Which people were not groups to work. And they bought stuff illegal. You know, they snitched him some food. I still was over there in that place where I built. Because I still remain in that place. So was a horrible thing. It was a horrible thing. 

And then in 1943 I happened to go to my brother to visit him because some day over there the farmers they shot it off. In that Rakov. They called-- they called the camp Rakov. A factory, big factory So they shut down and I went to my brother's house. I was my brother's house for visiting and I didn't know what's going to happen in 12:00 noon. 

The Germans came with the boots, the Gestapo. And he said, aufmachen. And he knocked that door. And we are laying under the bed, which my brother went to work in the morning and he locked, he put a lock in the outside. And you could imagine it's not a lock that you buy over here. It was a little lock. It really-- it's easy to knock it off. 

But he knocked it knocked it seven times and he did not open the door. Well, it was quiet and everything was quiet. He went away. I opened the door. And we were saved. When we were saved and my brother was at the-- in the camp where he was working there, I went over there to meet a group. And he kissed me and everything. He was happy that I am safe. And 

INTERVIEWER: Now, there was something about a boy-- before that the boy that stole some potatoes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: When? 

SUBJECT: This was in 1943 but it was still over there in that same factory. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Happened that every day came a horse and buggy with potatoes, with carrots and everything. And the same pfeiffe with the dog saw that he is loaded. 

INTERVIEWER: Saw who was loaded? 

SUBJECT: The boy was loaded with something swollen up the pants. He got potatoes there and carrots. You know, he walked like-- like Boris Karloff. He went like that. He said-- 

INTERVIEWER: What? How old was the boy? 

SUBJECT: The boy was about 20 years old. Boy was 20 years old and his name was Viner. He's in Argentina now. And he said he opened up the ropes, cut the ropes. He opened up the ropes and all the carrots and the tomatoes fall out. Then he said to the dog, biss den Juden. And he went at that boy. 

INTERVIEWER: Bite this Jew. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Bite the Jew. And he went and he bit him. He was black and blue. He still had-- I don't know how he did it. But I-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did the rest of the people do at that moment? 

SUBJECT: Well, at that moment was looking you cannot go near. You can-- you can only look. Because he wants to show if you steal something that's the punishment you're going to get. And this dog was a shepherd, a big shepherd, you know. And he bite him to pieces. So I helped him, you know, nurse him, something, give him food and everything. And he survived. He survived and he is now in Argentina. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he say something? Did you say something to him? Did he say something to you after that? 

SUBJECT: Well, he was unconscious though. He was unconscious said [INAUDIBLE]. He was bitten up all the way around. You imagine when he said to him bite the Jew. You could imagine how he made from him something. He was terrible looking. Terrible. That's what I remember. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there somebody-- were people shot? 

SUBJECT: No. Nobody got shot. Because every day the people have got nothing to live. They got to steal even they knew they going to get caught. But to survive you do anything. You know? Some people did not get caught. You know? But he-- he loaded up too much. You know? And he loaded up too much was showing. If he would take some little bit in the pocket, he would be OK. But this way he really-- 

INTERVIEWER: You mentioned people escaping. What happened when people escape, what happened to the others? 

SUBJECT: The people the others when they escape for instance, a lot of people escape. And they didn't know who it was. There's not documents or something. So the German take 20 groups and made to 20 in a group. And said, di bist verantwortlich. You are responsible for this 20. 

So in 8 o'clock in the morning you know, they go to work. They spread around the factory. When they spread around the factory you don't know where they are. You cannot be responsible for this kind of situation. But they don't want to know. They said you were responsible. Two brother in laws escaped. You know? And he was the one responsible, Brandis. 

INTERVIEWER: One man was responsible. 

SUBJECT: One. This member. Two brother in laws. But they want to show five o'clock at night when we hit to the gate, when he counted us they took away that boy. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? 

SUBJECT: The Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: They took away whom? 

SUBJECT: Brandis, the one which is responsible to the gate. And they have a firing squad of three. And they shot him on the gate. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember? 

SUBJECT: I saw it. I saw it. I saw the gate. And then he say rechts um! Like in the army. And we go. But we thought-- we saw because why. Because we thought maybe-- maybe he makes a fake to you know to scare us. 

INTERVIEWER: A trick. 

SUBJECT: A trick. So and then he said rechts um and we go. We go but we hear the shot. We hear the shot and we went. No chance to looking. But we saw he stayed by the wall. And the three guard with the rifles, the SS they shot him. But when we came in the morning back to work and comes to the gate we got-- we go want to see if he really didn't trick us. He did not trick us. He was dead. 

INTERVIEWER: You during the night you wanted to believe that he was not dead. 

SUBJECT: That's right. I-- I wanted to believe that they faked. But was really in the morning when we came in-- in the gate first we looked on the right hand side. And I saw him dead. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think then? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think of these two guys when they escaped and they knew they said that before that anyone from this group, from these groups, you were dealing with fire. And don't you try to escape. But in this time in situations where you live they all selfish. If they have a chance to escape they escape. No matter what. 

And they did. And what do you know what happened, a day later they came back. He said kill me, do whatever you want. And we hit them really hard. We hit these boys really hard. Because there-- there is no escape. There is not where they could go. This way they already in the group. They already better off. Because where you going to go. 

So what he did he put a life on the line and-- and he didn't accomplish anything with himself. That's how we lost our men 20 years old. And that's what we have to live with. So when we went, ehh-- well we quieted down. And we go-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone try to escape after that? 

SUBJECT: No. Not particularly in that moment. We did not nobody wants to try no more to escape. From that point nobody escapes. but when they the ghetto, the small ghetto, you know? They was a house with people living there. And in the ground they made guns. And nobody knew. And somebody squealed. I don't know who but somebody squealed. 

So the Gestapo came in the loads. Trucks and trucks. And they made a panic. Everybody out. And there it was over there in Poland there was a little market that they buy chickens and everything. And that's where they make that little ghetto with barbed wires. And you know, who work in very bad circumstances they lived. 

And when they heard they make-- they making ammunition on the ground they wanted to take out all the people from the ghetto. They wanted to take the whole little ghetto. In that little ghetto in that little house lived a friend which-- which he is now in Brazil. Live there. 

And he stay and they call his name. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] austragen! I stayed in to him and I hold his arm and squeeze him as much as I can. The other guys knew him. He said, "Why don't you go? Account of you we're going to get killed." And I said, don't say nothing. Keep your mouth shut. Don't say nothing. And he was he was shivering like anything. He lived over there in that in that house. And what do you know, they take a lot of people away on a truck to the cemetery and they shot them. 

INTERVIEWER: People from that house? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Where they lived in that building. In other words, the German say if you know why didn't you say? So this was a penalty for these people where they lived in that house. And because I didn't want to let go that boy he is alive. I get letters from him too. So when we went over there to the factory in [INAUDIBLE] where they make the-- the factory where I work on the ceilings. At that time they make already barracks for women separate and for men separate. In other words, you cannot go to your wife to see. The wife could not go to you to see. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's wait for a second. Why-- who was making the ammunition? How did they get the material? 

SUBJECT: The underground. 

INTERVIEWER: What underground? 

SUBJECT: The polish are. The Polish [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] You know, they have organizations. But they are connections within. And they are coming in and going out. There was bribery with the Germans too. It was a lot of bribery too. They dress themselves at night. They go out they dress themselves as Germans, as gestapo. 

INTERVIEWER: Jews? 

SUBJECT: Jews dress themselves as Germans. They brought in cows. They were brought in pigs. They brought in everything to eat. You have in the ghetto a lot of food too. Because they had connections. You know, there was the party. There was a party but they are underground. What they call the partisan. And they are working with them. In fact, I didn't even know about it. It was very secret. I don't know who squealed it. but it was squealed. You know? At that time they liquidate the ghetto. And I went over there to the place-- 

INTERVIEWER: So there was a Jewish underground in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: That was preparing arms? 

SUBJECT: They got radios. They got radios. They got [INAUDIBLE]. They got papers. They got outside help. They came in outside a lot of things went on in the ghetto, the small ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know anything about it? How do you know that there were-- 

SUBJECT: We, we knew because we heard about it. I didn't see. I couldn't see. Because this is very secret. But later on we find it out. They hanged this-- this man, the leader of the underground, was Zilberberg. And they hang him by the feet. They caught him. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember how he was arrested? 

SUBJECT: I did not see. Because when they liquidate the ghetto to the marketplace he was still in there, on the inside. And then we went to that place where we supposed to go in the camp to live over there. That's why I didn't-- I did-- I did not know. But we heard about it that he was because they buried him. Some of the people buried him. And we find that out in the ghetto. When that to the small ghetto that they did at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you know about this activity that you're mentioning cows were bought in, ammunition, Jews were dressed as gestapo coming in. How did you know all that? 

SUBJECT: They told us. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? What? When? 

SUBJECT: Our people. 

INTERVIEWER: When? Where? 

SUBJECT: 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I did not see. But they have connections. They had connections to do this kind of work. You know, they was. How did we get meat? How we get in anything? We made shoes over there. We made suits. We go materials all from the outside. We-- they got connections. And there was a lot of bribery with the Germans. But they took bribes. And that's the way it went on in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: So when you had meat and you had suits, you must have known something. 

SUBJECT: I particularly didn't know nothing. But I see they were-- there was. They was a lot of black market thing going on. They have something help themself. There was connections to the outside. Like for instance, Mr. William Rosenberg, he went outside work from the small ghetto. When he came back he get a briefcase with meat and I stood on the barbed wires and he said, Jack, you are there? 

Bingo. Over the barbed wires. I grabbed the satchel. Got a food satchel of meat. Which he was afraid to go through the gate. They're going to catch him. I mean, he was not the only one. That all come loaded. I guess they-- they had diamonds or gold and they wherever they worked they bribed that German whatever, he was watching him. And they made up between each other. That's how you came in. They did a lot of things like that. 

INTERVIEWER: You know, the way you describe it there were ways of living so that when somebody was really executed this was almost a surprise. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: You were shocked that a man can be executed. 

SUBJECT: I was really shocked. Everything what went on. And then when they liquidated the small ghetto, there was nothing, nobody left. 

INTERVIEWER: What about this liquidation? 

SUBJECT: 1943, there was no one. They bombed. The Germans bombed that building where they find ammunition. They bombed everything. Fact is, I got pictures from my father, from my mother, from my all family, and I put it in in the back of the chair. And I tape it down. In case, I didn't know I'm not going to come back. I just thought this for a while. In the meantime, that's it. We-- we-- we-- we are no way to go back. And they took us to the camp where they separated the men and the women in barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: They took you-- 

SUBJECT: To the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: How? Can you describe being taken from the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: They take us from the small ghetto to the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: By walking. 

INTERVIEWER: Walking. Yes. 

SUBJECT: By walking. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people were walking? 

SUBJECT: Oh. Was about maybe over a thousand. Over thousand. In the meantime, while the ghetto was still on, they still wanted to make-- to live there where the concentration camp is. So they have the people in one place. You know? They go to work. They go right away. Then I have to walk. So they make barrack's like in the army. Barrack of four floors is like 18 inches a floor. You've got four floors. We lay out-- we sleep on one day, maybe about 70 people like herring. No, no mattresses. No straw. No nothing. We-- that's the way we lived. That's the way-- 

INTERVIEWER: I still want to-- 1,000 people were rounded up one day and walked. 

SUBJECT: To go to work. To the-- to the-- to the place where the factory is. 

INTERVIEWER: No. You said there were-- this was the liquidation. 

SUBJECT: The liquidation of the small ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe it. What did you see? 

SUBJECT: What I see-- 

INTERVIEWER: From every detail. 

SUBJECT: What I see-- I see when they-- when they liquidate they killed a lot of people in the small ghetto. They have the trucks put it down to the cemetery. The Germans took the people whatever they lived and have buildings, whatever they see sick people, whatever they see people that they have not like to work, you know, old people, wherever they hide it, they put them on the truck. And put them on the cemetery. And they shot them. And there remains-- but there is already after the commission went through, there were maybe about 20 Gestapos. With dogs. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Look you in the eyes, how good you are. Show you the fingers. Show you the hands. And if not, you go too. You got to be very, very good. Described by them if you could go to that camp. You were the lucky one. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were standing in front of the Gestapo, and the dogs, what was on your mind? 

SUBJECT: What I stay in that mind when the dog stay in the middle of the market, this means we were not to touch. They did not come close to me. But my mind is we going too. We're going to do the death. Because what happened is that time that two partisans had two guns and they shot two Germans to death. 

They are now in the history. That's all what you needed at that time. So they make-- want to make it fast. They took all these trucks. With the dead. They-- they got killed too. You know? And they took to the cemetery. And we went to work in the concentration camp. 

At that time, my wife was over there and my friend Rosenberg. My friend Rosenberg was not there anymore. Because he was sending away to Bensheim to, to Germany to another camps. That time he got sick and they caught him and he went through another-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let's stay with you. A thousand people, the remains of the small ghetto are marched off. Where? How far? 

SUBJECT: Seven miles. Seven miles where that place where I was before. Where the horse barn was. The horse barn where I escaped from that hospital, in that place. You know, where I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: I don't know anything. 

SUBJECT: I-- I was in the hospital, escape. This is the place where I been. We went back to that place. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell the incident of escaping from hospital? 

SUBJECT: Before hospital I tell you. We were-- 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't tell me. Hold on. Mr. Tepper, what you told me in April-- 