JULIANA: This is [INAUDIBLE] 

[INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: The way I'm gonna start the interview-- 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I might as well tell you now is-- 

JULIANA: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: If you were to first start with your name-- 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old you are. 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where you were born. 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the town, the country. 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then-- where you were born in a second. 

JULIANA: OK. Should I start-- start now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have to speak a little louder. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We do? Oh, we've been told that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. 

CREW: Um another thing I'm running into is I'm running into your [INAUDIBLE], and I'm running into controls. I need [INAUDIBLE] OK? Thank you. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. Yes. [INAUDIBLE] I have is right there. Julia [INAUDIBLE] Is your first name Julia or Juliana? 

JULIANA: Well, my name is Juliana. But you could call me Julia. That's all right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, OK. 

JULIANA: Actually, my real name is Juliana. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. I saw when you signed in-- 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was Juliana. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are Juliana-- 

JULIANA: Ripp 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you say it [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: My name is Juliana Ripp I was born in the Novi Sad. I'm 55 year old. And Novi Sad is a small city. And I enjoy living there very much before we got occupied under Hungarians in 1941-- they-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your family was-- [INAUDIBLE] brothers, sisters? 

JULIANA: Oh, I had one sister. Her name was Vera. My maiden name is [INAUDIBLE]. And my father was a businessman. And my mother was a housewife. We lived a very plain life. You know, in the place where I was born, Novi Sad, it's a small city, but very nice and very enjoyable. We lived very plain, very ordinary life. My father used to go to work. He'd come home at night. And my mother was a housewife home with two kids. 

My sister had a very unfortunate accident in 1940. She went bicycle riding with three of her friends. And in Novi Sad, there was very few cars at that time. She was in a highway, and the car hit her. And she died. She was 17 year old. That was very bad [INAUDIBLE] (CRYING) I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you were already-- 

JULIANA: I was 13 year old at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when the war began, you were already in the midst of a tragedy. When the war began, you already had a tragedy. 

JULIANA: Yes, I did have a tragedy. That was a very big tragedy which I didn't think I could ever forget. They never found the guy. Anyway, she died. She was 17. I was 13. A year later, the Hungarians occupied us. I was in the high school at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me just a minute. Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

JULIANA: Yeah. I was in high school at that time under the Hungarians. Uh I could feel it already then, that the Jews were prosecuted. I went to school. And in school, there was only certain percentages for Jews that could go. So I guess I was a good student, and they allowed me. There was 2% in each place they could have Jewish people to finish it. And that was in 1941. 

In 1942, I graduated from high school, which is only four years in Europe. It's not like here. And-- thank you. Sorry. And uh I could feel it right then and there, the persecution against the Jews. We were occupied under Hungarians. And they used to say also, you see, she's Jewish. And she shouldn't really be in this class because really they don't like the Jews. 

But I guess I was determined. I wanted to finish the school. I wanted to go to further education also. But they wouldn't allow me. I belonged to the Zionist organization at that time, which helped me a lot to be together with the Jewish kids and to enjoy-- enjoy the youth, whatever I had, to forget about uh hate-- hate of the Jews. 

And uh in 19-- I think it was 1942. I don't remember exactly. There was very bad persecution against the Jews. It was very cold. It was in January. And we were told put the shades down, and nobody look outside. Uh, we didn't know why. We thought it was cold or whatever it was. 

And they were going all of a sudden-- I think it was Thursday, Friday, Saturday, whatever. I don't remember. One day, a Hungarian um all dressed up, whatever he was, a Hungarian guy, three Hungarians with the gun-- and there was one German guy also. They come to our house. There was my father, my mother, and myself. 

And they walked in in the house, started looking in every room. And they says, are you a lousy Jew? If you listen and you don't say anything, nothing going to happen to you. Just obey the rules. And then you're gonna be saved. If not, we're gonna kill you right away. I was-- I don't know-- 14 year old maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you experience at that moment? 

JULIANA: Uh uh fear. I was shaking. I was crying. My mother was crying. My father just looked there, and he says, just keep quiet. And just do as he says. Uh, he says, put your coat on and go. We're gonna take you. So they took us in uh-- first in one backyard. It was very cold in the backyard. And they said, if you behave yourself, nothing gonna happen. They were pushing and tossing and just do as you please. 

You couldn't see nobody outside in the street. Everything was deserted. After Dad had put us in the horse and carriage-- they used to because there was no cars. And they took us in um like a auditorium. There were a lot of other people there, scared and shaking and shivering. We were sitting there maybe for two or three hours. 

And then one Hungarian guy with the gun in there, he shot one in the ceiling. And he says, everybody quiet. And he says, you guys are the good guys. The rest were gone, but we not gonna do nothing to you if you keep quiet and you don't say anything. And just go home. So we went home. We were all scared, and we were all shook up. We didn't know what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know what he meant when he said, you guys are the good guys? 

JULIANA: I had no idea what he meant because I couldn't understand why he says all of a sudden, you are good guys. We're gonna let you go home. The rest were bad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So one minute you're sitting shivering and scared. And the next minute, he said, you guys are the good guys. 

JULIANA: You guys are the good guys. You could go home because we don't need you anymore. We did what we wanted to do, and we don't need you anymore. We couldn't understand what was it. First of all, we were so scared and so upset over it that we didn't even ask questions. There was so much fear. 

And as I-- I could remember as a kid, I was so scared. And I asked my mother. I said, what's the problem? She says, don't even ask question. Just let's go home, and let's speak together. And they let us go home. There was maybe there about-- I don't know-- maybe 100 people or so. 

And we walked home. We went home. And we went home, and we cried. We didn't know what was going on, that was happening, or nothing. The neighbor next door who lived next to my house, she says, oh, you didn't-- it was the Hungarian people. She says, oh, you did come home. How come? I thought they gonna kill you. 

Then after that moment, we uh-- forget [INAUDIBLE]. Had to be more than that. Something must have happened. And then, you know, you talk to people. And the next day-- of course, there was no telephones, no nothing. The next day, we went to-- I went to my aunt with my mother and my father. 

And she said, you know what was happening? All the Hungarians were taken uh to the-- to the sea. And they broke the ice, and they were killing them there. They undressed them naked. And they shot them cold-bloodedly. 

Because the Jews are bad, and we want to get rid of them. We don't want them anymore in this city. The Hungarians and the Germans have a new war-- get rid of all the Jews. That was one terrible, terrible experience as a kid I could remember. I don't think that I could forget it ever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you petrified this moment when you think of it too? 

JULIANA: I'm not petrified. I'm very sad that something like this could happen to Jew-- to a Jew. I feel very hurt, and I feel very-- I don't even know if I'd want to call it bitter. I feel very proud that I'm a Jew, but I feel very sad that something like this could happen to a nation for no reason at all. 

As a kid, I think I have such a-- such a wound in my heart that I don't think I could ever forget it. And I don't think I could ever forgive. Because the people say forgive it. I don't think I could ever forgive. And this hurt will stay in my life all the time. It's a very sad experience to grow up as a 14-year-old because I'm a Jew, I have to suffer. Because I'm a Jew, I have to be punished. 

And as-- as-- when I went back to school-- Monday, Tuesday, whatever the time was after that-- uh my classmates all said, how come you're still alive? Shouldn't you be dead? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: Yes. Yes. You don't deserve to live. You're a Jew. You are a lousy Jew. I said-- of course, I had words. And I said, you have no right to talk like that-- in stronger words. You have no right to persecute me because I'm a Jew. I'm the same person. 

No, you're not. You don't deserve-- you see? They won't even let you go to school because you're a lousy Jew. You shouldn't even be living. You don't deserve to live. It's very, very bad experience. It was very bad experience. And I wanted to finish the school. Was I-- should I call it a quit? I didn't want to. 

And I tried. She says, well, you're not gonna be long here because they're gonna get rid of you anyway. And the days went by. The years went by. And meanwhile, eh after the-- if I remember correctly, after the-- I don't even know what to call it. Persecution? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Pogrom 

JULIANA: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: That Pogrom 

JULIANA: Pogrom right. They took my father. They wouldn't let my father work. They took my father to the um forced labor, the forced labor. He had to wear a um-- a yellow around his-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Band. 

JULIANA: Band with the Jewish star. They forbidded him to work because he was a Jew. So they needed some people to work. So he had to go in the morning. They let him come home at night. But he was working as a forced labor there for-- I don't remember how long. It seemed to me forever. But I couldn't be more than about six, eight months or so. 

Because at that time, it started getting worse. The Germans wanted to take over the whole Novi Sad. So they told the men to work, or uh they had to pay like a ransom for the city that they shouldn't kill the-- the--the-- uh the Germans wanted so much money. Otherwise, they're gonna kill all the men. 

But that didn't work out either. They were working there, and they took the money. And of course, my father got a lot of beating at work as a forced labor there. He used to come home shaking and shivering all the time and being very upset. And the life was worth nothing at that time already. 

But after that-- that was already '43, I believe. I finished high school, wherever I finished. And uh, we live under-- under fear. What do you do now? I couldn't go to school anymore. They wouldn't let me. 

Because a Jew doesn't deserve to go to school. A Jew is not a person. A Jew is uh not a human being. You've gotta kill him. And majority of the people there agreed upon that Jew is not a person. So we lived for that one year-- we lived like nothing. We were afraid to go outside. We were afraid to do anything really. 

My father couldn't get a-- couldn't work anymore. He was in a bad shape. He was very nervous and very shaky. Uh, and we just took it day-by-day doing nothing really, you know, just-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: During that year until the deportation, did you mention your dead sister? 

JULIANA: Did I mention my dead sister? 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the family, was she mentioned? 

JULIANA: Very much, all the time. She lived with me all day, all the time, all the time. I uh-- there was no day we-- we didn't discuss her being-- why the tragic, terrible accident happened, why we are punished so much-- the one tragic accident after another. 

First, her death, which was horrible-- this is 40 years later, and I can't still forget it. It was a terrible, terrible experience. In a matter of two hours, she was dead. And then after the-- when the Hungarians and Germans uh occupied us, the continued fear and uh a terrible life, I could say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me about the beginning of the deportation. 

JULIANA: OK. In 1944-- it was, I think, before Passover, sometime there. Again, a German and a-- and a-- and a-- and a Hungarian come to our house. And they said, get dressed. Leave everything home. And come with us. Just like that. 

They took us to the temple in Novi Sad. There was-- we were walking on the streets, and the people are looking at us to be walking there. Everybody yelling and screaming, it's about time to get rid of the Jews. It's about time to get rid of you guys. Take a gun and shoot them all. Don't even spend time on anything. Just get rid of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were things you remember as you were walking? 

JULIANA: Yes. Yes. So finally, we walked-- it must have been about a-- a mile or so that we walked to the temple. They took us to the temple. And there was a lot of us there-- and nothing. Everybody just talked over. What did we do? How did it happen? Why did it happen? Why are we here? 

You know, comforting each other, crying, and being upset, and being-- I still remember my mother. She was very upset. She says, why do I have such a horrible life? Why do I have to suffer? What did we do? My father was a little stronger. He didn't want to show it, but it was horrible. It was terrible. 

We stayed there for the night. And after the night-- of course, the German and the Hungarian used to come there with the guns and toss us and turn us and hit us. Some people were louder. There was kids crying and whatever. 

Uh keep quiet. If you're gonna be noisy, we gonna shoot you all. If you're quiet, nothing gonna happen to you. It was a-- it was a big mess. The next day, they put us in the train, and they took us to Subotica That's a-- I wasn't very familiar with Subotica 

But they took us to another temple there and uh treated us like animals. There were like-- who knows how many-- I don't know the number. 150, 200, 300 people in one room? They gave us just barely any food, just a piece of bread and water. 

And it was dirty. It was filthy. This is already three days. Nobody took a shower. Nobody could wash themself, brush their teeth. It was a panic. It was terrible, confusing. 

All the time, people come to hit you-- the Hungarians and the Germans, especially Germans. They were even worse. If you were talking, they hit you with the uh rifle or hand or whatever they could take there. Hit the children. 

Anyway, we stayed there for two weeks. We thought that was bad. But that wasn't so terrible as what's coming. After that, they took us in the train and took us to Baja. That's in the Hung-- Hungarian border. Same thing, they treat us there like animal, like pigs. It was terrible. 

After that-- after-- that's four weeks already. We look like uh people who-- it's not even people anymore. You couldn't keep yourself clean. You couldn't do nothing. It was bad. They said-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you-- were you hurt by the physical appearance, that you weren't allowed to be clean? 

JULIANA: I was very hurt for being filthy. And I was very hurt for seeing my parents, how they suffered. My mother was so brokenhearted. She was 48 at the time. She looked like 60. She had no life in herself because she lost her daughter. And now being in this uh ghetto, whatever you like to call it, it's uh-- it was horrible. 

I was heartbroken because of my mother and my father. They looked terrible. They were-- they looked like uh two little old people who have no desire to live. Of course, I was younger. I probably could have taken it better at that time. But it was-- it was very uh depriving. It was very hurting. It was very dirty. I felt like a pig. 

And I used to cry on my mother's shoulder. And I said, why? She said, I can't answer your question. I can't say nothing. I guess because we are Jews. You have to be strong. And if you don't do nothing-- that was the theory-- nobody gonna touch you. You gonna survive. 

After that, they come like, uh you're gonna take the pigs and the horses. This is-- you're-- you're gonna go take a ride on the train. It was uh uh not a regular train. It was for the animals. At that time, I was together with my future mother-in-law. I wasn't married at the time. 

Uh and-- and uh my future to be my sister-in-law, she has two kid-- she had two kids. We're all together. My mother-in-law was a very heavy woman. And it was horrible to look. She was a very sick person. She couldn't walk by herself. She couldn't do nothing with herself because-- to pick her up and put her in the train, I think it was a worse scene than seeing my mother. 

She was very helpless. She couldn't go on the train. They pushed her inside with the guns and beat her. It was terrible. There was two little kids there, my husband's sister's two children. One was nine, and one was six. I adored those kids. They cried. And they said to me, help me. 

It was very sad. (CRYING) It was horrible. It was horrible. I could see them now. Terrible. How they begged for mercy, and nobody would do anything. It was terrible. 

I was 15, 16 at that time. It was horrible. I never could forget it. We finally got into the train-- one on top of the other, crying with each other. The Germans used to come there every so often and hit us with guns, with hands, with anything. 

Says, you not people. Don't cry. You're not gonna live too long anyway. You're gonna all be killed. It took forever to go with the train. I don't know how long. It seemed to me for weeks, months, years. But it wasn't. 

Finally, we got to the Auschwitz-- which do I know what's Auschwitz? Now I know. I did not then. Says, you're in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your impression? What did you see? What did you hear? What did you think? 

JULIANA: I thought I was free. I didn't know. I thought, oh my god, we are free. Finally, it's going to be everything nice, everything says one German, whatever he was-- a German guy with a gun, he said, just wait what's coming. You're not through. I didn't believe him. What do I know-- 15-year-old, 16-year-old? What do I know? 

The little girl there next to me, that my husband's sister's daughter nine and six, she says to me, what's gonna happen now? I said, nothing. We gonna be all together. We gonna go home. What was I supposed to say? They're begging for mercy. What do I know? 

My mother-in-law to-be, she screamed. She cried. She couldn't walk. My mother, she looked terrible. My father looked terrible. So they put us all in the line. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is after you got off the train? 

JULIANA: Off the train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Getting off the train was the feeling that you thought, now maybe things would be free? 

JULIANA: I thought, I'm free. We gonna all be free-- my mother and my father, my mother-in-law to-be, my sister-in-law to-be, and the two little nieces. When we go home, we gonna be all together. And she says to me-- the little girl says to me-- she loved my husband. 

She says, when [INAUDIBLE]-- that was Yugoslavian name meaning Martin-- comes home, is he gonna marry you? Are you gonna come and live there with us? Are you gonna play with me? Are you gonna be together with me? I said, of course. You know how we love each other. So we smiled. We thought, it's nice. 

But let's stay together. We all stayed in one line. We held hands. And we were all in one line. And we were going in the line. And I saw a big man, a tremendous man. I see him now. He was a horrible man, tall. It seemed to me he was 10 feet tall. 

He had the uh pants, you know, the horse riding pants and the boots. And he had a big whip and a dog next to him. His name was Mengele, a horrible man. I'll never forget him as long as I live. I dream about him. I wake up at night, and I scream. (CRYING) Horrible man, horrible man. To cut them up in pieces, he was horrible. 

As we were coming closer to him, I got more frightened and more frightened. He was whipping the people. He didn't care how, where. It was horrible. So I said to my sister-in-law to-be-- I said, I see that they are separating the people. I couldn't understand what was going on. 

So I said to her, let me have one of your kids so I could go with you. They wouldn't separate me on the other side. She says, are you crazy? My kid, nobody gets my kid. I could understand now why she said that. I have children. I wouldn't give them to nobody anywhere. 

So I said, OK. We come to this Mengele. He's beating everybody up. He hit my mother with the whip. I could have killed him. She screamed. She says to me, please don't let me hit him. I went towards him. He says, you better get away from me, or I'll kill you. Horrible man. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You approached towards Mengele? 

JULIANA: Yes. Because he hit my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How close did you get to him? 

JULIANA: It was close like to you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then he said--? 

JULIANA: He says, you better get away, you lousy Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then you--? 

JULIANA: I backed off. I was scared. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure. And what happened then? 

JULIANA: He pushed my mother on one side. He pushed my sister-in-law on the other side, the little kids. My mother, and my father, and I went on the other side. I said to my mother, be strong, please. I'll come back. I'll be with you. 

She cried. She screamed. She got beaten. She felt-- it was terrible. About three or four feet, like the end of this here, I could see my father. He was on the same side as I was. And I said, hey, Dad. Are we gonna get together? He says, don't worry about it. We'll get together. 

And I walked like an animal. I was left all on my own. I was scared. I was shaking. I was shivering. I wanted my mother and my father. (CRYING) That's the end of it. I didn't see them ever again. 

They kept hitting us. Hurry up. Walk fast. Go here. Let's go. We have no time for you. We were walking and walking. It seemed to me forever. All of a sudden, we got in one big room. They told us to get undressed, take everything off. 

I locked. I didn't wanna get undressed. I was ashamed. I was scared. I didn't wanna get undressed. They said, why? There was a lady in back of me. She says, are you getting undressed? She took a whip, and she whipped with me. I got undressed. 

They took everything off us. They shaved us off-- the hair to zero, everything. Go take a shower, cold shower. I didn't even feel the cold water. I was so scared. And they put a red cross in back of us so it lightens up when you run. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They put a red cross? 

JULIANA: Yes. In the back of our uniform. So it was red, you know, like a cross. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

JULIANA: If you run, so they see you. So you wouldn't run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. 

JULIANA: And they took us to this big room, cabin. It was like for the-- I don't know. They had bunk beds, three and two-- two or three bunk beds. And they took like seven people in each bunk. And they just pushed us in there. There were girls who were in charge of these rooms. They were uh very mean and very rotten to us. 

They said to us, get inside. And you gonna die tomorrow anyway. You're just laying here to wait when they're gonna take you to the gas chamber. Because the gas chamber is not far away from here. And your parents are dead. They're dead too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you believe them? 

JULIANA: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what did you think when you heard it? 

JULIANA: I thought that they were mean and just scaring us. I didn't believe nothing at that day. And then they told us that we have to go take a shower again. We have to go in a certain time to the bathroom. 

As we walked out, these girls who were in charge of the cabin, they said to us, you see the smoke there? As we were walking down going towards the bathroom or whatever-- see the smoke there? See the flame there? That's your parents burning. I didn't believe them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These girls were-- who were these girls who said this to you? 

JULIANA: Um those girls were Jewish girls. They were there for years and years. And they weren't people anymore. They were animals. They must've been there-- said, we were there since 1939. You just came now. You don't know what's coming. 

I couldn't blame them. The heart was taken out of them. They had scars, and they were limping. Their heads were bruised. They were beaten for years and years and years. They were-- they weren't people anymore. They were animals. 

The Germans made them animals. They had no feelings. They had no heart. I could see it now, and I could understand. Because I was there for a while, and I was an animal too. There was no heart in me anymore. 

The day uh-- in the morning-- well, we had a-- we had a blue and white uniform on. Uh nothing-- nothing underneath-- they just gave us that. And early in the morning, we used to stand in the cold that was in Auschwitz, the cold that uh uh Vernichtungslager which I didn't know at the time what is it. Now I know. 

They couldn't kill everybody in one time. There was a waiting period. And I was in that waiting period when the time will come for us to be killed. So we used to stand in the morning, like 3 o'clock, 4 o'clock in the morning, uh to be counted. There was a word for it. I forgot the right word. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Appell 

JULIANA: Appell. Right. We used to stand there for hours and hours. Couldn't stand anymore. I remember one [INAUDIBLE], I couldn't stand it anymore. So I was moving around and standing on one leg and the other leg. I wasn't standing straight. So the German girl comes there with her whip. And she hit me so badly I passed out. 

Now you're gonna learn and know how to stand still. For hours, they're counting us and counting us. There was never end to be counted. Finally, they took us back inside in the cabin. And they call us to eat. They gave us some kind of a soup and a piece of bread. 

And if you went there before she called you, she beat you up. If you went there when she called you and you didn't walk straight, she beat you up. And you went there and you didn't hold the plate right, she beat you up. 

This went on for three months. I stayed in Auschwitz for three months. By that time, we were so exhausted. Even though I was young, there was no life in me. I wasn't a human anymore. From beating, from-- from-- from not eating, from uh standing in Appell, from being desperate, from hearing every day that my mother is burning there. There's no more life for us. 

For waiting when we gonna be killed. I was an animal. I didn't hurt nobody. But I didn't care if I stay alive, if I don't stay. Some day, I pray to God. And I said, is there one? Please help me, and let me die. Because there was no uh life in me anymore. I didn't wanna live anymore. 

So we stayed there from-- from-- oh, I don't know-- maybe May till July or something, something like that. Then one day, there was a big panic. Everybody says, you gotta go. There's gonna be-- they're gonna pick up some people to be taken someplace. I was hoping that they'd take me and uh kill me already. 

Says, weather looks good, half decent. [INAUDIBLE] could work yet. It's gonna-- they need 200 girls. They're gonna be taken someplace. So they were standing there one day, two days-- hours and hours. All of a sudden, a German guy comes. Mengele there goes again. 

I couldn't-- when I saw that guy, I started shaking and shivering so bad. It was terrible. There was Mengele with two dogs and a German woman. They were gonna pick up people. He went to every line looking. And I said, oh, that's it. I hope it happens soon. 

And at that time, he picked out 200 girls. I was one of them. A miracle happened? I don't know what happened. I was one of them. There was a lot of-- a lot of girls from Novi Sad who we were together there. They took 200 girls. And I said, OK, they're gonna kill us. 

He said to everybody, OK, as long as we'll live. It's OK. Don't just panic. So we were chosen to die. It's OK. We didn't care anymore. So they took 200 girls and took us in the train. Everything was dark. We couldn't see where we going, what we doing, nothing. 

And we were told to keep quiet and not to talk anymore. So we were scared. You're talking about-- oh, about my age then. It was all young girls about 16, 17 year old. They took us in the train. And we were taken to Wüstegiersdorf 

How do I know this now? Because after a long ride, we arrive in this place. And we kept asking, what is it? What is it? And one Germ-- German guy says there, don't ask too many question. You're going to Wüstegiersdorf So we weren't killed. We were taken there. 

When we got out of the train, they pushed us. They kicked us. They hit us. They said, you gotta behave yourself, or else you're gonna get killed if you don't. There was always threats. There was always fear. There was always, hey, [INAUDIBLE], you lousy Jew. I heard lousy Jew every day. 

So they took us to-- to this place of course to take a shower, to change the clothes. We were filthy. We were dirty. They gave us dirty clothes. It was full of lices. They didn't help nothing. One plus is we had no hair, so we didn't have nothing in the head-- I mean no lice or nothing, no bugs in the head. 

They took us there in the-- in this one cabin there. And uh it was bunk beds there. There was so many rooms there. And they said, well, if you behave yourself, you might be able to go to work. And it'll be better. 

There was one German Lageralteste. She was rotten. She was bad. She used to come to the room all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the name of the camp [INAUDIBLE]? 

JULIANA: I-- as far as I know, it's only Wüstegiersdorf I don't know the name of the camp. I know we were in Wüstegiersdorf 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: I don't remember what was the name of the camp or nothing. It was close to, um, Breslau/Dachau something like this. I don't know the name of it. It was only uh 200 girls there. 

And then one day, they come. They said, we need some people to go to work. You can't stay here doing nothing. We're gonna take you to work. So they divided the shifts in night and day. I happened to be chosen for the night. 

They gave us wooden shoes and striped clothes. Every girl one sweater, which was dirty and full of lice. It was-- it was OK. We were glad to have a sweater on. As you walked in the streets, it was cold. The snow got stuck to your feet on the wood. You couldn't walk. 

We were sliding and slippery. And it uh uh-- if you couldn't walk-- you couldn't-- I couldn't even see. Nobody could see because it was night. They used to beat us up before I went to-- to work. I couldn't even walk anymore. So it was quite experience to walk to the-- to the place we were supposed to go. I didn't know at that time where it was. 

But finally, we got there. I got beaten so badly by the time I got-- I was all black and blue. And the-- the ice and the snow on the wooden shoes, it was hard. I had no energy to move. So the German guy says to me, if-- you better put yourself together. I'm gonna shoot you right now if you don't walk because you gotta work. 

So he says, this is the-- a factory which makes hand grenade. It's cruel factory. And uh you better produce right because we need the grenade to kill the Jews. I didn't say nothing. I was afraid to say-- I-- I had no energy to talk at that time. The food, we hardly-- we got a piece of bread and a soup. 

And I had no energy. I was cold. I was scared. I had no energy to talk. I just wanted to work, like he said. And uh we worked there. I did the best I can. When they come to lock it, they weren't satisfied. Got beating again. Says, you better do a better job, or tomorrow you won't come here. You'll die, you lousy Jew. 

This was going day out and day in. And uh it was a very, very bad experience. It was a very hurting experience. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A very what? 

JULIANA: Hurting, hurt. They hurt. hurt 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hurting. 

JULIANA: Hurting, yes. Because I was a Jew, and I had to suffer for it. And I feel everybody should know what the Jew had to go through to survive and to be proud that one is a Jew. Because of people hate them so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you feel when you say that now? 

JULIANA: (SIGHING) At this moment, I hate all the goyim. Every one of them. I hate them more than I could express myself to. Because they took my youth away. They took my parents away. They took my desire for life. And they took my love for people. 

I feel that the-- all the goyim should be killed. At this moment, I strongly feel about it. Of course, I give in later on. But if I think about it-- what a horrible experience I had to go through to survive as a kid, and how I lost my parents, and I couldn't enjoy my parents-- my kids don't know what's a grandfather and a grandmother. 

Age of 17, I had nobody when I came back. My kids are growing up uh without grandparents. They didn't know-- when I said to my daughter-- she was about two year old. And she saw somebody uh has a grandma and grandpa. She says to me, Ma, what is that? I hate them all. I hate them all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were in the factory day in and day out, as you were just describing, do you remember what you felt then? Was that--? 

JULIANA: I was scared. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then, it was fear. 

JULIANA: Fear. I was scared. I was so scared. I guess I was uh uh worrying that they're gonna-- they're gonna kill me tomorrow. I was-- I was fighting for life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened then? 

JULIANA: Um this was going on for quite a while. We were going back and forth to work. And um no food, no clothes, cold, beating every day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: Um till liberation, from um-- what was it? July? From July till May. I was liberated May 8. One day, something very interesting happened. Uh, one of my friend-- uh there was about 50 girls from Novi Sad that we were together with. She was uh working for the Lageralteste. You know, she needed somebody to clean her shoes and do uh cleanup or whatever. 

And across the street, we saw some men there, which I couldn't believe we seen them there. They were working on the rail-- railroad. And this friend of mine said to Lageralteste, who-- who are those men? Says, well, they are from-- from the other part. 

Do you know who's working there? Can we get-- find out who are they? Where are they? Well, she says-- I guess it was one of the better days of her. And she says, well, I'll find out who is it. And he brought a list there back. And he says, there's a miracle-- Ripp That was my husband. Not a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was your husband-to-be. 

JULIANA: My husband-to-be. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

JULIANA: So she gave the list. And she said, there's one of them there. Well, that was like a unbelievable story, which I can't believe this happened. Uh he came across. They said that um I was his sister, and he was my brother or whatever. So the Lageralteste allowed him to come across and visit me. It was like five minutes visit, very short. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember of that visit and what you found? 

JULIANA: That visit was the most memorable memory I could uh remember. When I saw him, I said-- I thought, it's gonna be all better. And I'm gonna find out something about my mother and my father, his mother, whatever. He came across. We couldn't even talk. 

I felt very happy and very sad. He says to me, (CRYING) you have to be strong. Everybody died, I know as a fact. You have to survive for me. And I have to survive for you. And that was it. 

It was a very sad and very hurting experience because I knew I'd lost everybody. At that time, I knew my parents are gone. Those two little girls are gone. Everybody's gone. If I survive, I have him. If he survives, he has me. It was uh giving me a little life in myself, knowing that somebody might wait for me, that I'm not completely lost. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The relationship with-- between you began at that moment? Or was it before? 

JULIANA: Oh, we had-- we were going together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before? 

JULIANA: We planned to get married. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before--? 

JULIANA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before the deportations? 

JULIANA: Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. We knew each other. We grew up in the same city. There was only uh-- I don't remember what year of the time was it. Was it January? February? I don't know. Maybe. Could be sometime in-- it was cold. Must have been winter, I guess. 

It gave me a little uh something to fight for. I knew I had nobody else, but I had him. And it gave me a little strength that I hope I'm gonna survive. It was a heartbreaking situation. Like I said, it was sad, and it was happy. It was sad because I had nobody. It was happy because I had somebody. I had him. 

That was the last I saw him. That was the last-- they were taken away at that-- then. I didn't know where he went. I didn't know what happened. I didn't know if he was gonna survive or whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened then in the next few months? 

JULIANA: The next few months, we had to go to work every day. We were treated very bad. We got beating at least twice a day. Uh my condition, my health condition, my physical condition, it's going-- uh it was worse and worse. I uh-- I didn't look myself in the mirror because there was no mirror. I didn't know what I looked like. 

But I felt very uh-- there was bone, skin and bone on me. There was like quarter of me, as you see it now. I could feel that I hardly could walk. And I couldn't even talk. I was-- uh I don't know if it's depressed. It's more than depressed. Uh I uh-- my physical condition was very poor. 

I had no energy to get up in the morning. I had no energy to walk. I had no energy to work. When I went to-- especially working nights, it was uh very bad. I couldn't sleep during the day, and I had to keep my eyes open all night. And it was uh very bad. 

I couldn't work normally because I couldn't put the things-- it was very precision things that we had to do. I was shaking. I was nervous. I was afraid who was gonna be in behind me. I was going downhill every day. It was worse and worse. Uh being that I couldn't work as I wanted to, I got more beating maybe than the next person. 

I just lost myself. I guess I had-- I lost whatever I'd gained when I saw my husband-to-be. I had no more energy. All of a sudden, we hear that the uh-- the Russians are coming. Says, you're free. You could do anything you want to. 

I couldn't do nothing. I couldn't even move. I don't know if I was happy. I don't know if-- that was May 8. I don't know if I was happy. I don't know if I was sad. I couldn't walk. I couldn't move. We were dirty. We were filthy. We had lice. We had everything. 

And then all of a sudden, when the Russian came in, they came in so strong with us that we couldn't uh help ourselves. They started beating us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They? 

JULIANA: The Russian, for some reason. Maybe because we were filthy. We the first day when they came to Wüstegiersdorf they came like an animals. That was maybe for the first day. Maybe we did something. I don't know. I don't know what happened. But the first day-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Has the depression and the [INAUDIBLE] lifted over the years, or changed over the state-- 

JULIANA: You mean after I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, after [INAUDIBLE] 

JULIANA: Well, there is time when I'm very depressed. There is time when I can't help myself. And there is time when I feel better. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. What gives you hope? 

JULIANA: My husband and my children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your family? 

JULIANA: I have two kids and three grandchildren. Finally, what happened after the years, I have a family again. I had nobody. When I liberated and I went home, I was 17. I went home. I had [INAUDIBLE]. I had nothing. I had no parents. I had no relatives. Everybody was killed. I had nothing. 

We went-- we went-- I went back with some of the friends who uh-- who left alive from Novi Sad. So many girls, we went back. And we cried. We didn't know where to go. So there was a Jewish organization there in the temple. And they greeted us there. And we stayed there till we could help ourselves, till we-- of course, when I went back, I was very sick. 

I had a, uh, uh, very bad vitamin shortage, B vitamin 12, which means I was full of sores. My legs were all swollen, and I couldn't walk. Um I got infection all over my body because of the vitamin shortage, so the doctor says. So I was in this uh-- when we went back-- went back to Novi Sad, I was helpless. 

I couldn't do nothing uh because of the vitamin shortage. So I had to go to the hospital. They treated me. Uh I got a poisoning. It took a while till I uh recuperated, and I could walk. I couldn't walk for like couple of months because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] At what point did you begin to live more regularly again? 

JULIANA: Uh I heard-- I came back in May. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

JULIANA: And I heard in July-- there was always a bull-- bulletin board in the temple. Who's coming back? And one of the lists, it was named [INAUDIBLE], Martin. That's my husband-to-be at that time. He's coming back. He's alive. When I read that, that he's coming back, that gave me all the life that I'm gonna survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Thank you. I wanted to ask you one thing before we stop. At this time, besides your family, do you feel that you're left with a feeling that you can trust anyone else? How has that changed over the years? 

JULIANA: I can't fully trust nobody-- nobody. Perfectly honest to be with you-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

JULIANA: I hate people. Not Jewish people-- I hate people. That's a sad thing to say. I control myself, but I hate people. I hate all the goyim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you feel this during the day? Or things bring it out in you more or less? 

JULIANA: Uh, I feel it every day. I feel it every day. I can't forgive, and I can't forget. I try. But deep down, I hate them. I hate them because they took everything away from me. And I hate them because I didn't have a normal life like any young human being just because I'm a Jew. And I feel that they have to suffer for it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And now you-- with this feeling, you also have your family now. 

JULIANA: I have my family now, which I'm very grateful for. And this is what holds me-- my children, of course my husband number one, and my children, and my grandchildren. And I thank God for having them. And hopefully, I never lose them because I don't think I could go through with it if I would lose them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Why don't we stop now, and you can go out to Martin? 

JULIANA: OK. I'm sorry if I broke down, but I couldn't help it. It's hard. It's very hard. I try not to talk about it, but it's very hard. 

