[BEEP] INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Well, we went on a train. And basically, nobody really recognizes that you're Jewish. The only problem you have is that there is a slight accent in you Polish, which sometimes people recognize and see. Some Jews didn't speak Polish at all, because they lived in their group completely and they didn't need it. If they spoke any Polish, they spoke broken Polish. 

My Polish happens to have been at that time quite excellent. So I had a better chance of passing as a Pollack as anybody else. So we came to a Polish family, and we stayed there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you scared? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Absolutely. But what difference did it make? You didn't have any choice. Basically, what we talking about that wherever I went, I had to go. I couldn't go anyplace else. So it didn't make any difference you were scared or not. You do what you have to do. 

We came to the Polish family, and my uncle came and his fiancee came. There was another Polish family about five miles away that also agreed to take a group. And that Polish family took my younger uncle, my younger aunt, a niece, and another aunt. They stayed there, and we stayed at this place. 

What happened was, for some strange reason one way or the other, the Germans got wind of the other hiding place. There were quite a few Jews being hidden out at that time. And they were being hidden out by Poles as long as the money lasted. When the money-- soon as they runs out of money, the Poles would kick them out of the houses. 

In our particular case, we came across two honest Polish families. One of them was a-- what do you call it? Watchtower Society Member, which is unusual for Poland. Polish are-- Poland was basically Catholic. So anyhow, the Germans came and took away my aunt, my uncle, and the two boys, and the Polish woman that was hiding them. She said, I'm not going with you. If you want to kill me, kill me here. So they killed her. 

When the family that we stayed with found out about it, which was virtually the next day, they said, we don't care. You've got to go. We don't want to be killed. My uncle's fiancee at that time left. She left previously looking for her father. So it was only my uncle, my brother, who at that time was about eight or nine. So, we left. Uncle said, Mark, you have Polish papers. You have lots of money. You get on the train, and travel. And hide yourself as long as you can. The war will soon end. 

So basically, what I did is I traveled in the narrow area of Silesia, because any place else if you want to go to the true occupational Poland-- we were, incidentally, in the part of Poland that was annexed to Germany. It was considered part of Germany. Eh, I traveled there, taking all kinds of long distance trains. Going into movies sleeping. And it lasted for about four weeks. 

And one day I came into a town called Katowice, which is a big, industrial town in Poland. And I went to the buffet area, ordered a beer. And I started drinking. And a man came over next to me, and he flipped over his identity. Says, Kriminalpolizei. May I see your papers, please? I took out my wallet and started giving him my papers. 

He took away the whole wallet. Looked at the papers. Says, a pretty good forgery. Your name Richard Olszewski? He says, you're Jewish. And your uncle is a boxer. At that particular time, I thought I recognized somebody in the background whom I knew. After the war, the man denied that he denounced me. I don't know till now whether he did or he didn't. 

Anyhow, I was taken to the Kriminalpolizei, which is basically-- oh, I don't know how to translate it. The criminal police, really. There's a distinction between the criminal police and the political police. I was taken to the prison. I was kept there for quite a while. I can't tell you how long, because I was in solitary. 

At a certain time and point, the Kriminalpolizei transferred me to-- transferred jurisdiction to the Gestapo. And they had me under constant interrogation, where are the Jews hidden? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you do resist when he's accused you of being-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --who you were? 

SUBJECT: No. I didn't. I knew the jig was up. I didn't know where the other Jews were hidden. So after a while, he be-- they became convinced that I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Torturing you? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What? 

SUBJECT: Well, some-- a certain amount of beatings. He put some matches underneath my fingernails, but he didn't like them. He just threatened me with it. He probably saw that I was scared enough that would tell without it. I mean after all, I wasn't a grown man. I was only, what? 15. 

So that's that's with us to Birkenau. I arrived there and normally-- arriving at Birkenau, you arrive in a big train with thousands of people. The selection goes left and right. But in my case, it was a small group. About 25 or 30 of us. And the Dr. Mengele came in, and left, right, left, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How can Dr. Mengele have been in Auschwitz and Birkenau? He was everywhere. 

SUBJECT: Sure. Yeah. At-- well, Birkenau and Auschwitz are one and the same. We're virtually next to it. The real crematory where all the burnings were done was in Birkenau, not in Auschwitz. Auschwitz was more of a political prison. Auschwitz was-- you had the barracks built from bricks. And Birkenau was all wood. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any other names of Gestapo or people like Dr. Mengele? 

SUBJECT: Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why do you know his name only? 

SUBJECT: Well, because when I went to the work camp, I was in the barrack with all kinds of human oddities, shall we say. What we call short people? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Midgets. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dwarfs. 

SUBJECT: Dwarfs. And they were there. And he had identical twins. He had all kinds of people there. And Mengele was experimenting with them. What kind of kids you have when you have sex, and so on, and so forth. And the block, they were talking about it. 

So anyhow, after the selection, frankly, I want you to know I was disappointed that he put me to this side instead of the other side, because I thought the people over there will have it easy, and I'm going to work pretty hard. I still didn't know at the particular time, you know, or maybe-- well, I didn't know. Let's put it this way. I didn't know. 

So they put me through what they call entlausung procedure, washing etcetera. They issued me my uniform. And I went to what's called the Quarantine Lager, which was in the A Lager, I believe. I was supposed to stay there about 30 days. And I was-- they were concerned that we would bring diseases to the camp. So everybody entering camp would stay in the Quarantine for at least 30 days. If you didn't develop any diseases, you would go to work camp. 

Well, within two weeks or so, I came down with typhoid. And they sent me to the hospital. It may sound unusual to you that in Birkenau, the real extermination camp, Jews are being sent to the hospital. Contrary to public knowledge, once you were there, you will be taken care of unless they decided to empty out the camp for one reason or another. 

So I went to the hospital, and I recovered within a short period of time. And there were some Polish physicians who took a liking to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to those who remained in the Quarantine? 

SUBJECT: Well, I found out later on that the ones who remained in the Quarantine were transferred to the Sonderkommando. Sonderkommando meaning the group of people who are involved in gassing and burning the corpses. I stayed there as a attendant helping out the physician. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the hospital? 

SUBJECT: In the hospital. It's a-- well, it's not really a hospital. It was a group of barracks. Each one was a hospital. However, learning from the grapevine that on frequent occasions, the Germans come and take all the sick Jews and sent them to the crematoriom. I talked to the physician. Listen, I have it very nice, et cetera. But they may come any day and clean me out. Why don't you send me to the work camp? Release me as being a healthy individual. 

Because I wasn't there officially in the capacity of an orderly. I was there officially in the capacity of being sick, but they utilized me as an orderly. He didn't like the idea. But after I badgered him for a while, he says, OK, I'll let you go. 

So I went to the work camp. And about a week later, all the Jews in the hospital were cleaned out and sent to the crematorium. So I was the work camp and normally-- I was in a block, shall we say, it was called the reserve block. In each block had people who were assigned to do various duties. Some would work at the place where you dismantle airplanes. You know, crashed airplanes, they take them for spare parts. Some people worked in construction. Some people work for the orchestra. 

I was in the reserve block, where there was missing somebody to work, you would come over there and drag us out. So far a while, I'll go working. I recollect, as a matter of fact, that I went working at the place where you used to dismantle airplanes. And there was one Russian prisoner of war. And he says to me, listen, he says, you're too small to work. Why don't you just go and bring us water. And it was a hot day. So I was very fortunate on that score. 

Then the Hungarian started being deported from Hungary. The Hungarian Jews were being brought to Birkenau. So somebody decided to go make a group that was specialized in unloading the provisions off the red cars. And I was one of the people who went there and were unloading the group from the red cars. I was also fortunate to that extent that some of the people who were taken from the Quarantaine to the Sonderkommando were very nice to me. They were very well fed, so they used to give me some food, on and off. 

So that's how Birkenau was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have any thoughts when you unload that stuff-- that thing from the-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I was very glad I was able to unload it, because I was able to eat. And I was there, it could be opened up and you ate. At that particular time in Birkenau, I developed an inflammation of the eyelids, blepharitis. And I would get up in the morning, I wouldn't be able to open my eyes at all. There was one physician right there in the work camp who was very good to me. He always used to clean them, and clean them, until I recovered. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah. I get up in the morning. In order to see, I would put the two fingers like this and push the eyelids apart to be able to go and see him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What came next? 

SUBJECT: Well, after a while they came and they decided that they have a farm on the outskirts of Auschwitz that they would like us to work. So they selected about 30 of us from that particular reserve block, and we went through the farm working. It was pretty rough over there, because you weren't part of a mass. To a certain extent, in Birkenau, you were able to get lost. So the kapo tried to hit you and you turned around, and just missed you, or hit you slightly. Then he hit the next guy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who hit you? 

SUBJECT: Kapo. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I thought so. But these-- the kapo were not the Germans. 

SUBJECT: No. Kapos were not Germans. But basically, the kapos were criminals. Incorrigible criminals who were sent over there for their-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they-- 

SUBJECT: And they only-- they only used to occupy the place of honor. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they Jewish? Are they German? Were they Polish? What were the kapos? 

SUBJECT: I really don't remember. But very few of them were Jewish, because a kapo only was a guy who was there for quite a while. Like four, five, or even six years already. But by virtue of his longevity, he was promoted to a kapo. Naturally some people were giving up hope and were just throwing themselves at the electrified wires on and off-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw that? 

SUBJECT: Oh, certainly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do remember one-- an incident? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Well, I really don't know anybody. All I can describe is somebody goes, yells, and the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you see? What was it, a day? Night? 

SUBJECT: It was normally would be in the morning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I don't know why in the morning. As a matter of fact, I never gave it a thought to it until you asked me. Normally, but in the morning, somebody just go and-- the way I remember, there was a ditch before you'd be able to get to it. You go to the ditch, and then just go and with both hands on the wires. You had the electrified wires between the various camps. In other words, I was in the D camp, and the C camp was another camp. And you really didn't have any guards in between, strictly electrified wires. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was very easy to kill yourself? 

SUBJECT: Oh, certainly. No problem. All you need is to have a little courage. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did this cross your mind? 

SUBJECT: No. Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you saw those people doing it, what did you think? 

SUBJECT: I didn't. I didn't. There's very little thought process that goes through your mind when you try to preserve yourself. All you do is just-- you're like an animal. You eat and you sleep. And you-- and you do what you're told to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever get any medicine to fix your eyes? Or it just cleared up by itself? 

SUBJECT: Well, the doctor used to give me a certain amount of drops. Naturally, when we left Birkenau, I didn't have any medicine. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did the doctor get medicine? 

SUBJECT: They were getting a certain amount of medicine. It's-- it's-- it was a contradiction by itself. In other words, if you were very sick, and they didn't want to occupy the crematorium for one reason or another, they would treat you. They would treat you great. All the medicine. As long as the medicine was available. And then-- and then when they wanted to clean up, they cleaned you up. 

Naturally, you always have the view of the crematorium burning continuously. Black smoke, and fire smoke-- and fire coming up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew what it was? 

SUBJECT: Oh, certainly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And-- 

SUBJECT: The Sonderkommando slept in our camp. Matter of fact, the way I remember it, part of my group were the ones that participate in it. Periodically, the SS would change the people in charge of the, Sonderkommando because it was known that if anybody will not survive, it would be the Sonderkommando, because they know everything. 

So every year, at six to nine months, they'd kill everybody in Sonderkommando and recruit a new group. That particular group felt that their time has almost come. So they made a small uprising. They killed the kapo in charged. They killed the SS man in charge. Shoved them into the crematorium. And they started running. I believe they were caught within four or five days, every one of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened? 

SUBJECT: They were killed a little bit sooner. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see of that? 

SUBJECT: Of what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Or did you hear about-- 

SUBJECT: Of the escape? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of this uprising escape, what-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I was told about it. It was common knowledge. You know, the sirens started going. You don't-- you don't have sirens too frequently, because there were no escapes from Birkenau. It's the sirens go on. There was a certain amount of commotion. Then the Sonderkommando did not come back. They always used to come back and change shifts. Did not come back and then were told the story. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what did they do to other people in the camp? Was there other punishment besides killing the people that had escaped? 

SUBJECT: We had flogging. And you had-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: For that? For that, because they escaped? 

SUBJECT: No, they didn't think-- you didn't punish one person for another. The only thing that you did have, a person escape, you have what was standing on Appel, meaning standing at roll call. And you'd stand until they were good and ready to send you back in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long? 

SUBJECT: It depended. Three hours, four hours, five hours. 20 minutes. It's really you were at the whim of management, shall we say. You know, and normally when you went out to work, there was a 50 piece orchestra playing. And you were marching to that. And when you came back, same 50 piece orchestra played. The best people from all kinds of symphonies played in that particular camp orchestra. On Sundays, they gave concerts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because management wanted it. In other words, you were there as a toy for the Germans to do whatever he pleased. If he wanted a concert, he had a concert. He wanted an opera performance, it's not for, you know, a couple arias and so forth. The man stood up and- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But who are the performers? 

SUBJECT: Basically, those were Jews who were in the art work world and were sent in there. You know, the Jews in the music field. You had Jews in the-- everyplace. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did they have them play before they went to work and when they came back? That wasn't for performance. That was for something else. 

SUBJECT: I really don't know. But I-- I can sing that song any time and every time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did-- 

SUBJECT: It stays in my mind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you sing it now? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It go, [SINGING NOTES OF SONG]. Yeah. And again. And again. And again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do it again, would you? I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHS] Well, [SINGING NOTES OF SONG]. And you walk. You'd march. No matter how tired you were, as you came before the gate, it was achtung, attention, straighten out your lines. Count them. And a couple would march and yell, Kommando number so-and-so, 54 people, 75 people. I don't remember we were much than five, or six, or tens, or whatever it was, and we're matching right through and being counted. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is that song that you sang? What is it? 

SUBJECT: I haven't the vaguest notion. Too much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: German match? 

SUBJECT: Probably. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the people playing, were they treated better than the people that weren't? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They were treated better. The people working in the kitchen were treated better. Now my normal joke with people who don't know, regarding punishment is that you cannot jump like a swan. And that was the standard punishment. If you had to jump 20 or 30 times, you are really able to do-- you know, it's bouncing yourself like that, bending down, and jumping. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jumping? 

SUBJECT: Jumping. Yeah. Like a duck. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For what? 

SUBJECT: As punishment. And when-- and you normally would jump, you know, I don't even remember how it was. But I believe the orchestra was in the back, and you had a pool of water in the front. And you're like a-- like a line where-- what do you call it? Another strip of concrete. And when you-- when they would punish you, you would jump, right? And if you couldn't, they push you over the water. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And think that was it? 

SUBJECT: Well, if you could swim, you would get out of there. If you couldn't swim, you would stay. Anybody tried to escape, one way or the other, you'd be hanged at the entrance. You'd be hanging there as you passed by, the people who tried to escape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said there was music. There was an orchestra in the background, when you were jumping like a duck. Was it the same music? 

SUBJECT: No, the orchestra in the background was merely as you were marching in. That particular spot it was also utilized for punishment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was the orchestra always playing this one song? 

SUBJECT: No, it was-- that particular song was the-- how should I say it? The theme song of going to work and coming back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have you ever heard it anywhere else? 

SUBJECT: No. Every time, that something different. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like Buchenwald? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I can sing you the Buchenwald song today, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Will you sing it? 

SUBJECT: My voice is coming. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's all right. 

SUBJECT: OK. (SINGING) Wenn der Tag erwacht, und die Sonne lacht, die Kolomnen ziehn zu des tages Muhn, hinein in den grau en den Morgen, und die Nacht ist kurtz und der Tag so lang, und wir tragen im Brotsack ein Stuckchen Brot. Und im Herzen, im Herzen die Sorgen. Oh, Buchenwald, ich kann dich nicht vergessen, weil du mein Schickal bist. Wer dich verliess, der kann es erst ermessen, wie wundervoll die Freiheit ist. Doch Buchenwald, wir jammern nicht und klagen, wie auch mit unsere Zukunft sei, wir wollen trotadem ja zum Legen sagen. Denn einmal kommt der Tag, dann sind wir frei. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember all that that. Does it mean? 

SUBJECT: Well 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you translate it? 

SUBJECT: Certainly. It-- it starts sort of on a poetic basis, saying, when the day awakens, and the sun smiles, the Kolonnen, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Columns. 

SUBJECT: The columns are watching to the day's work. Towards the graying morning. And the night is short, and the days are long, and we carry in our sack, a piece of bread. And in our heart, we carry all our sorrows. And then you say, Buchenwald, I cannot forget you, since you are my destiny, who leaves you can only determine how wonderful freedom is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now who taught you that song? Who made up that song? Who-- 

SUBJECT: I wouldn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But was it a German song? You sung it-- 

SUBJECT: It's a German song. When I was in the concentration camp before the Second World War, and Buchenwald, basically, in contrast to Birkenau, was a camp where the-- it was run by political prisoners, rather than by criminal prisoners. So there was a difference. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you speak German before the war? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You learn German in the camp? 

SUBJECT: I learned German in the camp. And I learned German in Switzerland, afterwards. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But that song you remember like you was singing in Polish, or in Yiddish, or in English. 

SUBJECT: That's right. Yeah. Exactly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you play an instrument? 

SUBJECT: No. No. I remember only that my mother wanted me to play the fiddle. And the teacher was always breaking my fingers to make it right. And I never did it right and my mother was very unhappy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's puzzling how you remember the song so well. 

SUBJECT: Why not? Why not? Just the same way like you probably remember your college song. I'm a graduate of Buchenwald. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But is your memory for music or for songs-- 

SUBJECT: Not really. I remember-- what do you call it? No. I probably don't remember anymore. But on and off, when I take a shower, I remember my father's nigun the way he used to sing at the prayers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you sing them? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't remember a thing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But-- 

SUBJECT: Right now, I don't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you sing them in the shower. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you ever sing to yourself the Buchenwald song? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you ever sing to yourself the Buchenwald song? 

SUBJECT: No. I never do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you say you hear it in your head. I mean, that was total recall, and you haven't sang it since? 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? You were saying how you went to the work camp outside of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Davon nicht. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's say, tell about the Buchenwald and the ending. 

SUBJECT: About what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The ending in Buchenwald. 

SUBJECT: Well, I was, I believe, in block 65 or block 66, which was the block for the youngster. Actually, that was the last building in camp. And that one was probably not considered a building, because the others were mortar and brick construction. That one was of wood. And Buchenwald was being evacuated by the Germans as the American armies were coming closer. 

And one day, they decided, everybody's leaving. Excuse me. So we decided we-- collectively, a group of us. I don't even remember who, what, how, when, where, that we're not going. And somebody had the great idea that after all there's an attic, why don't we go and hide on the attic. So we went and hid on the attic, and we stayed there for quite a while. The Germans came chasing everybody, and didn't see anybody in that particular block. They started ripping down the ceiling. Quite a few people came tumbling down. 

I was lucky. I was hidden between two supports for the roof, so even after they ripped it down, I didn't come falling down. Nobody noticed me. And I stayed there till the-- we were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was that? How did you hear that? Know that? 

SUBJECT: The only I know is that is that number one, the towers were not occupied by sentries. And somehow or other our Blockaltester, which is the guy in charge of our particular block, was running towards the fence with a gun in his hand. A regular shotgun. I was wondering at that time how he got the shotgun, and he snipped the wires on the fence. That's how I knew it. 

The next time I knew about it, when it was a regular zoo in Buchenwald. So when we were liberated, they made a tremendous stew for everybody. We didn't eat meat in time immemorial. And we all developed a beautiful case of diarrhea. All of us. Quite a few died because of that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was a zoo? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, zoo, yes. They had a bear and all kinds of animals that became slaughtered and they made a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But the zoo was for what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I don't understand. Where did the zoo animals come from? Yes. 

SUBJECT: Well, your little miniature zoo for the SS people who were living not in camp, but on the outskirts of the camp. And then when we were liberated, they just took the animals. They slaughtered them. They made a goulash out of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you saying that during the course of your internment Buchenwald, the SS troopers had a zoo outside the camp for their pleasure? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Yeah. I don't know that for a fact. All I know is that I was told that the zoo was taken, slaughtered, and here's a beautiful goulash. Strictly meat. And you can imagine what happens to somebody who weighs 65 pounds, and eats pure meat, and what's the price of it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mister 

SUBJECT: I was running to the-- to the bathroom or the outside, and couldn't make it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How has it changed you? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this. 

SUBJECT: Made me very cynical. I don't believe in God. I didn't believe in humanity. I don't believe in anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How does it change your behavior toward people? 

SUBJECT: I don't trust people. Very few that I do trust. You know who I trust? Is my brother. Really, and maybe two or three more people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is he here? 

SUBJECT: Yes. He lives in Chicago. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he with you most of the time? 

SUBJECT: No, he was not. As a matter of fact, I didn't-- I didn't tell you his story. His story is very simple. We left that Polish family, and then I was caught. And my uncle and he were hiding, and uncle said, listen, the two of us together don't stand a chance. And he was, what? Seven or eight. He says, go back to the Polish family, and tell them, look, there's no place I can go. You want to report me to the Germans, report me to the Germans. 

So he went back to the Polish family. The Polish woman was there. And she took pity on him. And says, listen, my husband will not permit it. So what I will do is I'll keep you in my house until the time comes that my husband comes back from work, in which case you go to the dog house. You know, they had a watchdog there. And sleep in the dog house with the dog, until the next morning when my husband leaves, and I'll take you in the-- into the house. And that's how he survived the war. 

After the war, they wanted to adopt him. And he didn't want to. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mr. Rosenberg-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The father wanted to adopt him, too? The husband. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was in style then. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where are you most of the time, day, nights, before the war, with the shul, and the nigun of your father, in Buchenwald, and Birkenau, or here? Where do you spend your time mentally? 

SUBJECT: Right now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Most of the day, or night. Not maybe this moment, if you want to say. 

SUBJECT: Neither. Neither. I spend my day at work, or at home talking to my wife. Reading the newspaper. Talking to the kids. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And where's your mind most of the time? 

SUBJECT: It's not there. It's not there. It's here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's here. 

SUBJECT: It's here. It basically is on a day-to-day basis. In other words, what I don't have is the long-range planning that normally a family used to have. In other words, if you will, you're in a cocoon with your family. And when you grow up, you come out of the cocoon, and you're ready to face the world. 

To me, that cocoon was broken too soon. I was torn away from my family. So I'm missing something. I'm missing maybe the security of the family. And the planning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because there's no tomorrow, really. 

SUBJECT: No. There isn't any. If you think there is, you're mistaken. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel about having told us all of this? 

SUBJECT: Not any different. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever told it before? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not to your wife? Not to your children? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never told it to anyone? 

SUBJECT: No. As a matter of fact, a few years ago, the koheint in our temple wanted somebody to address the youth of the temple and tell them how it was. And I told him, I'm sorry. I cannot. But I'll bring you somebody who can. And I brought a man with whom I was liberated, with whom we lived in Switzerland together. And he came and did a very nice job of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You say you're cynical, and you're bitter. You're suspicious of people. I think that's what you said. You don't trust. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you do trust in your everyday life. You carry on your everyday life. You must trust someone. 

SUBJECT: Is there any other choice? There's no other choice. What do I want to do? You want to cease to exist? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You trusted us. You came here. 

SUBJECT: And, no, you wanted to hear my story. And maybe enough time passed by for me to be able to tell it. And maybe I wanted to see if I can do it. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any-- any hopes of what your story could do for other people? For anything? Do you have any-- 

SUBJECT: No. I only-- I only did it for myself. To see if I can tell it. Stand it. You know, it's been, what? 34 years since I was liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were how old? 

SUBJECT: 51. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. How old then? 

SUBJECT: 17. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 17. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. No, I don't believe that you can educate people. The people who listen to that are people who know anyway. People who don't need to hear that particular aspect, too. The people who ought to know, who ought to do something, are those who aren't interested. The other thing that I do that's of any substantial magnitude is that I contribute to the United Jewish Appeal more than I can afford. 

Somebody would ask me for any local effort, I wouldn't. And the only reason I can say there is because I feel those are the people who are with me. And I can try to help them as much as I can. I feel more closely to Israel than to anything else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why didn't you go there? 

SUBJECT: I tried. But, you see, a group of us went-- it's funny. In 1945, you liberated and everybody is the great humanitarian. So the Swiss Red Cross decided that it would be a great move for them to bring their children to Switzerland for a-- at a heilen, which will be for a rest and a cure. 

So they came and they took the kids for a rest and a cure. There were 300 and-- I don't know, about 300 of us, thereabouts, on a train, with an American chaplain, going to Switzerland. We came to the border in Switzerland and the Swiss Red Cross came and started looking at us. Well, those are not children of eight, nine 10. Those are young men, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, some 22, 23 sneaked in. You know, after all, you hear Switzerland, everybody wants to go in. 

The Swiss Red Cross refused to accept that particular trainload. And that train was standing for hours on the border between Germany and Switzerland. And that American chaplain, he went to the Jewish communities in Switzerland and raised a stink. And that's how we came in. Because the Jewish community in Switzerland said, you take from them in. They won't be a burden to you, et cetera, et cetera. 

Everybody does things strictly for propaganda, for the front, because it's fashionable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are we out now? OK. Good. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I don't think you are cynical. 

SUBJECT: Well, yes. I am. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have a difference of opinion. 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHS] 