SUBJECT: OK, one night the German's surrounded the children's camp and took all the children. They shipped them out. I lived near one of these bridges. And I heard the trucks going, and I looked out the window, and I saw trucks of children. And I knew where they got them from. And I knew my brothers there. 

Well, that was middle of the night. And I didn't care if I get killed. And I started looking for connections to get them out, to get him out. And he was about to leave the ghetto. And somebody snatched him. And he's alive, lives in New York. That's the only one. 

INTERVIEWER: How was he rescued, do you know? 

SUBJECT: Somebody seen all the-- There was like a, they call it, it was like a big, it was like a big, like you've got here, the capital. And that's where the, you know, everything was there and in order for them they went out through that gate out there. And the policemen got them out for me, a friend, a policeman. He got them, got them off the truck from there. 

Because there were so many children and somehow he managed to get them off the truck. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, this was within, inside the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: This was still inside the ghetto, yeah. It was just about to leave the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: And he managed to stay in the ghetto until-- 

SUBJECT: The other policeman, yeah, but he was going to get them out. Til he' went to Auschwitz. He was in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: But he survived Auschwitz, also? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, one day the surrounded us. And so, you know what's going on like this? We're working and staying in lines and-- and starvation. What's going through the few years till 1944 came. And they started liquidating all the ghettos because the Allied forces came into play. And they started liquidating the ghettos. 

So what they did, they did it by areas. They were sent out into certain areas and get the people, take them on the trucks, ship them out to Auschwitz. They came to our area. And before they came to our courtyard, I heard the screaming in the next courtyard. I knew what's going on. 

We didn't have any bathrooms. We didn't have the facilities in our homes. We had, you know, what they call in German latrine, you know, outhouse, in the courtyard, bathrooms, toilets, one bathroom and toilets. Well, I had entered toilet. I crawled into the hole, held onto two poles inside. They came into the toilet looking for people. If people did hide there. But they didn't see me because I was alone. 

When it quieted down, I got out. I don't think I will ever forget. I think I still feel that smell. I think for weeks I scrubbed and scrubbed. And I still smelled because I was standing up to here in you know what. 

For my own way, I fought them as much as I could in my ow-- my own way I wasn't just going to give in just like that. So I survived that time. It didn't help me much because then they had less people, less people. And it was easier for them to find the people. And that was it. So in August I was shipped to Auschwitz. 

I came with my mother and with my younger brother. Because the others they caught before. Well, when we got to Auschwitz I thought either I am crazy or everybody here must be crazy. It's unreal. 

The people were screaming because when they were shipping us out of the ghetto in cattle cars, they would give us a loaf of bread. Because they said to take everything, that we're going to work camps, that we're going to better places. We going to get work. We're going to have nice homes-- not that we believed it that much, but we had no choice. Because if you didn't go, you got killed anyhow. You got shot anyhow. So it didn't make any difference. 

So when we got to Auschwitz all I could here is the people screaming. If you have any food, please throw it to us because they're going to take it away from you. I said, gee, they took us to a nut house. That can't be. Either I'm losing my mind, or these people lost their mind. 

I found out later who lost their mind. Well, naturally, they separated us-- took my brother separate, took my mother separate, took me separate. Til I saw the chimney and I found out what's it all about. We didn't have any clothes. We were barefoot-- just some piece of rag. 

They stripped you. They x-rayed you. They took everything away from you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They x-rayed you? You went and actually had a physical x-ray of your? 

SUBJECT: In there. They checked us in there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In where? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, you mean an examination? 

SUBJECT: Not as such-- just to see if we didn't hide anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They x-rayed you? Or they examined you? Or both? 

SUBJECT: Examined you. Not x-rayed-- examined. Then the teeth, every piece of gold. If you had a gold tooth-- in Europe they used to cap it with gold-- they pulled it out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you remember knowing what that chimney was for right at when you arrived? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long did it take you to find out? 

SUBJECT: The others wised me up right away. When we got-- they put us in the bunks or whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They pulled out the teeth. Was there any anesthesia? Was there? 

SUBJECT: Are you joking? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to know. 

SUBJECT: That would be too good to be true. Anyhow, they separated us, and they put in some kind of -- They called it "blocks" where they had put the people. 

And they kept us a lot outside and it was hot-- August. And they had like water pipes going all the way with faucets here and there. But the water was shut off. And I stayed there for hours, and I felt I'm going to faint. And I don't care what they're going to do to me. I went to the faucet just to get that drop that was dripping because there was no water. The water was shut down. 

And one of the women guards hit me over the head and just knocked me out cold. I don't know when I came through, or how I came through. I have no recollection of it. I guess the other girls-- well, they probably couldn't touch me. But maybe later on she said that I get in because nobody could make a move or they would get the same thing. 

Well, I was there one day. You must have heard of Dr. Mengele. He was the one who made the election who goes where. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe him? Do you remember what he looked like? 

SUBJECT: Not really. Because he was a tall guy. He had this whip in his hand. He was tall, slim. And you know, everything was so fuzzy. You just didn't believe it that this is for real. You thought you're dreaming. 

And then he would make the selection. You go here, you go here, you go here, you go here. Which we found out later that what it meant that the ones who went on this side went to the gas chamber. The ones who went on this side went to concentration camps. 

Well, I was lucky to go to a concentration camp because they were looking for the young strong people. So I was six weeks in Auschwitz, and then they shipped us out. There were 1,000 girls on that transport, and they shipped us to a labor camp, which was about 100 miles from Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How is it that no one seems to remember what Dr. Mengele looked like? He saw so many people. 

SUBJECT: Because everybody-- can you picture yourself coming in from a halfway normal life, coming into a madhouse? Coming into something like this? Can you picture yourself being lucid? It's impossible. You were fuzzy. You couldn't believe it. That's not happening. That's unreal. I'm dreaming. 

That's the feeling everybody must have had. That's why we don't remember so clearly the face. Because it's just unreal. It couldn't be. In this day and age? The cultured people-- the German people doing this to other people? You couldn't conceive it. Your brain didn't take it in. That's all-- just didn't take it in. 

Well, anyhow they shipped us to that labor camp. And when we got there, there was some girls already. There were 500 girls from Czechoslovakia and 500 girls from Hungary. There were 2,000 girls in that camp that came before us. And as long as that came before us, they got the better positions. 

What do I call better positions? They worked in the kitchen. They had the inside jobs, which were better than to go out to a factory or to build homes. Well after we got there, next day like 5:00 o'clock, they had the whistle. And you had to get out and go outside and line up. 

Well, we did not have assigned jobs yet, so they started calling out who is a dress maker? Who's a shoemaker? Who is this? Who was that? 

Well, I was none of that because I never had a profession. Because where I come from girls never worked. Girls were supposed to get married and have children and have a home-- not work. 

Well, they kept calling professions, and girls kept picking up their hands. And I see they're going to run out of professions, and God knows what they're going to do with me if I don't have a profession. So they ask who is a carpenter, and I picked up my hand. I'm a carpenter. 

I figured it's better than nothing. So I became a carpenter. I knew about carpentry as much as I know it's a latency. That's how much I knew about carpentry. But I figured it out-- that I got to be something. 

So I started building homes. Then other girls joined in, in masonry and oh, whatever you need. And we built homes-- private homes for the Germans. We had a few German men with us, and we had a foreman. They knew that we're not carpenters, but they showed us how to knock a nail in and how to bring stuff. And they taught us. 

And I worked. Sometimes if the weather was very bad and we could not during the winter time. So we'd cut wood in the woods. I had to cut woods and things like this. 

Well, finally the time came when in 1944 around Christmas time. I believe it started before. But when they came to us, it was around Christmas time. They started liquidating all the camps because the allied forces were coming closer and closer. 

So what they did, they would pick up the people from one camp, marched them for god knows how many miles. And whoever dropped, whoever couldn't walk-- they would shoot them right there. The ones who still could make it-- they would bring them in the next camp keep up the people from death camp and again, and again. 

What they did later with the people mostly-- either they took them to the woods and shot them all, or they took them to the ocean and drowned them. When they came to our camp, we naturally didn't know this when they came to our camp. The girls told us what's happening. And I said, oh no, you're not going to get me that easy. 

We had the tool shed we had in the camp. Every morning we would pick up the tools before we were marched to work. And in the evening, we would bring it back and lock it in the shed. And naturally, the foreman had the key. 

And I said, I'll be damned if I'm going to go and die in the woods someplace. I broke into the shed. It was a little bit already-- because people came from other camps. And they were trying to get us ready, and we had a warehouse where the German people-- the SS and the SS women. And they had a warehouse there with clothes because you know our girls were sewing for them and doing everything for them. They would send them materials. The girls would sew, and they would send it to the families. 

So I broke into the warehouse and took very nice clothes for myself, broke into in tool shed. I took some fence cutters for the iron. Because our fence was not electrified. It was a regular fence, only we had the search lights going around our camp. And we were located in the woods. 

Here was our camp. Here was the road, and here were the woods. All that separated me from our camp to the woods was the road. All I had to do is make that before the search light gets me. I took a friend of mine, which she was really a sister of my friends-- a younger sister. My friend died of TB in the ghetto, which my sister died too of PB in the ghetto. 

And when we went to Auschwitz-- I'm going back a little bit-- because we're in the same transport, so her father said to me, you are responsible for her. And wherever I went I saw to it that she is with me. And I said, look, I am breaking out. I am not going to die that easy for them. I'm not going to make it that easy for them. 

She said wherever you go, I go with you. I watched the search light when it was in a different direction. I cut the wire, waited again till the search light was the other direction, and I dashed to the woods with her. And this was in December, and the snow was that high. 

We got to the woods. She said, what do we do now? I said, I don't know. First of all, it's night. We're going to stay put right here. They're not going to look for us because they don't know now who is missing because the next day they're not going to have a counting because other people came in. And they're not going to have their regular recounting like they have every morning, so don't worry about that. 

It's just we don't know where we're going because it's night. I don't know what direction to go. I might go back to the camp. I said, let's stay in the woods. 

Well, we were deep in snow like this. I said, look, let's sit down back to back. This way, at least we keep our backs warm. And that's all. Let's pray we're not going to get pneumonia. You know we didn't even get the sniffles. I swear to you. We didn't even get the sniffles. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thankfully, you survived. 