INTERVIEWER: --now. 

SUBJECT: Yes? 

INTERVIEWER: Early life-- 

[BEEP] 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's start with something. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: So your name? 

SUBJECT: My name is Alex Prince. I born in Hungary. That's name my birthplace Szerencs, Zemplen county. 

INTERVIEWER: When? 

SUBJECT: 1904, December 22. My father had a bakery, and he has eight children, four boy and four girls. We live a really beautiful Jewish life. My father was an Orthodox Jew. We don't went every day in the shul, but we Friday night and Saturday morning, the boys with their father, we went together in the temple, the Orthodox beautiful temple. 

We keep the Shabbos. We don't work in Saturday Shabbos. And my mother is also a very religious Jewish beautiful woman. And the tragic was the end when they kill her in the ghetto. 

So we live beautiful. And at that time, we have no difference Jew or Gentile. We live friendly with the Gentile people. My father has a big shop, and the Gentiles, they patronized all the same thing like a Jewish people. We have no differences, never 

INTERVIEWER: There was never any anti-Semitism when you were growing up? 

SUBJECT: That time, never. My life in Hungary, not this early. That was happened before the second war, when the Hitler came out in Germany. You know, I have one brother, he live in Berlin, Germany. One brother also lived in London, England. And my younger brother and I stay home with my father, because he was the oldest. And I took out his bakery, and we live very nicely and beautifully. 

And we have nowhere was even-- once happened when war started, the Nazis was in Hungary, you know, my father liked to sit in front of his house with pipe in his mouth. And the policeman walk front of him. And he said, hey, parasz. You know parasz It mean like here cowboy. Hey parasz, don't you know me? Could you say to me hello? And he stand up and he gave the policeman a slap. 

INTERVIEWER: A flick? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, a good one. Because he was a strong man. And I show you these pictures. I don't know if you could see it. Here. 

INTERVIEWER: That's your father? 

SUBJECT: This my father. And the mayor in the city call me up. He said, Sanyi, they call me Sanyi, you know, you can't do that today. Is no more. So you have to do something, otherwise, your father get trouble. I said, what I can do? Said, give some money. I said OK, how much do they want? So I paid him out. That's what-- 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: It was 1937. 

INTERVIEWER: Was that the first sign that something was changing? 

SUBJECT: First sign after the change, yes. And I would say thank God my father died 1939. Is shame to say it. Thank god my father died. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: That he didn't live longer to see what happened? 

SUBJECT: No, nothing, that's why I mean. And that was about 1939. And 1944, they took me in labor camp 1939, '38-'39. 

INTERVIEWER: You were at that time 34 years old? 

SUBJECT: Yes, about 34, 35, 34, 35 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have a family? 

SUBJECT: And I married, I was 32. For a nice Jewish young lady from Budapest. And here was very educated Jewish lady. My father love her very much, because we go in the Friday night, always eat supper after came out with the temple and to my parents' house. And then Hanukkah, when he sings the Hanukkah song, Ma Nishtana, not Ma Nishtana. 

INTERVIEWER: Maoz Zur. 

SUBJECT: Maoz Zur. They was happy. Because you know, in the small town, Jewish girl, even with [INAUDIBLE] girl, they don't too much about. Like a good educated girl like my wife was came from Budapest. They have much more Jewish education with the [INAUDIBLE] girl. That was my opinion. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT: I have children. The first children, I don't-- I don't know-- met-- when my wife was pregnant, they took me away 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: So you never saw your children? 

SUBJECT: I never saw my children. And because the Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Carpatholia was with Russian hand and Chechen and Romania, they get back for in Hungary. And they don't have enough men to drive the truck, so the Jewish people, they have license for driving truck and vehicle, they call in. 

INTERVIEWER: So they called you up as a driver? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you working as a driver before? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your occupation? 

SUBJECT: I-- we have two truck in the bakery, and I drive this. 

INTERVIEWER: You drove? 

SUBJECT: So I went in, and they put in the Hungarian army clothes, and took for a Red Cross battalion and took me out in Kolomyia I think is Poland, part of the Galicia. They call Galicia. 

INTERVIEWER: And in the occupied part by the Germans, in occupied Poland? 

SUBJECT: Yes, occupied by the Germans. That time, they already-- Poland was the German hand. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were a Munkaszolgálat 

SUBJECT: A Munkaszolgálatos yeah. I wasn't Munkaszolgálatos, I was in this truck. But when the German get for Hungary, and they get enough soldier to drive truck. The Jewish people, they took out Munkaszolgálatos They took me out, and I get in. 

INTERVIEWER: When you left your wife did you have a sense that you may not come back? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I have sense. I have sense by my brother at that time was in America already, my older. And the avenue we can go for Australia, look for-- how you say when you somebody knows-- I was a baker. They look for people they could use. But they get returned, my brother and I. And the main thing, I get old parents. I don't want left them. 

INTERVIEWER: So you tried to leave? 

SUBJECT: I started to go and leaving Hungary. But no chance. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't get a visa? 

SUBJECT: I don't get none. My brother sent them the application, but we don't get answer the right. They turn it down. Anyway, my father died 1939. I come home a couple days. And we have to go for Izo, near to Munkacs a small town. They put the-- they call me over there for Munkaszolgálatos. 

And we was only there a couple weeks, and they took out with the train to Poland. And we working on the road, and cut the forest for the tree. And work after and after for the German army in 1941. 1941, generally, it was already in-- on the Leningrad, terrible with death. People didn't have nothing to eat. When they see a frozen dead horse on their way, they eat it raw, and they all get sick. 

And over there, and on the Leningrad, I meet my brother, my youngest brother. He was also a baker, but he wasn't married. And only we have to sit down for a cellar or anywhere a couple hours, the Russian army took it. I said, I don't-- we don't know anything about Auschwitz and what happened over there. 

Because usually, until '44, I get postcard my wife. And I know my birth, my daughter, and I have a daughter, so I want to go back. My every force-- every life, I force myself to go home. And he went to Russia, I come back for Hungary. And since, I never hear anything about my brother. And I-- 

So slowly, we go back, and the name-- is Dawidko in Poland. They put together again all the Munkaszolgálatos. Oh, I speak Hungarian again. They left on the thousand, you know, the battalion. And about 140 battalion with even could make one once battalion 200 men because it's all dead, all get died. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? How did they all get killed? 

SUBJECT: Sickness, and killed. And the worst thing was the typhus, you know, the fl-- the fly-- what they call this-- fly? Not fly. 

INTERVIEWER: Lice. 

SUBJECT: Lice. So I get-- in Dawidka I get sick too. And they took me in [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] This was the camp for the typhus camp. I don't-- I think the people heard about [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And that was not hospital. That was a place where is a horse, and the horse and the cow standing for the farm, only some straw on the floor. And we live there without food, without any medicine. 

And nobody-- very few people live. Once they find out you know, we have Hungarian guard. The Germans said if we killed the Jewish, you go home, you free. So they make fire on this place we call hospital. That was not hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: You were sleeping on the straw, and-- 

SUBJECT: Throwing them-- 

INTERVIEWER: And they made fires in the straw? 

SUBJECT: Fire. And when is the people run out, they shoot, they kill. There I still get lucky, and I get alive. 

INTERVIEWER: That was 1940? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was about 1940. No, it was 1941-42. Because 1941 was when I think that the-- when the Russian army break the German rings around. And I get a little bit-- I get stronger and stronger. And I went back my battalion. They took me, my battalion, and we get slowly years and years there to Hungary. And we find that in Budapest. 

And before Budapest, a couple, about 20, 30 miles, then the name was keresztul something like that in Hungary. The Hungarian Nazi, they call Nyilas. The Nyilas abduct us, and they kill of us 20 people, all company. 

And I remember very well some Hungarian high ranking soldier that very high up came over to our automobile, and they find out our commander and I told him, front of us, you-- we take you to-- you have to save these people. Because don't you know that Germany is out already and the Russian in Budapest? 

But you know, and finally, I went to Budapest, and I get work for a German army kitchen, in the cellar. That time, it was already the main army was in Buda. And this was Budapest. In 1944 or '45, January, the Russian make us free. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me, what was it like to be in a Jewish battalion on the side the Hungarian German armies? How were you treated? What-- 

SUBJECT: They didn't have nothing to do with the German army. We have Hungarian commanders, and about 24 prisoner. They got guns and got. You know-- 

INTERVIEWER: 24? 

SUBJECT: Guard. 

INTERVIEWER: Guards? 

SUBJECT: Guard. 

INTERVIEWER: For how many Jews? 

SUBJECT: About 200, 180 Jews. And we went to work. And we was good feeling together because I want tell you, we make settle to give it to them, they give a piece of bread or the torn shirt, or the shoes. And my wife paid out in Hungary. They sent from his wife and they collect it. That was the rule. And this was we survive. And is very hard to describe. 

And when it was '44, this young Vari you know, in Budapest, the big building has every house I been to go out the other building. I don't know how you call it. But I'm still not speaking good English. And the Russian came over there. And some Jewish people was over there. They came from Munkacs and around Munkacs, Karpatalja 

They know how you speak Russian. And I was really Hungarian, and I don't speak other foreign language. And I don't want to go even there again back for prisoner for the Russian. I want to go home, in Szerencs, about 250 miles in Budapest. 

Anyway, with the next day, we get free. We went where we want to go. And first, we go to Budapest. My sister live, I want find out her. And I find out her. She was in Budapest in the ghetto. Some people they can-- the German has no time to send out. 

And but the husband already, the German took and walk out for Budapest, and they never came back. So I went back to Szerencs But on the way was they find out that-- we were walking. And the people was good to us, the Christian people. Because they don't find very little Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in the brigade, and the labor brigade, you didn't know what was happening to the Jews? You didn't know about the concentration camps? 

SUBJECT: We have nothing. We don't have radio. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did you react when you were on your way home, and you found out what happened? 

SUBJECT: You can't believe. I want kill everybody. And when I arrive in the morning in my town, and I see my bakery is still up, but somebody living. And I go to the door, a woman came out. I said-- she recognized me. I said, I want in and you want to get out of here, because I kill everybody. I-- we was terrible. 

And again, the Hungarian police come to me. I said, Alex, cool down. They going away. They don't let you-- you take what you have. And my neighbor, they start to crying. Oh, thank god, you Jews back. I said, you don't want to be back. You don't want to be back for nobody. No Jewish people you want here to see it again. 

So no, I said, why you crying now? Where my-- they took your my mother, she was 75 years old. They took us for the-- how you call-- when you see in Western film the horse wagon and pull up in the street? My old mother and everybody two side in the street. They left her. 

INTERVIEWER: Pulled up behind a wagon on the road? 

SUBJECT: On the road, yeah. Yes. Because she was a good Jew, and they think we was rich. But you know, they not was rich. We have only a bakery. We live like Jewish people 

INTERVIEWER: And they dragged her behind the-- behind the-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I find out. Even I find out what happened my wife and my children. Was at that time, she was four years old, a girl. My next door, a girl came home from Auschwitz and told me she was with her, and even she was in the wagon when they took in the wagon, she want be make suicide. She want kill herself and the baby. 

INTERVIEWER: Your wife? 

SUBJECT: My wife. 

INTERVIEWER: And the baby? 

SUBJECT: But arrive in Auschwitz. And when they select that, the right or left, she went-- they want take away the baby, the German, because she was a young woman. She don't give up the baby, she went to gas chamber with the baby. And my wife, they died in the ghetto in Szatmarnemeti 

INTERVIEWER: Your-- 

SUBJECT: My mother. My mother. I'm sorry. So you know, it's not so easy, because I'm crying inside now. And still, I don't remember. I never will remember. 

And I teach my son. You know my son. He's a good Jew now, and he don't remember-- he remember what happened his father and his grandparents. And I'm part of a defense league-- how you call, defense league? And I tried to do everything and I don't want to forget what happened for the Jewish people. But no reason kill like-- 

We can't have fight against them, because they don't have men, only woman and children. What can you fight a woman with no gun and children? It's just like a chicken, shot through down in the neck. That's what happened. 

And you see, here's my sister and brothers, and the horse of my father's bakery on that side. You could see a [INAUDIBLE]. That was my father name. And I'm here for my friends in my town. It's about already 60 years ago. Because I'm 77 years old. 

And here is my-- this picture, in the middle is myself, and two brother. This is the brother-- brother, he left to Russia. The Russian take him. And this brother lived in London. He die in 1956 over there. 

And my oldest brother was a Hearst newspaper company was a correspondent for in the war, a war correspondent. And he gave me over there in Szerencs. And he helped me out to go. I told them I can't stay here. I can't look my neighbor. And I get back my business. I make a living, and money over there already. 

No, I left everything for nothing. I could sell it. I left it over there. I want to go out. I can't look at my neighbor, and nobody. Just out, out, out. And that's the end. And he took me. He has a friend in the American army, a high ranking soldier, and took me in the airplane in Paris. And I waited for three months the visa to get in United States. Thank god. 

And I working here in the bakery. I live in New York 25 years. I married second time here. And I have one son. And he is a young doctor now, and you know, he's a real feeling Jew. And he knows what happened with the Jewish people. He don't forget either. He does. 

And you know, it's not so easy, what was-- how you get out survive. I once the time, I just like every-- like no thing-- I work like a monkey. And we hunger. Without clothing. If you see a dead people on the way, mostly German soldier, we took out his shoes. I make the clothing with a hat, otherwise the winter time we frozen up. 

That's why we help ourself. Nobody help. Nobody else helping us. You must help yourself. 

INTERVIEWER: In the Jewish brigade, did you have your own commandos like Jews? 

SUBJECT: No Jews, no Jewish commandos. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing? Everybody was equal? 

SUBJECT: Everybody was equal Doctor, dentist, doctor. Only one doctor was a company doctor, but he has no medicine, no nothing, no food. You know, I was very friendly, my friend was a doctor. He in Poland. 

Because we sometimes, we can work anywhere where we want. We went scrub the door, the poor people. And he said, he knows, he was Ungvar in Karpatalja, near to Munkacs He knows Russian language, because he was a Russian occupation many years. And he teach. 

He give me advice for the people, doctor advice. We get a plate of soup. There was over there the people is very hungry, very poor, and very nothing to eat. They have only one room. It was terrible. One times I slept and a small hole in the roof. And you know, the under-- 

INTERVIEWER: Attic. 

SUBJECT: And I see hang up a small basket on the top. I said, my god, what we have on the basket? And it was dark. And I-- and the piece of bread was green. Was no difference, we eat. 

And the German soldier don't let me drink in the water, in the pump. We can only eat what that dirty in the floor, under we get something dirty, in the animal dirt and everything. That's why people get sick. And most people get that. You know, they can't hold everything. 

INTERVIEWER: How many of the 200 Jews in the labor battalion survived? 

SUBJECT: I said for a 240 labor Munkatabor men, two, three, not more. 

INTERVIEWER: Two, three out of the 200? 

SUBJECT: Out of the 200. 

INTERVIEWER: And the rest? 

SUBJECT: Is all died. 

INTERVIEWER: All died? Disease, hunger? 

SUBJECT: Disease, hunger, and they lose his-- 

INTERVIEWER: Interest in living? 

SUBJECT: In the life. [INAUDIBLE] the strongest Jewish people, they is strong. They lose his life much faster than when somebody was skinny, and they don't have so strong. It is terrible. I don't know you interested, I get German monthly German? I have every month, a German money for the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you want to stop? 

SUBJECT: No. 

CREW: Anything else? 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

SUBJECT: And I'm here, and I happy with my wife. But I'm crying enough. Many times I have nightmare. Sometimes my wife wake me up-- why you hollering? What you-- I said, I'm sorry, I. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the nightmare? What is in the dream? What is in the nightmare? 

SUBJECT: What happened with me. 

INTERVIEWER: Particular scenes? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, the thing they-- 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT: They hit me, always in the back with the stick. And the stick get used. You only-- you never work, only the you was in the coffee house to play card, and the poor people working, you was always rich. And that's why they was all hit. Because they-- we -- the Jewish people with a normal life. 

My father teach me if you have working man, you paid for it. You never owe money for working man. And never spend more money what you could cover your feet. And you want to drink, don't go in the bar. Buy it and drink home. So they always teach us the good things that save money and help people. 

See, I learn my father with every Friday, we went to the temple. You know, that time, some poor Jewish people walked through the city. I don't think so you know that. As-- and they went in the temple and they pick up everybody, pick up a couple people to bring home to get eat and sleep. 

And that was a Jewish life. Help each other. When the Talmud said, help the people. But nobody help us. God forgot us. So I lose my faith. But since I'm retired and I went to, I get back, and I go every Friday night, every Saturday morning in the temple. And I learning the Talmud. And I give-- I get a good, very good understand. 

INTERVIEWER: You lost your faith, but now you believe again? 

SUBJECT: I lost it. [INAUDIBLE] We can't carry that anymore. We have no strength. I don't know what we're to carry. A piece of bread, or a cover, or a shirt. 

And then any time the German hold us, just like a gangster, they rob me. I beg them, please don't take it, because the main thing is a life, a spoon or a knife. That for belong to my life. If I don't have a spoon and a knife, I can't eat. This way, I could eat anything. 

And they took everything out. They don't-- they want to be-- they want to us to die and never come back. They don't need for us to what happen. I find out just when I get to Budapest 1944, 1945. We never knew that. 

Even I don't-- when I came home. Even I think I find my wife home. And I have a Christian maid before I left my house. And I find out where she live. I went her, and I ask her, why don't you went my wife to Budapest? 

Because his father live in Budapest. Maybe could survive. But she don't have a chance for the baby. She don't want give up the baby. That Christian girl won't take out the baby. 

They don't know what really was going to happen. They don't know Auschwitz. They don't know Buchenwald and Treblinka and all these things. They don't know anything. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, we're going to have to stop now. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything more you want to say before we stop? 

SUBJECT: You know, I can't say more years and date and friends. Because I was-- I don't-- I forgot already. And I worked so hard, my living when I get free, so I get help myself if I want to live. And I help my new family. That's the way. 

And even if not, I went through so much, this age, you don't remember. I don't want-- even if I mark-- they took away every piece of paper, notebook. They took everything. Very few lucky men have such a good memory, too good. 

But I read the book. And I find out what was really, and what was happened. Read the book. That was true. They don't have the book. They don't say such are true things. But we have in the book and read these all miserable-- much more voice, and much more true. 

They sent out that the Jewish people, my friends, on the tree, winter time. Was minus Siberia cold. And put water on the frozen on-- and pulled down like a dead man, frozen dead man. That happened. 

And they went to pick up akna you know, the mine. And the field in the front on Russia. And they kill not an animal or the mine killed us. Most people get killed in the back. They shoot us in the back our own guards. 

INTERVIEWER: Your own guards? 

SUBJECT: Our own guards. Because they said kill the Jewish people anyway. You go home. Because they don't like it over there. They don't want to get over there. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. OK, we're going to have to stop. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Thank you, and I'm sorry I can't help more. 

INTERVIEWER: No, it was fine, thanks. 

SUBJECT: What we have, what I said was true. Is more true what I said. Is not enough what-- what I said. You see, take a look my family, my two, three brothers. The middle is mine, me. Now look at this Jewish man, strong like. 

Here is my sister and my brothers. And this is me when I was a young boy. And this is was my bakery. Oh, I don't show this. That was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Munkaszolgalatos? 

SUBJECT: Munkaszolgalatos 

INTERVIEWER: When was it taken? 

SUBJECT: They took me Hungarian army clothing. And we was real good Hungarian That's a shame to say it. 

INTERVIEWER: Pictures. I know that. Thank you. 

SUBJECT: And here is my wife, brother. He was in Nuremberg trial. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I'm sorry. So Jewish people went through enough. 