INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. Where did we-- 

INTERVIEWER: You arrived at the farmhouse. 

SUBJECT: OK, I arrived at the farmhouse. The family consisted of two sons, and the farmer, and his wife, and this daughter who was a teacher, who wasn't there at that particular moment. I was coming into the house, and the farmer was very nice. And they welcomed me. I went into the room, and they showed me my bed. And that's where I slept for a month. And the farmer and his wife slept in other alcove. And the days were very long days. I mean, I had really nothing to do basically. We had no books. The farmer had no books at all, and I had nothing to do than washing dishes, ironing all these men's shirts every day, and doing little things, nothing special. 

And in the month-- month and a half about after I arrived, my mother was in danger, so they brought my mother. And that changed, of course, my life completely because I had somebody that I could talk to. And basically, mother and I sat down on a big couch in a corner. And that's where-- it was a pied a terre. That's where we sit. 

And our daily life was we would get up in the morning, not the first couple of months, but the second month, or the third month, I don't know when it exactly was. But we would start catching fleas. That was our first encounter. We were riddled with fleas. I mean, the beds were not very clean, and it was straw. And, of course, it was breeding. So that was one of our excitements of the day. How many could we catch in the morning? That was the way we started. And we would go crazy of course being eaten up by these animals. And we would tell the farmer that we have fleas. And he says there was nothing he could do about it. We must have brought them in. Well, of course, that was idiotic because we didn't bring them in. But it was due to the dirt basically. The woman never cleaned. 

She always ran with a hat. She had a scarf always around her. She never washed her hair practically. So after a couple of months, what did we get? Lice. We were covered it with lice. And mother and I would scratch our heads. We never had any idea at the beginning what we had. And one day, I said to mother, I don't know what do I have. It feels like things on my head. So she looked, and she absolutely became hysterical. You have lice. So maybe you have them too. So we looked, and we took a comb. We had a little trevet that we put under my head-- and she took a comb-- and just hundreds came out of my head. So what were we going to do? How do we get out of these things? There was no way. We had no medication or anything. There was nobody knew that we were there. 

So how were we going to get stuff? So the only way we knew was boiling water. Absolutely boiling. Throw it over your head. And then, you take these little eggs, and what is left, you kill with your finger. So that, in essence, what we did. So I mean my scalp was of course burned to crisp most likely. But anyway, we eventually got rid of the lice. I didn't know how we did it. It took months, months, months, months, 

INTERVIEWER: With boiling water? 

SUBJECT: With boiling boiling water over our heads. So that was a very unpleasant thing that we had to live with. 

Another thing was that she constantly fed us, and she didn't feed us during the day, basically. And my mother would have to make every day rye bread. She would say, here is the rye meal, you know the raw meal, and the flour, and you make this. My mother had never been baking rye, but how do you make rye bread? You have no equipment, nothing. And we had a potbelly stove in the living room. That was our only heat. And the heat went only on the 15th of November to the 15th of February. So if you know the Dutch climate, when it's raining, and cold, and damp, and rotten, then you know what it was like. 

So if you want to talk about medical problems-- bursitis, arthritis, whatever, I think I can trace it all wonderfully back to my era in living on the farm. 

Anyway, one terrible thing was always happening when suddenly-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you cook daily? 

SUBJECT: We didn't cook. We got the meal from the farmer. 

INTERVIEWER: But the rye bread. 

SUBJECT: The rye bread was put on a stove, on our potbelly stove. That was the way it was baked. There was no oven. We don't have oven. 

INTERVIEWER: Only the winter months? 

SUBJECT: All in the winter months. Only in the winter. Of course only in the winter months. And then she had a little stove outside the house, and we had a dog. We bought a dog that would be our watch dog because it was very dangerous. There was no warning system that if, for example, somebody would come over the fields, we would know. There was only a bridge in front of the house, and then on the side of the house was the field. There-- you know, you could walk over basically. But because we had a dog there in a big house, we knew if somebody would come that the dog would bark, and then we would know at somebody had come to the farm. 

So every season would pass by from winter to spring, from spring to summer, and summer to fall, and fall to the winter. One year after another. And I was 14. I was 15. And I was 16. And I never had any fun. My friends would play, hopefully, in the sun. And then you know, whatever they did, but I was inside. And I must say thanks to mother and her courage and her really support, I think I survived it as a child. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know the day of the week? 

SUBJECT: Sometimes we did, and sometimes we didn't. You know, sometimes. It depended very much. We would listen to Radio Oranje, which was underground. We had a radio. It was underground. And the farmer occasionally would let us walk and listen. And then at six o'clock at night, it would be Radio Oranje from England. And that was only our way of knowing what was going on in the world because we had no newspapers ever. She would never give us anything. So we didn't really know what, what was going on in the world. They would tell us occasionally, but very minimal, sketchy. So Radio Oranje was our highlight of the day. It was what we looked forward to. And this is what really happened that we could listen to. 

But on the 16th of December, 1943, every night the RAF would fly from England via the northern tip of Holland to Germany to bomb. And of course the anti-aircraft was always trying to get the planes down. And indeed, on the 16th of December, 1943, they were lucky. They hit two RAF planes, and it was our luck they landed in our backyard burning to a crisp, of course. 

INTERVIEWER: Two planes? 

SUBJECT: Two planes. The pilots had escaped. They just got out and escaped into the field. But the minute, of course, the anti-aircraft hit those planes, the SS was zoom on the route to find out what had happened, where were the pilots, and they were going to search all the farms. 

Now, we had a little hole in the wall, a kind of a panel that you pushed back. And there was a hole behind it, and that's where mother and I would hide. First, we would have to climb into the alcove and have a straw-- what do you call it-- a rope, a ladder, that we would go up into the farm attic, where all the bales of hay and straw were. Then, we go down, and that's where our hole was in the wall. And that's-- we could push it back, and then we would go in. And then we had to lock it up, that it would look natural if somebody would pass by. 

Now, this hole was-- our seating places were bales of straw and bales of hay. I don't have to tell you what comes out of bales of straw, rats. So mother and I would sit there for one hour, two hours, two days, three days, whatever had to be done with all these rats running over us. You couldn't say a word. Mother would say shh to me because if I would make a sound, that was it. The Nazis were knocking on the walls. 

INTERVIEWER: You heard them? 

SUBJECT: Bang, we heard them walk through the stalls, where, where the cows were. We heard them into the farm because it's a-- don't you have anybody hidden here? Or you know, where are these pilots? And the farmer would say, I don't know. They say, well, don't you have any other people hidden here? He says of course not. So we had to be as quiet as a mouse, while the mouse and the rats were running around us. So I don't have to tell you how I react to any of these little animals. I go absolutely in hysterics when a mouse runs around. But that was one very difficult episode. 

So they didn't find us out. So after about two or three weeks, they would come back periodically to see if anybody was hidden. So constantly-- 

INTERVIEWER: And then the dog would bark? 

SUBJECT: And then we would-- or somebody would see somebody would be in the fields and say, oh, I see the Germans coming. Edith and mother have to go. 

INTERVIEWER: Who would that someone be? 

SUBJECT: The farmer's son, for example. If he was outside in the field and saw a troop of Germans coming across the water, then he quickly went in and say, you know, disappear. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: The whole farm was surrounded by canal? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. But not on the whole area because the other end was of course the land. I mean the front was surrounded by a canal. So it was in '43. And then very shortly after that, we heard that father was in danger. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you have any, get any news from father? 

SUBJECT: The same thing. By the same family, this lawyer family. Again the underground would bring a letter because he knew who father was. He was the liaison between father, mother, and myself, and Renee. And Renee was with a doctor's family. And then later on, she had to go to 14 different families. She was absolutely all over the map. But she kept contact with this is one person. That was our liaison. So that was only contact we had. So then he picked up father, and father came to the farm. 

INTERVIEWER: Before, you mentioned you listened to Radio Oranje. Do you remember a particular broadcast? 

SUBJECT: No, I only can listen to Loe de Jong by saying, [SPEAKING DUTCH] 

I mean, that was the cue. And when you heard that, you know, you just bubbled over emotions because there was still some freedom in the world. And it was in England. 

INTERVIEWER: Free Holland. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, free Holland was in England, in London. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they announce about the course of the war? 

SUBJECT: Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember particular-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember-- I mean it was not in '43, it was later in '44, when they invaded, of course, the south, and were trying to cross the Rhine. In 1944, it was the 17th of September. There was a landing in Arnhem and Nijmegen, Arnhem, and they didn't cross the Rhine. And that was real catastrophic for all of us because we never were liberated 'til much later in May the next year. But because of the invasion there and the landing of the troops failed, basically, that couldn't cross the Rhine, we were stuck. But my sister was liberated earlier than we were. And the southern part of Holland, of course, with liberated much earlier. But we were waiting desperately because we became more hungry, and we had no food. We ate tulip bulbs. We ate junk, junk, junk. And we had food, she made sure that it was maggots. 

So when my father came, things were, of course, more pleasant for us three as a family because we had each other. And how did I spend my days? Mother would teach me French, German, geography, little bit of arithmetic, all out of her head. We had no books. Nothing, books. And then we would say, what shall we do today? What shall we talk about today? And after a while, we said, well, let's make up stories. Let's do something. Let's play some bridge. We played bridge together. Mother was-- is not a very good bridge player, but she taught me how to play bridge. That's the way we, you know, spent our time. How-- what would you do all day? 

INTERVIEWER: A story that you made up. 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, we would-- after the war, we would take big trips. And we would be united with our family. And, you know, we would do all kinds of things. One other thing that happened during the war, which my mother never knew, but I was told, which I just think is terrible in a sense as a 14 or 15-year-old to carry through the war and not allowed to tell your mother. My mother's sister have committed suicide in Amsterdam with her child while her husband was being picked up by the Nazis. The minute he was picked up in Amsterdam and brought to [DUTCH], which is where-- and [DUTCH], where really the haven was, my aunt and my mother's cousin, who had also a child the same age as myself and my nephew, threw themselves in front of the gas. And I was told-- the gas. They opened the gas in the kitchen and gassed themselves in the kitchen, the four of them. And I was the one who got this very beautiful news, and I was not allowed to tell my mother. 

But, I think, in retrospect, it's actually criminal to tell that to a child and carry it. And my mother would say, well, if Aunt Louise survives, we will do A, B, and C. I could say, mother, let's not plan this far yet. I would, you know, in my own wisdom I would say well, we can't plan. Let's wait. My grandmother had died. My mother didn't know that she had died in a home also during the war. Her brother had been taken away by the Nazis. He was spied on, and he was in hiding. And somebody told the Nazis that he was there. And he was picked up, as his whole family, and his daughter, who was then 16, also was brought to Bergen-Belsen and Theresienstadt, and was the last transport. She was-- she's also gone. So everybody was picked up and gone. There's nobody left. 

So that was another very difficult thing for me to deal with. I was not allowed to tell my mother that her sister had died. 

INTERVIEWER: Who gave you this-- 

SUBJECT: That was the friend of my mother, this girlfriend. And let's call her Toast, was her name. She would come periodically to visit us. I mean, that was the one link that we had some outside communication. And she told me that my aunt had died with the rest, and mother should not know that. Why? I don't know. In retrospect, she was a pretty strong person. But anyway, mother was not allowed to know that. So I kept that under wraps for four, or 3 and 1/2 years. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you obey that? 

SUBJECT: I was told not to upset my mother. So, you know, as a good daughter, I didn't do that. I felt this was something that was told to me in confidence, and I kept that confidence for 3 and 1/2 years 'til after the war, we all came out, and then I told mother. And I said, now, you better-- you know, not the first day, but once we were home, I told her now you better not count on everybody turning because I don't think they will. And then, of course, she was aware that her whole family had wiped out, and there was nobody left. 

But it was-- so in 1944, father came. And then we had a railway strike in 17th of September 1944, which meant that all the railway workers had to go into hiding. And the farmer took a railroad worker, he took a student, he took us, so we were about seven people, and we all slept in one room, which was a horrendous situation. But anyway, we all slept in one room-- small, maybe about the size in an attic kind of thing. Cold, horrible. But anyway we survived that period. 

But the farmer was such an incredible man. He was really so sick, and so-- I don't know why he did what he did. I did it for the money, that I do know. You know, it was incredibly expensive to hide us. 

INTERVIEWER: How much? 

SUBJECT: That I didn't know. That I have to ask father. I've never asked for it, father. But it must be incredible maybe, 100,000. 

INTERVIEWER: Dollars? 

SUBJECT: Guilders. 

INTERVIEWER: Guilders. 

SUBJECT: Well, maybe dollars by now. Incredible. You were completely wiped out. 

INTERVIEWER: Why you never asked your father? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. Occurred to me to really ask him once. Never. Strange, indeed. I never asked him. 

So why did he do this? I think he was, in the first place, he was a kind of a man he thought after the war when he would, you know, come out as a hero smelling like a rose because he had hidden Jews, railroad workers, and students. 

OK, where were we? 

INTERVIEWER: Your father had arrived at the farm. 

SUBJECT: My father arrived in a year and a half after we came to the farm, so it was about 19-- the end of '43, beginning of '44. And the farmer really utilized him enormously. He made him milk the cows, clean the cart-- the farm inside, the-- what do you call it? The manure from the cow. Give them hay. He was really a farm hand. And at one point, I remember one night he said to my father-- he was standing in the little hallway and was a huge butcher knife. And he said, I'm going to kill you now, right in front of me and my mother. And my father said, well, what do I have to lose? You can do it now, or the Germans come, and they kill me the other way. So if that makes you happy, go ahead. Well, of course he retreated and dropped the whole thing. But he was a very crazy man. He had-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it? 

SUBJECT: There was nothing. He went into stages of rage. He would scream. He would fight. He would yell. He was a person. Now he was a stooped over man with a small little mustache. Falsty, is a very crazy person, and harsh, and jealous. He was an extremely jealous man. Why? Who knows? 

INTERVIEWER: Jealous? How do you see that? 

SUBJECT: He was jealous of his wife. If his wife would talk to us, he would say, you had no business talking to them. I wasn't there. You cannot talk to them. Or, I mean, it was a mutual thing. They were both very crazy people. 

INTERVIEWER: Charles about his wife and your father? 

SUBJECT: Yes. He was not allowed. My father, if she would talk to my father, he would go out of his mind of fury. She was the most unattractive woman. She was 39 years old. She had already her menopause. I mean, she was really a very sick character. I mean, obviously, it had affected her mentally, and he was a very crazy character. So he made our life absolutely miserable. There was not a day that we would feel relaxed. I mean, we were n fear. It was a fearful existence. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he threaten you? Go on rampages against you? 

SUBJECT: No, he never threatened me. He never did anything. I was-- you know, that he knew. I was a young child still in his eyes. And the boys were very nice to me-- his two sons. I had a very nice relationship, and they would talk to me, and we would play so-called, I mean play cards. What would you do? There was nothing to do. These boys went out every Friday night and Saturday on the weekends, and I stayed home. I looked outside the window, saw the milkman come, you know. The milk boat picking up the milk cans. That was my social life. I didn't have any life. There was no life from 13 to 17. Almost 17 when were liberated. So he was a very very dangerous kind of man actually. Very sick. Psychopathic. A very sick man. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he physically attack anyone? 

SUBJECT: No, he never physically. But he wanted to once to my father was his butcher knife. So it was close enough. It was with a huge knife I never forget it. I can see it. A black handle and a long, you know, knife. And he was standing in front of my father. So my father said, OK. You know, go ahead. What do I have to lose? What did we have to lose? Nothing. It was every day the same thing from day to day. They were extraordinarily long days. You know, do we survive? How long will it last? Is there an end to it? My mother would say, have patience. We'll make it. And if I hadn't had my parents, I'm sure I would never have survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any joking ever? 

SUBJECT: No. What was there to joke about? Well, maybe occasionally, we laughed. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember about what? 

SUBJECT: No, maybe sitting with the rats. And mother and I would say, who could have thought, you know, we would sit with rats in a room? I mean, our lifestyle wasn't exactly that kind of a lifestyle. Or who would think that we were, that we were brought up to peel the skin of a sheep, or a calf, or a cow, or veal? You know. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you wash? 

SUBJECT: We washed with a little-- what do you call it-- container in a little bowl. That was it. Washing was a minimum. Let me call it minimal. There was not much hygiene. Physical hygiene, mental hygiene, wasn't much of that. And it was hard-- it was a hard story to think about, but we always said we are-- he's saving our life. He's hiding us. And no matter what, if we'll survive, we'll survive all the other things. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, did you change clothes from the-- at night? Or-- 

SUBJECT: We so-called we had a kind of a pajama. It was a piece of crud. You know, just to have the feeling that you could take out your clothes. But if you come out with fleas and lice, it's not much of a change because you go in with the fleas, and you come out with the fleas. 

INTERVIEWER: So there were two sets. One for the day, and one for the night. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And the day-- during daytime, what did you wear? 

SUBJECT: Day, I wore a skirt that we had made from cow hair. Mother had knitted that, which was extremely painful. The cow hair is very harsh. So I wasn't wearing exactly a petticoat. So that was a very painful existence. I mean, what we had to wear, and a little blouse, and the daughter would lend me her sweaters-- one of her sweaters or something like that. But I had no clothes. I had one coat, and I never needed a coat because I never was outdoors except once. And shoes. I don't even know what I wore for shoes. I think a pair of sandals. Do There was nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Skirt was on your skin? 

SUBJECT: Mhm, yeah. I mean, I had a pair of panties, but that was it because I didn't have anything else, no. And I mean, it's very interesting. I had to iron, for example. It was one of my tasks-- 10 or 15 shirts a week. And she would stand over me and said well, there's still a little crease in there. And I would say well go and fly a kite, you know, quit standing there. So the end result is I don't particularly like iron shirts now. I don't need that. I don't need to dig too deep why I don't like to do these things, but there are certain things I know I know why I have such an aversion because my, my youth was so pleasant with it. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there the family fights? 

SUBJECT: Yes, the daughter had an enormous fight as the father because she was going with a student he didn't approve of. But she was a teacher, and she was a much more-- he looked up to somebody who had some education because he himself is a very basic high school-- grammar school, that's all he had. No high school. So he was a very dumb man, and he looked very much up to this lawyer who said to him do you ever want to hide Jews? you know, I can get you a lot of money. And will you do that? And he said yes. That appealed to him-- money and prestige. And that's the way we survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any fights in your family? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Never? 

SUBJECT: No. I must say living in such close quarters, my mother and my father, it's miraculous. We never fought. There was no disharmony at all. I mean, it was difficult because we knew we had to live this way. And this is the way we had to survive. There was one room, and that's where we lived in for 3 and 1/2 years. You couldn't get out. 

INTERVIEWER: At night, that alcove-- 

SUBJECT: Was in the same room. So you went to the outhouse to go before you went to bed. You walked past all the cows in the farm, and then you went back into your room. And it was always on for me. There was no privacy, and it was horrible because he slept with his wife in the other bed. 

INTERVIEWER: Actually, you were sleeping with his father in the same-- 

SUBJECT: In the same room. And the only thing mother and I usually closed the door because we, we just had the feeling, you know, we wanted to be alone. 

INTERVIEWER: And he didn't? 

SUBJECT: Sometimes, he did, yes. Sometimes he didn't. I mean, whatever, you know, got his fancy. He was crazy. He was stark raving mad. He was a very crazy man. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. He was just a crazy person. He was a most unrealistic man. He was irrational in his behavior. He was crazy. That's the only way. And I can't pin it down because it is too long ago. But occasionally, I see how he would treat people. He yelled. He bellowed. That's the right word. He bellowed. And then, he would-- you know, you would shrink because where could we go? Nowhere. We were sitting in the same room. 

INTERVIEWER: Looking out of the window, what-- did you ever see anything that was unusual aside for the the milk boat? 

SUBJECT: No. Sometimes we saw people, strange people. And we said, who are they? Oh my God, strange people. It would be census taker or God knows what. You know, people would come to the door-- the mailman or whatever. So we would always be on guard. There was always fear. You know, who is coming? Are we going to survive? Is somebody going to tell on us? You never had the security that you would survive from day to day. But we felt the closer we come to '45, the more chance we had. 

INTERVIEWER: Any uniformed people that you ever saw? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, occasionally, people who were coming on the farm, you know to look like checking things out. I mean, the Germans always came to check things out. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Just a bunch of soldiers, who would come to the houses, and would knock on the door, and say, you know, is everything all right? Or somebody was missing, for example. They would check, and try to find the houses, and find out if there was somebody hidden on a farm. And if they felt that the farmer was very relaxed know about it and not frantically walking away because he had to hide somebody, then it was pretty good. But it was a very difficult period. And after the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see uniformed people, Germans, entering your farm? 

SUBJECT: No, I couldn't see that because it came in the back. We were too far from the road. We couldn't see him. Occasionally, if I could sit in front of a window, then I could see out. But it was nothing to see. It was an empty land. It was really you know a flat land, fields. 

INTERVIEWER: What, what did you see through that window? 

SUBJECT: Flowers, and grass, and the bridge, and water, and then long areas of more land. It was open space, enormous open space. And a farmhouse in the distance. That was all. 

INTERVIEWER: And you didn't see soldiers crossing the bridge? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Hey, couldn't it have been that the farmer was himself frightened and therefore crazy? 

SUBJECT: Maybe he was frightened. But on the other hand, he was quite secure in his doing this. I don't think he was frightened what he had done because he did it quite aware. He was very aware of his task and what he was doing. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, but if he were caught. 

SUBJECT: Well, if he was caught, of course. And he knew he-- you know, his neck was just like ours. That was-- that he knew. But I don't think he cared. He was that kind of person. He was like a bulldozer. He did his thing on a very harsh kind of way. He was a very harsh man. You would not call him gentle or lovable, far from him . He was fearful individual. I was afraid of him when he was bellowing. I lived with fear of him, of this man. What was he going to do to us? Was he going to just spy on us if at some point if he had enough money? Was he going to tell people what was he doing? 

INTERVIEWER: That he will turn you over. 

SUBJECT: Turn you over. I mean, he said that occasionally too. You know, maybe I should turn you over. So my father said, you know, if that's what you want to do, Mr. Boersma, go ahead. You know, but what could you do? You're completely in this man's hand. And you had to do just wait 'til the day of liberation came, which came on the 27th of April, 1944. The Canadians came and liberated us in the Lemmer. And that was one where the entry aircraft always came over. And on the 5th of May, we finally got clearance from the Canadian authorities that we could go home. 

INTERVIEWER: What exactly do you remember of the liberation? 

SUBJECT: I only remember the liberation that they came into the house, the farmers, and said, it's all over. You're free now. And I said to mother, now we can go outside. And she said, no, not yet. We have to make really sure that it's true. We'll wait for the radio. And then we listened to the radio, and it said yes, indeed. It was peace. And we were liberated, and everybody could come out. Now it was OK. So then, they brought us to the authorities in the Lemmer and to ask-- 

INTERVIEWER: What-- the moment of recognizing that you were free, what did you feel towards that farmer? 

SUBJECT: I guess thank, thanks, that he saved me, and that I could now go home, and that we really-- he had been you know sticking to us, and that we all could go home. And he was, he was liberating five people. 

INTERVIEWER: And do you remember the saying goodbye to him or good bye-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I mean his son, he gave us a huge horse drawn carriage maybe, like you want to call it. And we put clothe our belongings on it. And then we went. His son drove us with these two horses, two [NON-ENGLISH]. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you say goodbye to him and his wife? What did you say? 

SUBJECT: Well, I guess I kissed them goodbye, and I said thank you. And we'll see you soon. I mean, what else? I mean, even how I hated this man, he still saved my life. I mean, I never forgot that. He saved my life, even if it was a hard route, but he did it. And we paid handsomely for it. But still, I survived the war, so did my mother and my father. My sister did too. 

INTERVIEWER: And the first time you went outside that room, what do you remember at? 

SUBJECT: The wonder, the beauty, the smell of the land, the fresh air after four years. The beauty. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the day, what it looked like? 

SUBJECT: No, I don't remember what day it was. It was April 27, 1944-- '45 when we came out. And then we went-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember what kind of a day it was? You were-- 

SUBJECT: I think it was a beautiful sunny day, and we went to the Lemmer to the army headquarters, the Canadian Army at Fortis, and we told them that we were survivors and that we would like to go home. And we needed passes. You needed a pass because there were so many Germans and people who had been spies running around. So you needed a pass to get back into your town. So he gave us passes, and then we went back to our home. 

And my father's factory was still there. It was just completely empty. There was not one machine left. There was nothing in it. It was four empty walls. That was all. And our home had been lived in by Nazis, Who a Nazi family who had lived in, and it was my grandparents' home that we moved into right after the war. The minute we came home, we went to my grandpa because we knew they were dead. So that house was there. And there was some furniture left in there. And my mother took occupancy of her own house. And that was May 5th. And then, we waited for my sister to come back because we knew she had survived the war. 

And it took another day or two before she came because there were no cars. There was no communication. There were no trains. So somebody brought her. And of course, this was a terrible reunion to see each other. You know, after so many years, how beautiful that we four survived. The rest of the family had all been killed. There was nobody left. So we as our immediately family were still alive. 

And then we found out when we were in our hometown that all the families that we were friendly with had been wiped out. In my high school class, there was three of my high school friends that had survived. So that was in May, and then we moved into our house. And then, of course, I had had one year of high school. So what was I going to do? I had to go back to school. 

So the high schools were extremely nice to all the Jewish children that had survived. Put us immediately back into our classes and helped us enormously to get back into the swing, but of course was impossible to like you hadn't done for four years to suddenly be structured like this and sit in a classroom. So we were helped. We went back to school in June, and the whole summer, of course, everybody was at summer in school. And in the fall, we were promoted to the next grade. And in two years, I had my final examination. And this was my high school years, but all my friends were already in college. I was almost 17 when I came out of the war. And all my friends had already graduated. So I came into third grade, but my friends were already in sixth grade, high school. It was the high school equivalents. 

INTERVIEWER: The 3 and 1/2 years in one room, what kind of imageries come up when you think of being in that one room? What kind of thoughts? Just think of that one room, long long-- 

SUBJECT: Being trapped. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Constantly being trapped. Can't get out. I'm stuck. And if I go out, I'll be killed. So that was always a fear, the fear of never getting out. 

INTERVIEWER: Never? 

SUBJECT: Was I ever getting out? Who knew? Was there any hope that we were going to survive, one? Was there hope that we ever would be liberated? We hoped, but it went from year to year. Don't forget it went from the 12th of September, 1945 'til the 5th of May, or the 27th of April 1945. That's a long time when you're 13 years old or 14 years old is sit. I sit every single day. 

INTERVIEWER: So it's sitting all the time. 

SUBJECT: I gained an enormous amount of weight. I had no food but starch if there was any food. 

INTERVIEWER: So it's trapped, it's sitting, what else? 

SUBJECT: Not doing anything. Being basically not bored and bored. I mean, we tried to talk about stories, about travel, but does one do. Mother would tell about her life, about her grandparents, about families. I mean, you know, you had to keep yourself busy, but it's an awful long stretch if you don't do anything to keep yourself busy. Every single day. There were no books. Nothing to read because the farmer didn't read. And suddenly, to go to a library would be very suspicious. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you expect something to happen all the time? 

SUBJECT: No-- yes and no because you didn't know what to expect. If somebody passed by, it could be a spy. 

INTERVIEWER: For example, what kind of fears? 

SUBJECT: If somebody would come in and would find you. It happened once to me that I had to go to the bathroom. I just had to go. And the farmer's hand they thought had left already, and it happened he was standing in the farmhouse. And there I came. I said to mother, this is it. Forget it. He saw me. Well, we had fear for days. Was this man trustworthy? Was he smart enough to realize that was somebody hidden there? Was he smart enough to keep his mouth shut, or whatever? Thank God he didn't ever say anything. But he knew that they were hiding Jews then because I had been in the farm. 

So you live constantly with fear. You were trapped. You lived this fear. You were hungry basically. You were mentally dulled because there was nothing to do. 

INTERVIEWER: What's that like, mentally dulled? 

SUBJECT: You live. You just-- you live. You're vegetating in a sense. Intellectually, you're dulled. What will do you? 

INTERVIEWER: You don't feel much? 

SUBJECT: I don't think you do feel like-- you're becoming kind of passive in a sense. Your life is passing you by. What do you do when you're 14 years old? Active. I was an extremely active person. I played tennis. I've played hockey. I swam. I did everything. I ice skated. I mean, I was a real active-- a bicycle. I was an active person. 

INTERVIEWER: Once you were free, could you-- 

SUBJECT: Once I was free, well, the first place I immediately went back to school. So I studied from morning to night. I never have studied I think as much in my life as I did during that period because I felt I was so far behind that I needed to be diligent and catch up. One never catches up. I still feel that I haven't caught up what I lost by not going to school, the sequence as everybody else. I can never undo what has been done to me. But that is a fact. It's there. 

INTERVIEWER: And the urge to move? 

SUBJECT: To move in what-- 

INTERVIEWER: To move, to run, to physically. 

SUBJECT: I think maybe I had that. I don't know because I was an active student after the war. I went-- after I finished my high school, I went to the University of Amsterdam. 

INTERVIEWER: I mean physically to run. You were sitting all the time. 

SUBJECT: Oh, you mean-- no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: There was no urge. 

SUBJECT: No, I did a lot of bicycling. I went immediately to bicycle again. To be out, to be free. To be free and not wearing a David's star. Not to be scared who will see me. To be a part of society again. To be a human being. And I had wonderful friends who really-- 

INTERVIEWER: But did the fear stop you? 

SUBJECT: Did the fear stop me? 

INTERVIEWER: After you-- no. Stop. Did the fear stop after you were liberated? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. I had no fear. That I didn't have, no. I mean, I have other things that I occasionally, you know, think of. But no, fear I don't have, that it would happen again. Who walks around behind me, no. I mean that I don't have. But this is basically the story in a nutshell. Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. OK. 

SUBJECT: Now, I might be liberated from the microphone. 