SUBJECT: In 1968, I was in Israel. I went over to Germany afterwards. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Maybe you can say a little bit about that later also, how it was to go back. 

SUBJECT: OK. Frightening experience my wife, my wife went away when those people came around, wanted to greet me. She got frightened, you know. She sat in the car. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They recognized. 

SUBJECT: They're very-- yes. Oh, sure. I went with many to school. Uh, my wife also was born in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell him I don't want to wait for somebody to get an audiotape. We didn't want to lose time while we wait. I mean, I don't want to lose time. If they're not ready, they're not ready. It's really insignificant to us. Mr. Israel, may I-- Mr. Israel, as I understand it, you lived in a small town in what country? Whereabouts was it? Can you describe the town you lived in? 

SUBJECT: I was, uh, raised in a small town in Germany. And-- and the town was about 800 people, and of the 800 people were about, uh-- 10 families of Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was this town exactly, near what big city? 

SUBJECT: A big city-- the next big city was-- on one side was Frankfurt and the other side were Kassel. And, uh, this was more or less a small farm town. People made their living by-- some Jews were cattle dealers, otherwise was, uh, dealing in-- in dry goods and stuff like that-- iron, schrott iron, dealers in junk. And my papa happened to be an antique dealer. Why? Because he was in First World War 1914-1918 and he got shot in his legs. So both legs of his were lame. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He fought in the German Army in World War I? 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your life like in this small town and what was the name of the town? 

SUBJECT: The name of the town was Dillich-- D-I-L-L-I-C-H. And life was, uh, pleasant until, uh, 1933. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So the business was something passed from generation to generation? 

SUBJECT: Yes, it was. Papa's business he inherited from his father, I believe, and they were the same business, a small business. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did the family come from originally? How long had they been there? 

SUBJECT: The, uh, family was there for-- in-- the years 1817 or something like that, 1817 when they came to Germany, to this particular town. They originally originated in Spain, the family. And, uh, was always many children. My father had, uh, 15 brothers and sisters. And I had, uh-- when I had my bar mitzvah, we had, uh, 230 relatives. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The relatives were mostly in Germany? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I can't talk. It affects me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: No. I was the only child. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your mother's family. 

SUBJECT: My mother was born in, uh-- by Hanover, and she had four brothers and three sisters. Uh, two years ago, the last brother died here in Hartford. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You-- you said that things changed in 1932. 

SUBJECT: No, '33. 

INTERVIEWER 2: '33 

SUBJECT: Right. In which way I found out-- well, when I was in school at that time and, uh, the children started to, uh, push me and stuff like that. That's how it started. But you-- you know a changeover. You had to listen to, uh, speeches from Hitler. You were forced then to sit and listen to it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you at that time? 

SUBJECT: I was, uh, born in '22-- six-- I was, uh, nine years old, approximately. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your relationship with your friends started to change? 

SUBJECT: Some of them, yes. Not all of them. Some of them-- the one who lived right next door to us were the same, others were not. And then Hitler Youth started, where we could not belong to. And, uh, things changed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember particular friends who became different? 

SUBJECT: Not all of them. I cannot pick out a particular one to-- there was one always in the crowd. Regardless of where you went was worse than other ones. The waited for you when you came out of school and, uh, parents had to come and pick you up because they would-- there always were fights. Want to be shown that they were better than the Hitlers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did the child understand this? 

SUBJECT: How did he understand it? I not understand it. But then I-- I found, uh, went along at evenings and looked and they had special classes where they got the instruction. It was just like an injection they got, and that was it. They knew how. They never left you alone. In school, sometimes the teacher took it out on you because you were a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean there were special classes and how did you see these classes? 

SUBJECT: Well, we used to take walks at the evenings and there was a town. In the town, we had a-- like a gymnasium, and they used this for this type of purpose. Different kind of-- different age groups were in different things, girls and boys. It was the Hitler Youth. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you could watch or hear what is-- 

SUBJECT: No, I could not. Just bypass that. Nobody bothered me. But after a while, you know what was what. They marched, they sang, they had different uniforms. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Israel, did you feel different from those boys? 

SUBJECT: Well, I knew I was a Jew. I-- I went to shul at the synagogue in town. And many of times that night when we had our prayers, they used to throw stones at that time already. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said that there were 230 people that came to your bar mitzvah. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, that was quite a bit of time, uh, had passed and yet you-- your family was free to have these-- this large number of guests. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they did. They were not, uh, bothering us in that-- it wasn't at that time as bad as it got later. It went into sessions-- in different stages, let's say, by year by year by year. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you describe it as you saw-- as you felt it? 

SUBJECT: Well, at that time when I was still home, I was 13 and a half years old. I had to leave-- I left home for being trained into, uh, my livelihood as a cook. I went to an uncle in a school and learned how to cook. And when I came home the next time, it was all together different. It changed. It wasn't as free anymore as when I left it. People, uh-- how you-- how you describe it? People didn't talk to you no more, they was afraid to talk to you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You trained for your bar mitzvah. You said that people threw stones at the synagogue when you were-- when people were praying in the evening. 

SUBJECT: In the evening. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like to train for your bar mitzvah when people were making you feel badly for being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry. The bar mitzvah lessons were not taken in the same town. We had to go about eight miles to a bigger town where was a Hebrew teacher. And also, they had a synagogue and we were not disturbed at that time. The, uh, actual things started later, after-- after years went by. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. But the question is, uh, you prepared yourself to be a Jew-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --while you were being stoned for being a Jew. What was that like? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was not a pleasant thing, believe me. Uh, we had, uh-- many of times, we had problems at night where we slept and we were awoken at the-- they broke into the, uh, stable where the horses were kept or the cows were kept and they made all kinds of things there, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean-- 

SUBJECT: Well, they beat a horse one time to-- to annoy us. And they let the cows loose at another time. So slowly and surely, people disappeared in the town. Jews went into bigger cities. And Papa and Mama moved out of the town in 1936. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they complain when the horses were beaten and the cows were let loose? 

SUBJECT: Well, if you complained, you got hit, so you forgot about it, left it alone. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did your father get hit when he complained? 

SUBJECT: No, he did not. He had a-- a silver and gold medal from the First World War and they did have respect for it. And Papa-- Papa never was hit as far as I can recollect. But we had a Jew in that town who sold a little gold to somebody else, and for this-- they claimed it wasn't the right thing and for this, they picked him up one night and they hit merciless. The man laid for four weeks in bed and couldn't move. 

And, uh, they threw him out of the car when they were finished with him. It was-- was a mess, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You heard about this? 

SUBJECT: No. I saw him. I heard-- I saw him. I saw the man afterwards. I saw him and he was picked up. Everybody around in town was very happy that it happened to him. And afterwards he came home. I saw him, he was for four weeks in bed, could move no legs, no arms. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And who did the beating? 

SUBJECT: SS. From a couple of different towns they came, picked them up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did a Jewish boy-- you were a boy seeing that-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --think of seeing somebody beaten? 

SUBJECT: Very bad impression on you, it would make memories. And it made, uh-- to be more cautious when you walked around afterwards, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you talk-- did you ask your parents why this was happening? Did they explain it to you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they did. Their explanation was that we were, uh, not wanted here anymore. That was the explanation. As a Jew, you are not wanted. You were not an Aryan. I don't know what you say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you were still going to school with your friends and you were feeling not wanted. 

SUBJECT: There was no friends no more at that time. After that, there was no more friends. I just went to school with a hesitant feeling that some-- what happened to you, that you get hit, too, or something like that? So at 13 and a half years was the end of school. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were in school-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --how could you concentrate on your studies when you were feeling uncomfortable? 

SUBJECT: Well, there was one old teacher who made you comfortable, who made you forget the whole thing and studied with you as a person. The teacher was very nice to me because they were-- they were my cousins' teachers also, who were, uh, 10, 12 years older than me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In 1936, you left Dillich. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: I went to a city called Hanover. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your family moved? 

SUBJECT: Papa and Mama moved to Kassel. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They sent you alone to Hanover? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And anything, uh, any, uh, time you learned a trade in Germany, you were all by yourself sent there. Parents never went with you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was customary. 

SUBJECT: It was customary in there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So when you were approximately 10 years, 11 years old, they sent you to-- 

SUBJECT: No. I was 13 years old-- 13 and a half years old-- I went to Hanover and learned the trade. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the next stage, like the stages? 

SUBJECT: Next stage when I came home one day, I had to wear a yellow star that, uh, made me look different than anybody else. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You went to Kassel, to your parents' home. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you had to wear a yellow star. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was the star? 

SUBJECT: I had it on my left, uh, side over the heart on my jacket and on my coat. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the front only-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the front only so it was visible. Jew Was written on it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened when you started wearing the star? 

SUBJECT: Well, you couldn't sit down in the, uh, railroad no more and, uh, you couldn't sit in the trolley cars. You had to stand. It was miserable. Everybody, uh, looked at it and they pushed you, different things. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember about that time when you were back with your family? 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember the, uh, ninth of November when all the synagogues burned. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were 16 and that's the Kristallnacht. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And, uh, many of my friends who were older who learned with me went to concentrations, Buchenwald in particular. At our section of town, like Kassel, they were always sent to Buchenwald. That was the first time any Jew or anybody really heard and saw what the concentration was like. And at this time, only was hearsay. Nobody knew what it was in that. You know it existed, but you were not there. And when those people came back, the prescription of a concentration, that picture in your mind in 1938 when they came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think about the concentration camps, were you afraid? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We were afraid. From the stories they told you, you were afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they say? 

SUBJECT: Well, you had to stay for hours at a time, you slept nine people in a bunk bed, your hair was cut all the-- all the way down on your-- on a person. Excuse me. I'm a bad boy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know anyone who had been to the concentration-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who? 

SUBJECT: I had many friends my age and who were a little older. And we got together in, uh, New Years Eve in 1938-39 when they came back. And that talk was the first time I seen them back in, uh, on the New Year's Eve 1938-39. They had gotten released slowly and surely because they could, uh, show, uh, an entrance visa in any foreign country. 

This is how come they got out of the concentration first. Some of them headed for America, some of them headed for Brazil, Holland Belgium. Anywhere they could go, they went. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why didn't you leave? Why didn't your family leave? 

SUBJECT: Because I had a father who had to, uh-- I was the only son and Papa never wanted to leave because he didn't think it ever would come that bad. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did he not think that it would get that bad? What gave him hope that it wouldn't? 

SUBJECT: He always had hope that he, uh-- he was in the war and everything else, fought for the country, that never would happen to him. And many of, uh, people like that died because in-- they were in the wrong belief. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you try to convince him to leave? 

SUBJECT: No. You couldn't convince a man like that. I had an uncle who was the same way. He were also in World War I. His two sons and daughter died in concentrations. And I did-- Papa-- Papa went to the concentration and lasted 14 days. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where did he die? 

SUBJECT: He died-- uh, we went together in the concentration which was mostly made for-- for people who weren't in the world-- the First World War. Through that they were protected and they went to a concentration called Theresienstadt. That was an hour from Prague and, uh, 20 minutes from Leibnitz, which was the border between Germany and Czechoslovakia. Uh, different from any other concentration are the one reason-- there was a Kommandatur, which was like a city hall. It was run by German, but you actually did not see those Germans. 

This city, which called Theresienstadt, as a concentration as such, we had Jews running this city for concentration. You had, uh, people there who were elected, different bloc wardens and stuff and such which the commander came actually from the Germans but they were not seen. The only time you did see those people when it's worse are counting time, that every person in this concentration had to go into a field for the whole day and there they were counted. 

Theresienstadt was a city which was occupied by the Czech-- Czech people and their fortress. It was a-- a fortress made by Maria Teresa, a queen of Austria. And Czechoslovakia took it and put a military barracks there. An inheritance of 2,000 people were there. When the Jews came there, there were 250,000 and 350,000. Where the lived was in the military, uh, barracks that we put 5,000 people in one and approximately there were six of them as such. 

The name of it was, uh, the Leibnitz, the Hannover, the Magdeburg, the, uh Sudeten, the Genie. All these was names of-- of places where we lived. And each one had 5,000 inheritance-- how 5,000. There were rooms where you had 150 people sleeping in a small quarters, nine people in one bunk. You understand what I'm talking about? 

There were two on the bottom, two on the next, two on the next. And they were all put together as such. This is how come you could house so many people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In a place which inhabited 2,000 people in the concentration camp, 350,000 were living-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --in the quarters-- 

SUBJECT: Same space. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --for 2,000? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What reason did they give you? Did they give you any reason for sending you there? 

SUBJECT: You don't ask for no reason. Another thing I did, in 1941-- this was still in Kassell-- uh, there was a transport called which went to a concentration in Riga. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Concentration camp. 

SUBJECT: Concentration camp, right. It was called in Riga, and it was-- where, Lebanon? What-- what-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Latvia. 

SUBJECT: Lithuania, I believe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Lithuania. 

SUBJECT: Right. In 1941 in December was the first transport out of this city, where I lived with my parents in Kassel. And I as a person helped other people carrying their package and luggage and-- and such. I had many of friends who went. In 1942 in April, a second transport went out of Kassel and I again helped them. And this so-called transport never got there where it's supposed to go. it went halfway on the way to Poland and those people were all gassed. 

I found out when these people went to, uh, to Riga, that other people there knew some of the people on the railroad that never got there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the transport like, what did you see? 

SUBJECT: Well, when it started in Germany it was-- so that-- not the people get knowledge of anything like that. They might have had knowledge, I don't know. But they certain get no knowledge so they put them in a regular passenger train. When you got transported at a concentration like I am, went from Theresienstadt to Auschwitz, where I got, uh-- first thing I got a day later was a number. See? Now, this was different transport. This went from A1 to one million and then they started off number B from one to one million. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you read that number? What is it? 

SUBJECT: Number is A1605. The reason I don't take it out, it's the vein. See? And you feel it. So you would have to get a new blood vein in there and I don't want to do it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you-- what do you think of when you notice that number on your arm now? Do you notice it anymore, does it still-- 

SUBJECT: Well, now I know I have a name again. At that time in Auschwitz, I did not have a name. I was called by number, and the number was inscribed on my breast on the left side, on my leg on the right side. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were tattooed three places? 

SUBJECT: I had a prisoner's, uh, uniform with a little hat and a coat and I had the number here and I had the number on my chest. Each one had to be sewed individually. So when you do work, you were called by number 1605 So if you did do something wrong, you were not called by name because a name did not exist. You had a number, and the number you were caught. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you first take your name away? 

SUBJECT: It was in Auschwitz when I lost my name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was in 19-- 

SUBJECT: In 1942-- 44-- 43-44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you went to Theresienstadt, let's go back a little bit. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You went to Theresienstadt, Mr. Israel, what-- were your parents with you, both parents, your uncles? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Papa and Mama were together in-- in-- when we got there. And Papa got very sick. You see, when we got there, it was very hot and nobody told you that you could not drink the water. The water was not fit for human consumption. You had to boil the water. Otherwise, you got typhus. Anyway, Papa must have drank the water the way-- I was sick already and I was in the Marakko called the hospital Marakko. And I had a very bad diarrhea myself, and Papa died 14 days later. I never saw the man again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He died of dysentery? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was he helped at all? Did he suffer much? Was he helped? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't tell you. I wasn't there. Mama wasn't allowed to go in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you with your mother? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Mama and Papa ad myself, we got together in the concentration. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you stayed with your mother. 

SUBJECT: I stayed with Mama. Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And where did they take him to, hospital? 

SUBJECT: Yes. A Marakko is the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You don't know whether they treated him. 

SUBJECT: I do not. Was too many cases, you know. Too many people got sick at one time. There's a tremendous amount of people came in every. Single day, new transports came. It was like a-- a-- a camp where you, uh, got saunas. Certain people stayed in the Theresienstadt, certain people got shipped right out to Auschwitz or other concentrations. 90% went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did those transports arrive, what did you see? 

SUBJECT: Well, first they came to Leibnitz, and then the Jews had to build a railroad track into Theresienstadt. And this took a year I believe or something like that. And once the-- the, uh, the railroad track was finished into Theresienstadt. The transport came right into Theresienstadt. They had a special, uh, engine who brought the trains in. Sometimes this was six cars, sometimes this was two cars. Then transports came from Holland and from Belgium and from, uh, from Denmark the Jews came. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you help build the railroad? 

SUBJECT: No, I did not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you doing? 

SUBJECT: At that time, I was in the kitchen cooking. I had a very good friend in the-- the D8 kitchen, which was a special kitchen for people who were really bad and sick. That's what they called it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those transport kept coming? 

SUBJECT: Transport kept day and-- day and night. And each time, it were more people, each time it were shipped different transports out of Theresienstadt which were decided in the Kommandatur which were the German, uh, office where they stayed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of food were you cooking? 

SUBJECT: Most of the time, you cooked soups. IN the morning you're supposed to get coffee or tea or something, which was hot water, and a ration of bread or something, a couple of ounces you were supposed to get. But most of the time, we did not get the bread because you got a little soup or coffee, whatever you want to call hot water. At noon, they got, um, oatmeal; at noon you got potato soup, water, something floating in it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe what you did, the cooking that you did. 

SUBJECT: Well, the cooking I did, we were-- we had-- most of the time, we cooked soups. That was most of the time what was cooked in the concentration. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your job, what did you actually do? 

SUBJECT: What did I do? I helped-- like everybody else, put the merchandise together. There was some flour, which we thickened to thing-- the water-- with and potatoes we cooked. Other people did potato peeling. There was potato kitchens where people sat and peeled potatoes. Other one cleaned. There was a-- a-- a working detail of-- of-- of hundreds of people who took the dead bodies away each and every single day that died. Each one had something else to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- who decided what people will stay, how do people stay longer in the camp and-- 

SUBJECT: It was decided in Kommandatur. And the Jews gave a list of everybody who works there that was in a big barracks, again where were officers from different people who run that camp. They presumably made the decision with the Germans together. I couldn't tell you. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who stayed longer, who had the privilege of not being shipped out? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't-- I couldn't tell you. The only ones I remember, they was there until the end, until 1945. That was the last transport to enter Auschwitz were the war veterans, again like Papa. I had friends who lived in towns not far from me and they got shipped. That was the last one. The gas chamber in Theresienstadt never was completed. There was one built without the knowledge of any Jews in the concentration. Why they could do it, they had tremendous underpass underneath the, uh-- what do you call a festung, what's a festung? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Fortress. 

SUBJECT: A fortress. Well, the fortress had tremendous surrounding around the whole town. And underneath the fortress inside were gas chambers being built. We looked at it after we came back from Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your mother? 

SUBJECT: Mama went in the gas chamber in 1944. I went through the gas chamber and got prison clothes new once. I got de-liced. All my hair was cut up all over, I got clean uniforms, and we were loaded for transport from 18 to 45, anybody who could work. The rest of the people in this particular camp who came from Theresienstadt went all into the gas chamber, Mama including. So I said my goodbye and, uh-- everybody took us to the fence. There we said goodbye. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you say? 

SUBJECT: What can you say? You tell me. Always were hope, but you knew that was the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After you had been in Auschwitz for how long? 

SUBJECT: I was in Auschwitz for three quarters of a year, I believe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Together with Mama. 

SUBJECT: Together with Mama. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were not separated from her? 

SUBJECT: No, I was not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was not that unusual? 

SUBJECT: No, was not-- no in this particular camp. There was, uh, a camp which was strictly for Theresienstadt. There was a camp strictly next to us, only gypsies. Those gypsies didn't do nothing else. There was thousands and thousands of them. They had to bring in different groups in the morning to play. When those groups go out into factory where they took coals out. They made margarine and oil and stuff like this. 

This particular group was brought out by gypsy music in the morning and brought back by gypsy music at night. That was the camp next to us. The camp on-- on my-- on my right, they came from Hungary-- from Hungary. All Hungarian people, Jews, was in the next camp, men and woman. Many of times, you stood on this electric wire and watched trains coming in with everybody had to leave their valises and everything there and they're marched right into the gas chamber. 

How you know it's a gas chamber? That they were burning day and night. People went in, nobody ever came out. So the presumption was that they were burnt. And the smell was unbearable. Our chief engineer in this concentration in Auschwitz was a man who was brought to trial for 30 years as a murderer. He was our chief observer. How you call it-- he was the head of us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Overseer. 

SUBJECT: That's it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever see him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. His name was Willie. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know his last name? 

SUBJECT: No, I do not. You see, there was-- each time you had a uniform with-- with signs on it. This is what distinguished us like that. One person had on a Mogen Dovid, that was a Jew. Other ones had on green, yellow, blue. Each one meant a different thing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they mean? 

SUBJECT: Some of them was political, some of them was gangsters, like people who were brought to trial and-- for so many years and they were there. Other ones were priests and stuff like that we had with us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Catholic priests? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What color sign did they wear? 

SUBJECT: I think it was blue. There were, again, political other-- other-- other the reason of, uh-- I don't know. I don't know the answers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were the priests treated as badly as-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. The same way, not different. In-- in-- in the next camp I went to, which was Schwarzheide, I had many French prisoners and Italians with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But this camp was the Theresienstadt camp, where the priests were. 

SUBJECT: No, Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. But the camp of people having been sent from Theresienstadt. 

SUBJECT: No. No. They were there when we got there, sir. They were the originator, you called it, of Auschwitz. Auschwitz I think came in-- in-- in being in 1941. All these Jews were the first one there. Hungarian Jews were the first, Romanians Jews were there. People from all over the east of--of-- of-- of this world were-- were in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you were talking about Italian prisoners, French prisoners. Were they Jews or were they-- 

SUBJECT: No, they were not. They were-- they were prisoners of war. They just happened to be in the misfortune to come into this particular concentration of ours where we-- where we were shipped into afterwards. We're supposed to build a factory-- rebuild a factor which the bombs destroyed. There I was standing in-- in three and four feet of snow and I froze my feet. I had frozen feet from this concentration. There I met French prisoners, there I met Italian prisoners. 

From the war they were shipped there. They were the same like us, treated the same way and everything else, guarded by the SS. I-- I-- I-- I in trying to save my life, I came to the realization that I could not swing it during the day so I worked in night details underground. To build this bunker, you had to put a foundation underneath. So we went as steep down as we could and we dug a little bit. 

And most of the time, we stayed there. And another reason I-- I-- I took that detail was the bombs came and you had to stop work. You didn't have to work because you had to go in the shelter. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you given the opportunity to choose your detail? 

SUBJECT: I was given the opportunity to choose the detail. I had a friend who was the head of the working detail. The Germans did not, uh, put you anyplace. They left it up to us where you wanted to go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think that the Italian and French prisoners of war and the gypsies and the priests suffered as much, the same as the Jews? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They got treated as bad as I did. And another thing, by itself it wasn't bad. We were guarded by-- by, uh, people who called themselves faux German, which wasn't really the same. They didn't talk German and anything. And they-- they-- they were the rough ones. They kicked and they hit and they did everything-- the hung them. You name it and they did it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What gave you the will to live through this? 

SUBJECT: Well, was a belief what I inherit as a little boy to believe. And I prayed every single night and I made it. The only belief what kept me alive. Had to be something there to help. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did any other people in your family survive this? 

SUBJECT: No. I'm the only survivor of, uh, the whole family. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You never saw anyone else again? 

SUBJECT: No. Nobody. The only cousins I have left is through-- they are in Israel. They went to Israel in 1933 and '32. I have one more cousins here who came here from England who is related from Mama's side, and that's the only cousin I have. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of the 230 people that came to your bar mitzvah, no one is alive? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you think about now when you think of having come through this experience? 

SUBJECT: Just bad thoughts, that's all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you feel about living in America? Was it hard for you when you first came here? 

SUBJECT: Very hard. Language barrier was a very hard thing. I worked for $25 a week 82 hours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where? 

SUBJECT: In a small place in downtown Hartford. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You came directly to Hartford? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get to America? 

SUBJECT: How what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get to America? 

SUBJECT: I had a-- a brother of Mama's living here in Hartford who wrote and who sent me the card by-- for the ship to come here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And when you got here, did you talk about what had happened to you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, many of times. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did people understand? 

SUBJECT: No, they did not. Some of them didn't even believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you-- did you continue talking or did you stop? 

SUBJECT: No. Did not make no sense. People didn't want to listen. You quit by yourself. You walked away, that's all. I was not the only one. We were a group of about 24 or 26 boys and girls who learned English together by a Mrs. Gilbert. That was a wonderful woman who opened her house on Salisbury Street. And all the boys, you name them, who came in this country in 1946, went to Mrs. Gilbert who learned English. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were not a boy then, you were a young man. 

SUBJECT: Well, I was a young man let's say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And talk, if you will, a little about what it was like to have-- to come to America and become an American. What problems did you have, what happened to you? 

SUBJECT: Well, there really was no problems. If you wanted to work, you could advance. That's the only thing there was to it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned a trip. Did you go back to Germany? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I went back to Germany. I wanted my children to see it, where I was born and where my wife was born. So in 1968, I took my family to Israel to visit my cousins and on the way back, we stopped over in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Dillich? 

SUBJECT: Everybody who was in this particular town didn't do nothing and didn't know nothing about it. They all were angels. The really the ones who bothered me were not there. I would have took care of them myself, but they weren't there. Because I came in 1945 and I came out of the concentration, I was looking for those people. And they were-- got all lost all of a sudden. Nobody knew where they were. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your wife was from Germany, too? 

SUBJECT: My wife was born and raised in Germany also, and she came here when she was a little child at 10 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So she did not experience-- 

SUBJECT: No, she did not. The only one experience was her Papa who got into concentration in 1938. Then moved right away to America. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like to go back to Dillich for you? 

SUBJECT: Very hard feeling. I expected to find somebody when I came out of the concentration and go back there-- maybe my cousins or anybody. Nobody. So I went to Frankfurt, where they moved. Nobody knew, nobody saw. An uncle of mine was with me in-- in-- in, uh, Theresienstadt. I had there Papa and his brothers, too, and tante rosa, tante... There were six sisters there and two brothers. IN other words, eight children, and they all died in Theresienstadt. None of them came out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And when you came in '68 with your children-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --what did you-- 

SUBJECT: I wanted to explain it to them, the suffering and the things we had to do and everything. I showed them. Maybe they understood, maybe they didn't understand. I don't know. I cannot tell. They had their own opinion on the thing, you know. But I wanted to them to see the-- the suffering and everything that cost, the anguish they had their grandparents and where we lived-- the land and everything else. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have they talked about it with you since? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They do once in a while. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do they say? 

SUBJECT: They go back and remember certain things what I explained to them really was that hard and stuff like that. So that-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were-- was-- is it easier for you to talk about your family and your past with your children now that they've been there? 

SUBJECT: Yes, it was easier. I got used to the idea that they're not over-- you know, they're not there. That's it. Went back to places where we lived in Kassel. It's terrible. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Israael, when you went back to Theresienstadt. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was like a normal life. 

SUBJECT: In Theresienstadt it was like a normal life, yes, in a certain way. Because you knew you couldn't get out. The entrance to this concentration which you call it was guarded by a police from Czechoslovakia. German itself you did not see. They lived by themself in the middle of the town so they could observe the whole thing. In 1942 or '43-- in the beginning of '43, they came up with a great idea, Mr. Hitler, to make a movie. Hitler gave the-- the Jews a city or something similar to this. What it was called, I don't recollect. 

Now, the movie was made by-- by very famous movie stars from Holland. The name of this was Martin Roman. And there was somebody else, a friend of his. I saw this movie star again in the manual synagogue, but three or four years ago. He remembered me. Movie was made in different barracks. Let me say the Jews had the privilege of going to a coffee house. They sat there and they talked and stuff like that. The Jews had a symphony like. 

They made an orchestra together and they played in this marketplace. They had different barracks like tailors-- tailor shops, grocery, [INAUDIBLE]. All this he showed on this particular pictures. The actors were the Jews themself. Wherever you went, there were Jews. Now, you've got to understand one thing. They let them have their own clothes. When you came into Theresienstadt, you had your own clothes. When you came to Auschwitz or anywhere else, you had uniforms. 

You got everything taken away. So they really looked nice and neat, and especially the Czechoslovakians from Praha, which wasn't too far. They had-- some of them had uncles and cousins and stuff that were still there, they sent packages to Theresienstadt. And they looked very nice and clean, those people. So you had an easy picking of-- of people to be your actors. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the purpose of that film? 

SUBJECT: The purpose of the film I never found out. He wanted to show the world. I presume that he made copies of this and showed that into America and showed it into Australia. In different words, how we-- how everything is false propaganda what people said, this wasn't bad. This-- this was the idea of the film, I believe, you-- that he could show them that he did treat the Jews better than they, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You actually witnessed the filmmaking? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: I saw cameras and I saw this Martin Roman, who was the director at that time, I believe, with another gentleman who was a movie star with him in Holland making this movie-- the camera to film. There were Germans with them who-- who guarded this-- this merchandise. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, all these coffee houses, tailor shops, did they really exist? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they did. Yes, they did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they were just in the movie as they really existed? 

SUBJECT: As they really existed. And he showed them some privileged buildings where-- where not too many people lived in, how good they lived. You know, they're like a bloc warden, the guy who was in charge of the whole barracks and stuff like that. He showed it to them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mr. Roman, was he Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes, he was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did they permit a Jew to make this film? 

SUBJECT: He was world known and they knew he was there. And they permitted him to-- to make the film for Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was in Theresienstadt, he was a prisoner? 

SUBJECT: He was in Theresienstadt as an inhabitant, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened to those Jews who were in the-- in the film, the tailors and the people in the cafe? 

SUBJECT: Were all shipped, no problem. Afterwards, they all got shipped. In 1944 for some reason, everything went out of Theresienstadt. There wasn't a Jew left in Theresienstadt, only the very, very sick. And there was transport who went to Germany someplace. I don't remember who came back in the meantime in 1945 in January. And I came back into Theresienstadt in May of 1945, just two days before this ended. We were shipped back and walked back like a-- a dead march, let's say, more or less. 

Once we went out of Schwarzheide it took us January, February, March, April. We slept in open rails for 14 days or three weeks. I was standing in water sometimes as far as-- as my navel. It was raining day and night and we were in an open car. And many of the guys died. Some of them couldn't walk, they got shot. Now, on the- we were on top of-- of this thing. 

On the bottom, you saw the fighting when the Russians came and stuff like that was the last six weeks we marched on the top and they were on the bottom. They saw-- they knew that was the end. Still, they didn't give us a break or give up or something like that. They hiked us all the way to Terezin. Some of the time we had to walk, some of the time we holding rails. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Theresienstadt there were people who had Gentile relatives? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In Theresienstadt was like he-- a Jew married a non-Jew, an Aryan in Germany, it was forbidden. The husband was sent to Theresienstadt for a period of maybe a year, maybe a year and 15 days or something like that. They all were afraid. They never worshiped anywhere in no concentration because they were purpose to stay there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I wanted to ask you, you said the gypsies in Auschwitz played the music for the people to go to work. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Meaning the other people, the Jews and the political prisoners, marched to the gypsy music? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the music? 

SUBJECT: No, I do not. I do not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it different songs? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They played different songs. You ever saw 2,000 playing instruments? That's what it was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 2,000 people played at once? 

SUBJECT: Yes. On both sides of the road and they marched to it. Don't forget, this was only part of Auschwitz which I know. There were many-- many-- many of camps. Do you understand? And there were-- again, there were guys who worked in-- in the, uh-- oh what is called the crew where you go buy coals? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Coal mine. 

SUBJECT: Coal mine. They worked in coal mines. There were maybe 10,000 men in different columns marched. It took an hour and a half to march them out and an hour and a half to bring them back-- that many people. It was a column of about 100 people, each one. And each one had a-- a gentleman next to them who worked the same. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Weren't you very weak? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I was at the and. I weighed 86 pounds when I came back to Theresienstadt. Many of times I stood in the commander in Schwarzheide and they wanted to ship me because they thought I had TB I was so skinny and stuff. But I felt good and I begged and I stayed. I knew what would happen to me I would have gone. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were able to plead with them? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were able to request? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Because the commander of the camp was a German and I could talk the language. And I talked to him. Sometimes they listened, sometimes they did not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They didn't mind your talking to them? 

SUBJECT: No, they do not. They did not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they punish you for-- for speaking out? 

SUBJECT: No. I only got punished one time. I-- I, uh, had a very good friend who I saved their life and I was cooking for them up in a different section of the camp. And I used to save potato peels. And I don't know if there is really any vitamins in it or not. I had so much potato peel every single day and I put them under my arms. And one of the guards saw me do it and reported me at night. So I sat for six hours with my hands stretched out on my feet. 

But it did not make a difference. I got him back and away we marched like little children back into Theresienstadt. He's in New York City now. He's still alive, my friend-- like my brother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Saved by the potato skins? 

SUBJECT: Saved by the potato chip. Yes. You wouldn't believe what that made. You feel like when you stood at night in the barracks, there was a stove and you make those potato peels. The ghetto, you hid them and they dried out on top of the fire. You stood there sometimes for two hours and did this. And then you ate the peel. And your stomach worked. You felt it when there was something in there. And that was the important part of being here today. If I didn't have that, I would not be here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You couldn't steal food while you were cooking in the kitchen to eat? 

SUBJECT: No, you could not. There was always guards there. They watch you that you didn't put nothing in what you're supposed to be and anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They saw that you didn't put anything in your own mouth. 

SUBJECT: No, never. Only thing I could have was the-- the leftovers in the pot like a little child gets the-- the chocolate to eat. That was my reward every single day. But I did keep the-- I did keep the, uh, potato peels, cooked potato peels. Every single day I brought them back. And somebody else got them sometimes. That helped. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever try to escape? 

SUBJECT: No. It never entered my mind because the fence was electric and on each corner of the fence was a guard up on top. So it never occurred to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Some people didn't want to go on living. 

SUBJECT: Well, some people went against the fence and, uh, got singed. They died instantly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew the fence was electrified. 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. Yes, I did. In Auschwitz and in Schwarzheide, both times I know they were. I think I have to go. I have to go to work, ladies. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Duty calls. It's my pleasure. I tried my best. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: And if it's not good enough, I tried. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. No. It's very hard, I'm sure, to-- to talk about these things. 

SUBJECT: Right. Brings memory which were buried. You understand? You forgot it in all those years. 34 years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You buried it. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But it must be hard to bring it up again. 

SUBJECT: Well, it is. I never watch any movie from the concentration or anything like. If I can go out of the way to talk about it, I go out of the way because it's not good for to get myself all worked up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How come you agreed to speak to us? 

SUBJECT: Well, Rabbi Victor asked and I agreed. Maybe I shouldn't have, I don't know. I don't know it's so good for me. All right. Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The gentleman has to take-- 

SUBJECT: I'm finished? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. But he has to take the mic. 

SUBJECT: Cameras off? Can I take it off? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. You might-- you might laugh, but all through the concentration, they were on me and I never left them off. Mama made the first pair when I was a [INAUDIBLE]. 

