MILA PIZER: At home? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

MILA PIZER: We had a neighborhood of Jewish kids, and we went to school together. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The beginning of it? 

MILA PIZER: The beginning, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your name? 

MILA PIZER: One was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your name. Your name. 

MILA PIZER: The name of the girl? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your name. 

MILA PIZER: My name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

MILA PIZER: My name is Mila Pizer. Uh, was born in Sulejow, Poland, occupied by Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year were you born? 

MILA PIZER: 1926. And at the age of seven, I started public school. And I finished seven grades. And at that time, I wanted to go to further schooling, but it was not allowed because I was Jewish. And we had-- my father was a tailor. We were a family of seven, five children-- five daughters and the parents. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you in the order? 

MILA PIZER: I am the fourth down. And all my other sisters were working, helping out at home. Two were working outside as tailors. And, uh, I was the-- with my youngest sister, still at home. And, uh, we were not rich people. We had what we need. We didn't go out to knock on doors or anything like that. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- 

MILA PIZER: On Friday night, we closed up everything. We washed up everything, make it clean and neat. And, uh, my father closed the machines. And he went to synagogue. And, uh, we came home. We had supper. And Saturday was no working day, and so we took a walk on the field. 

We lived near a synagogue. And we took a walk. We played, like all children play. And, uh, there were a lot of Polish people who weren't very pleasant. I mean, they were calling Jewish names and all that stuff. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

MILA PIZER: I don't know whether you wanted the name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. What-- what were they calling you? 

MILA PIZER: Well, Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Polish? 

MILA PIZER: In Polish, [POLISH]. And they weren't pleasant. So therefore we just stuck with our own group of children that were Jewish. And, uh, we had that much more common. And on Sunday we went to, uh, either who attended Hebrew school. There were private lessons to give. And otherwise we did our homework Sunday. And we went our ways. And the Monday started all over again. The 19 of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is Sulejow like? 

MILA PIZER: Sulejow was a small town. I can't really tell you how many people lived in there. It was a poor town. Everybody was a farmer. And, uh, it was really-- I can't really remember much about it. I can't really remember that much that I would like to say about it. 

During the '30s, '7 or '38, already German-Jewish people came that were thrown out from Germany. They came to live in Poland. And they lived like two or three families in one home. And they were telling all the stuff that went out-- went on in Germany. But nobody wanted to believe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what they told? 

MILA PIZER: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what they told? 

MILA PIZER: Well, Hitler, when Hitler started doing, uh, what he did to the German-Jews-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Any detail, any personal experiences you remember being told? 

MILA PIZER: Uh, what they told me was that they were-- they had business, beautiful blooming businesses, and they were thrown out from there. Then the closing of the synagogues and closing the stores because there were Jews, and they had to evacuate and leave everything behind and come wherever they would find a place to live. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they talk about arrests or people disappearing? 

MILA PIZER: They talked about their people, the German-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Their people. 

MILA PIZER: German people, German-Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right. They talked about it? 

MILA PIZER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did that evoke any fears in you that that-- 

MILA PIZER: Well, at that time I was 12 years old when we heard those, uh, stories. And then in 1931-- 1939, when the Germans invaded Poland, uh, that I remember very well. One day in bed, it was like 6 o'clock in the morning. It was certain day. I can't recall the day. 

My uncle had a grocery store. And his wife sent him to the store for, uh, a bag of sugar. And he went home with a bag of sugar under his arm, when the Germans told them to stop. Halt, they called out. And evidently he didn't hear it, or, uh, he just didn't stop. And the SS, the German soldier, went after him, shot him right at his home in front of his wife and his children. And he was the very first victim when Germans invaded Poland. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was the very day the Germans invaded? 

MILA PIZER: The very same day, just about an hour later when they invaded Sulejow, my uncle was killed. And, uh, after that, they gave out no more schooling. Jews are not allowed to have any education, and therefore I couldn't finish my own schooling. And, uh, then they took all the Jewish people. 

They got them together into a synagogue. And they said, in case there is anyone with a gun that will revolt, that will try to do something, all the synagogue will be burned with all the people in it. But nothing happened. After about a day and a half, we were free from the synagogue. And, uh, we went home. And they gave us, uh, hours, certain hours that we could walk or go shopping. 

Those hours were from 6:00 AM to 7:00 AM, where all the clo-- the door-- the stores were closed, also 6:00 PM to 7:00 PM. Again, everything was closed, so we couldn't do any shopping. Then they gave us-- uh, I went out. I was 13 years old at that time. And they gave out a grocery store. And they said, whoever wants whatever they want, go and stay in the line. 

So I stood in the line. And the Polish people said to the, uh-- uh, German soldiers, here is a Jewish girl. And I want to be ahead of her because the product was already almost gone. And I had just a chance to get a pound of cheese. So this girl says, she's Jewish. She could stay in back of me so I could get that cheese, that Polish girl could get the cheese. 

It so happened, I got the cheese. By the time I got home, I was beaten up by that girl. And the whole cheese was on the ground. So I came home with nothing, only tears. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know that girl from before? 

MILA PIZER: Yes, she was a neighbor of, uh, ours. She lived nearby. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your relationship with your former schoolmates? Did you see any of them afterwards? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, all the schoolmates are-- that I had, that they're all gone. So I really-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, I meant at that time. I was talking of the Gentile schoolmates. You were in a mixed school. 

MILA PIZER: No, I didn't have any Gentile-- any Gentile schoolmates. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't? 

MILA PIZER: No. And, uh, we went to, uh-- I came home crying, of course. And what can you say? What can you do? Then they gave, uh, like a rationing. You could only go to a certain store a certain time for a certain piece of bread, a certain amount of bread. 

By the time you got home, even if you were lucky enough to get that loaf of bread, somebody always came that wasn't Jewish and grabbed the loaf of bread away from you. So, again, you came home with nothing. First you stay two or three hours in line for it, and then somebody grabs it from you. 

Uh, as far as, uh-- uh, we went also-- uh, my father was praying one morning. And that the window was open. It was in a summer, very hot. A German soldier went by, and he says, what are you doing there? My father didn't hear well. He says, I am praying to God. And he said in German to my father, open the door. 

My father opened the door. The German soldier walks in. And he tried to take off the [NON-ENGLISH] from-- from his forehead and hit him about the face. He says, what are you praying to? Who are you praying to? God is dead. 

You have no one to pray. And if you won't take off everything as I tell you, you're going to be dead too. So he had no other choice but take everything off. And that was the end of the praying. Then at night, we had to, uh, close the windows very early. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was a regular soldier not an SS man? 

MILA PIZER: A regular German soldier. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not an SS man? 

MILA PIZER: No, a regular German soldier. And he was quite young too. And then we went out to a different town to get a pair of, uh, sneakers, because shoes were impossible to buy. We went to a different town, a smaller town than Sulejow, Trzebinia, and there was, uh-- uh, a friend. 

I can't really remember what was her name, a friend of mine I was working for the pair of shoes. That was a distance like I would say from here to, uh-- to West Haven. And we were walking to a shoe store. [NON-ENGLISH] was the name of the shoe store. And we bought a-- I bought a pair of sneakers for myself. And they were little-- they couldn't be more than maybe eight, nine years old German kids. And they were attacking us. 

They were-- they knew we were Jewish because we had to wear the bands with the star on it. So they started to, uh-- to hit us and attack us with the rocks and all that. And, uh, by the time we got home, my feet was so blistery and so aching from walking and running, so to escape an open head from the rock they were throwing. And all around them they gave hours where you have to stay inside. 

You can't even go outside on the-- on your front lawn. You have to stay inside and, uh, cover the windows with anything that you could find so no little light could come through. They didn't want any lights out. That went on from '39 to '41. At '41-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any deportations of Jews during that time? 

MILA PIZER: Not at that time. In 1941, the deportations started. And my sister, my older sister, and I were the first to go to a concentration camp. And we were in a school. They took all the people they could accumulate, assemble in the school. And, uh, we went-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the day and where they found you? 

MILA PIZER: It was in December-- January. But I don't remember the date. It was the first week in January in 1941, where we were taken to a school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where-- what were you doing at that time, at that moment? 

MILA PIZER: What was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were you doing at that moment? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How were you-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you? 

MILA PIZER: Yeah. How were you called? Why were you chosen? 

MILA PIZER: Well, I-- they-- they said, uh, you have-- they took-- they took us anywhere they could find us, on the street or wherever somebody was walking, in the street-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did they find you? 

MILA PIZER: At home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you remember people coming? 

MILA PIZER: There were two, I don't know whether they were SS or just regular soldiers. They had their uniform on. And they said, you have to come to school. Well, we went to school, and there were already hundreds of, uh-- of, uh, other people. And they took us to a train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have a chance to-- 

MILA PIZER: We didn't have a chance to say goodbye or anything else to anybody. We were crying. We were taken away by force. And, uh, we went on a train, where there were people pushed in worse than cattle. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your sister and you, you were the only ones at home? Is that why the two of you only went? 

MILA PIZER: Well, my father-- my father and mother were home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, your other sisters-- 

MILA PIZER: The other sisters weren't home, n o. They were working or out somewhere. And so we were taken to that train with nothing else but what we had on. And of course, I was still young, and I was crying. I wanted to see my mother. And I wanted to say, where am I going? Nobody told me where we were going. And we were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you? 

MILA PIZER: We were pushed into a train with the hundreds of thousands of other people, all young kids of anything. And we were laying like on the floor in that train. It was absolutely terrible to describe. People were urinating. People were, uh, vomiting, sick, crying, everything else, hungry. And it took about two days in that condition to get where we went. And we went to, um, they call it Auschwitz Du Lac. 

At that point, there was-- it's just like they-- they de-liced us, or whatever you want to-- clean us up. From there, we went again to that train. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they do to de-lice you? How did they-- 

MILA PIZER: In the Du Lac? Uh, they cleaned us. They look through your hair. They didn't feed-- no feed-- no food at all. There was no food. For two, three days, we were going without food. In the Du Lac, there-- they were telling you where you're going. But nobody believed them. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they tell? 

MILA PIZER: They told us that we're going to a working camp. And you are better off going to a working camp because later on, it's going to be worse. So we went to the train again. We went to the working-- to a-- two days riding, we arrived in Czechoslovakia. 

was-- the town was Trautenau, Ober Alstadt by Trautenau. And it was in Czechoslovakia. We went to work as-- uh, well, they were in a factory. And that factory were all different type of, uh-- uh, weaving. Some were doing other jobs. 

I happened to be weaving. The machine was as long as three times the length of the room and high. And I was only 14. So I had to stood up on a chair to get to do what I have to do, and wearing that blue outfit, that blue, denim dress with the Jewish star in the front, the Jewish star in the back. And I had to perform the best I could, or I would have been not here to tell the story. And at, uh-- at that point, I had a helper, another girl from Romania. And her Jewish star was a little worn off already. And she was beaten so badly, that I was scared if she's going to survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: By whom? 

MILA PIZER: By a SS man that came from Auschwitz. And we also had SS women that were watching over wherever we went. They went with us to work. We were not allowed to talk to any of the workers there, the Czech people, because they-- because they were thinking they may reveal something or talk about politics or whatever. 

We were not allowed to talk to anybody. And the shift that we had was from 5:00 in the morning to 2:00 in the afternoon. And then we came back to the barracks. And we had to work additional chores, cleaning up the barracks and peel potatoes and do whatever they ask us to do, and under constant, uh, stress, yelling, screaming. 

If you won't to do this right, you're going to beaten. If you don't do that right, you're going to-- you have to do it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was-- 

MILA PIZER: All-- all the SS women. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you-- do you remember-- 

MILA PIZER: The names? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --certain names, how they looked, one or two specific people? 

MILA PIZER: Well, one was Mrs. Huffman. She was tall, skinny, uh, and very mean person. The other was SS, also Mrs. Huffman. I don't know whether they were related or not. But she was the main-- the main one. She is the one who hit me. 

The-- I changed the job, from one job to another, that the foreman made me change it. And at that time, she gave-- there were leftover stale bread. And she said-- she called out the [NON-ENGLISH], which is the weaving people, to come and collect the extra slice of stale bread. 

She did not know that I had changed the job from the one to the other. So I went to collect that piece of bread because I was working at that [NON-ENGLISH]. But she wasn't aware of it. And when I came to collect the piece of bread, she gave me a slap in the face. And I thought my eyes are puffing out. 

So of course, I turned around, and I went back to the barrack crying to my room. And about a half an hour later, another German girl, Jewish-German girl that we worked together-- I forgot her name-- came and she says, Mrs. Huffman wants to see you. So I hesitate to go because I thought just to get another slap, I didn't want to go. 

But then she says, you better go because if you know what's good for you. Well, I went. And she gave me that piece of bread. And she didn't apologize for hitting me. But she says, next time you say that you're working there. 

Now, you're not supposed to talk, only when you're asked. So how can I say I was working there? And, uh, after that, I had my three sisters with me. Fortunately, they were together with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell us some more about those SS women, other incidents, what they were like? 

MILA PIZER: Well, they were-- they were-- it's just they were very mean. You couldn't go pass by them without being hit. And, uh, they never praised you for what you did if you did something right. And, uh, you stayed in line for food. That was just a potato soap, supposedly, without potatoes, just the peels in it. And if you didn't stay the right way, you got hit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they look? How did they dress? 

MILA PIZER: Well, they-- they had their uniforms on, the SS uniform. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the women's SS uniform? 

MILA PIZER: Uh, they had-- I believe that was there were green or blue SS uniforms. They had the band, like, SS on it. And they had their hats on, the, uh-- what do you call those hats? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

MILA PIZER: The-- like the Russian hats. And, uh, on Sundays we had to go out. They call it appeal, which was a roll-call like. And you have to give your name. And who wasn't there, they went to look. One girl did escape, was found later on beaten, that she was-- she was dead, better than the way she was found. And, uh, also having three sisters with me, I was fortunate. And when, uh, they asked me to go and clean cabbage after work, that is, after work, after 2 o'clock, when I came home from the factory, they gave us a chore you have to clean cabbage or potatoes or whatever. 

I stole a few potatoes. And I didn't think anything of it, because I thought, well, I'm that close to it. I might just as soon steal it. I stole a few potatoes. And it-- I only had-- I had no facility where to cook. There were no pots and pans. 

So I took them to work. And at my machine, that was very long and had to be, uh-- the weaving had-- the thread had to go through very, boiling hot water. I put the potatoes in that hot water and had him for two or three hours in there, steaming until they got soft. And then I shared the potatoes with my sister. 

I couldn't cook more than three or four at a time. Because if I was caught, there was something else again. And I was afraid, because every time, every morning we went to work, we were searched by the SS men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Men? 

MILA PIZER: Men, the SS men that came from, uh-- from Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They did a body search on the women? 

MILA PIZER: Yeah. They searched us all around, if we have anything. Or by the same time, when we came from work, we were searched also if we didn't collect anything from the German or Czech people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they molest any women in those searches? 

MILA PIZER: No. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was it to be searched by a man? 

MILA PIZER: Well, they were SS men that knew. I mean, they searched through-- through, uh, the clothes to see if you have a potato. You could find a bulge. And if you didn't have it, then you were clear. And at one time, I remember I had to drop all my potatoes that I had in a blouse, a blouse with an elastic. And I made it like blousy look. And I had to the potatoes in there. 

I had to drop them all because if you will find at that time, I think, he, more or less, thought that I was bigger than I should have been. So I dropped the potatoes. And lucky for me that the potatoes were rolling down a stream where he couldn't see them. Uh, but all around was very bad, very bad food, no food at all, as a matter of fact. [INAUDIBLE]-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many girls were there? 

MILA PIZER: In my camp were 1,000 girls only, only girls, no men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What ages? 

MILA PIZER: Uh, ages between, I would say, 14 and 28. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All Jews? 

MILA PIZER: All Jewish girls, right. And there were 36 in a room. There were bunk beds, triple bunk beds, 36 girls in a room. Washing facilities were extremely bad. If you want to keep clean, you had to wash your hair with coffee that was given to you for breakfast. 

You have to save the coffee, like, two or three times to have enough to wash your hair. Washing clothes, well, you only had one shirt. So if you wash your one a shirt, then you stay nude. So you couldn't even wash that one shirt that you wanted to wash. 

Praying was not allowed, of course. Talking to one another wasn't allowed. We stayed in the Sunday. They called us out to-- in the yard, nude, completely nude, on a winter day because as a punishment. Somebody did something wrong. So the whole barrack was punished. And we had to, uh, take pails, like two pails. 

There was a line. The first one had a pail, and she had to fetch the water from a brook and hand it down to the next girls until it came to the very end. And at that time, you-- you were frozen, but you didn't even know. You couldn't move your fingers. And those who fell, they couldn't do it. So they let them fall. And those who could manage and survive at the two hours came back to the barracks, thaw out, and went back again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to the girls who had fallen? 

MILA PIZER: They left them there, until-- until later on, they came back in. They were like frost bitten. They couldn't talk. And after a while they came back too and, uh, were all right. But in the meantime, the scare of the people that I have to watch somebody fall right in front of you, it was terrible. And being young, you don't realize how bad it is. 

But I swear, if I had to go through that again, no way. [CRYING] And, uh, probably in 1945-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- all this time, do you know anything about family, about the war? 

MILA PIZER: No. We're not-- we were not in contact with anybody. We are not allowed to write or-- or, uh, even if later people came to the camp, like-- like I came in '41. And other people came-- kept coming, '42, '43, '44. Uh, you are not allowed to ask any questions to know about, uh, your family whereabouts or anything like that. 

I had a sister that was 10 years old in 1941. And she was taken away and killed. So was my mother and father. Where my sister and I went to the camp, the Germans said, if a family of five children, if two are in the camp, the parents will be saved. They won't go. 

But after, uh, a few months, my other sister, a third sister, came to the camp. And she came to a different camp. And, uh, she must have-- she was sick. And they sent her-- luckily they sent her home, not to Auschwitz. When she came home after a few months, my mother was gone already. 

So they didn't say-- they said, if you have three children in the camp, your parents will be safe. They were just saying it. The fact was that my mother was already taken away. And, uh, I don't know what year my mother was taken away. It must have been in, like, '42 because I was in at '41. And a few months later, my sister went. And in '43, my father went. And my youngest sister, 10 years old, they were saying, whoever is hidden any place or with any body, it won't come out from wherever they are, they will be shot to death if found. 

So my younger sister was only 10 years old, and she was afraid. She was hidden in the attic. And she came out, and she was too young to work. She was too small, obviously, to be taken to a camp. So they took her to-- to-- probably Auschwitz or one of those death camps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But one of your sisters was returned from camp back home? That's most unusual. 

MILA PIZER: My sister, yes, one. She was in a Camp Greenberg. I don't even know whether that was Germany or where, the Camp Greenberg. But after a few months she came home. And she found that my mother was gone already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All this time, all those years in the labor camp-- 

MILA PIZER: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --did you know about the extermination? Did you know about the war, what was happening with any contact? 

MILA PIZER: No contact whatsoever. We did not know anything, except that my-- when my sister came, the other two sisters, when they came to-- to join us, they said that the younger sister was gone, father and mother were gone. We don't know where. We don't know anything, where they went, what happened to them. And nobody knew anything. You couldn't correspond with anybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you think was happening to them? 

MILA PIZER: Well, what can any 14-year-old think? I-- I don't know. I am here. Maybe they are out there safe, maybe not. But as it came out in '45, we found out plenty. That is no one survived from my family. 

My father's family consisted of, uh-- he was one of six children. My mother was one of seven children. Aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, everything went. There was a large family. No one survived. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And during all those years, you didn't know whether there was still a war going on or who was winning? 

MILA PIZER: Nothing, nothing whatsoever. Nobody told us anything. We couldn't cor-- commun-- correspond with anybody. You couldn't ask questions to anyone. And, uh, if you don't write-- and-- and made us come in-- how can you tell? How can you know anything? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, but you said you were not permitted to talk to each other. But how could they watch you at night, or couldn't you speak to one another about what was happening? 

MILA PIZER: Oh, we could talk anything we wanted but not about the war, not about the parents. Nobody wanted to talk about it because nobody knew anything to say. If I would ask, uh, where are-- where's your mother? She knew just as much as I knew. 

There were no letters coming in to anyone. There was no letters coming out to anyone. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Political rumors, were they coming around how the war was going? 

MILA PIZER: Nobody knew anything. We were just in the blind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you observed any change over the years in the attitudes of the Germans? 

MILA PIZER: No. They were-- to the very last minute, they were very bossy, very demanding of us that we had to do the very best we can. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know that liberation was near? 

MILA PIZER: No. We didn't know. The fact is that we were about a month before the liberation, to be very exact was around, uh, March and April, we were digging ditches. And the Germans told us, dig and do not talk to one another, like to say, why? What's this for? And we were not allowed to talk to each other, just keep on digging the ditches. 

That was on-- that went on for two months. And after two months and one day, we came home from the digging ditches, my sisters and I and quite a few other girls. And we saw that, uh, everything is, uh, like a storm hit the barracks. 

Everybody is in the front lawn, talking, and free. That was two days before the liberation. And we didn't have to go to work anymore. There was no-- no SS. They all escaped two days before. That was May 7th we were free. 

The Czechish-- to Czech people took control of the barracks. And evidently the Russians were very nearby. And May 9th, the Russians came in. The two days prior to the Russians, the liberation, we were freed by the-- by the Czech people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And up to the last moment-- 

MILA PIZER: We were working up to the 7th of May. We were still digging ditches. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And believing that the Germans were-- 

MILA PIZER: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --winning the war? 

MILA PIZER: Yeah, because nobody ever give us any hint whatsoever what to expect, what's going on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there air raids, bombings? 

MILA PIZER: No. No. We heard some shooting. We heard-- we heard some shooting, like-- but who knew what this is? It could have been hunting. It could be anything. So we didn't know exactly what it was. 

But two days later, 9th of May, the Russians came, liberated us. And they were stunned to find 15 barrels with gas that the Germans tried. The 15th of May was the deadline that-- to get away with us. And they supposed to, uh, gas all the 1,000 girls with those barrels there. 

But luckily the Russians came on the 9th, and they found the barrels, so we were safe. And when May 9th came, my brother-in-law was the very first man to come into our camp, and he was liberated, uh, a week before at that. And he still had his, uh, uniform on, the prison uniform. And he took us out to freedom from-- from the camp. He was the very first man to take all four of us out and his cousin, that was also on the same camp, and, uh, take us to an apartment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Over the years, have you talked to anyone about this? 

MILA PIZER: You mean after the war? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes and recently. 

MILA PIZER: Uh, yes. We were talking about, well, you see a new face, where were you? In a concentration camp? Which one? And so on and so on. But later on, that eased up, and nobody wants to talk about it anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about now? 

MILA PIZER: Even now. If we get together a group of people, they don't want to talk about it because it's too painful. And each one went through enough, where they know what-- what went on. Now we know what went on. So nobody really wants to talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In your family? 

MILA PIZER: I told my children. When they were born, I made them aware. They read enough books. They see every, uh, film that is on television about, uh, the Holocaust. They see the Remember Me that was on television recently before, uh, the holiday. And they know all about it. And as they say, you are a very lucky woman to be alive today. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But they know it from you? 

MILA PIZER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But did you tell them? 

MILA PIZER: I did tell them everything, yes. I did tell them because I think it's good for them to know what went on, because the school didn't teach that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So with your children, it's possible. With other members of your family is it possible to talk about it? 

MILA PIZER: If there is an occasion, if they see something on television-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Does your husband family's know? 

MILA PIZER: They keep asking questions. And I tell them whatever they want to know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do they want to? 

MILA PIZER: Yes. They do want to know, and they are very interested in it. And every time they see-- as a matter of fact, I have a library full of books that they buy. Treblinka, they bought a book. Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your-- your own children? 

MILA PIZER: My own children. Yes, they bought the books, and they read them. They go to any-- any length. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you understand that, that they are so interested in it? 

MILA PIZER: Well, since one of his-- their parents suffered so much, why shouldn't they be? And as a Jew, they-- they are obligated, and they should know because it could happen again. I hope not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: From the way you describe it, you don't seem to talk about it very much. Yet your children-- is that correct? 

MILA PIZER: Well, I personally don't want to talk about it because it's very painful. And, uh, I-- it just goes through me, and I can't help but get all upset, nervous, and crying. And, uh-- but when they see on a movie, a film, or anything that is connected with the Holocaust, they are very anxious to see and know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you cry, what do you cry about? 

MILA PIZER: What I cry about? Why couldn't my younger sister be alive? She would have been 49 years old today. Why couldn't my parents be alive? Why could-- why did they have to go with a death they way they did? What makes me be a better person that I survived? It's more like a guilt conscious. And, uh, there was-- there was not enough tears anymore to cry. 

At first we cried every occasion, we had. But now it's just like a dry well. Until you come up again and you renew the whole thing after a few years, if you-- a few months-- if you don't talk about it, it just comes back. It just comes back. 

All my youth, the best years I spent in a concentration camp. That's enough to cry. And, uh-- [CRYING] so that's it. When-- at feeding time, at meal times in camp, they put some kind of a, I don't know, a medication so we would not get our menstruation or kill something in the bodies so you couldn't produce anymore children. And as a matter of fact, I was told by one of the SS men-- well, he didn't just talk to me. 

He talked to that the whole group that if you can eat the food, it's because there is something to kill something inside of you, so you can-- there'll be no more Jews. We have to be free of Jews. When I got married and I found out that I could be pregnant, it was just too much of a thrill. That whatever they did, it didn't-- it didn't really help them. 

You can't tamp out a nation. You can't tamp out the Jewish people. They have to live. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

MILA PIZER: And now I feel like I want to die. [LAUGHS] It's unbelievable. [CRYING] 