INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Start again, sir. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: My name is Nathan Auerbach. I been born in Pole in Tarnopol. My date birthday is April 22nd, 1930. I was a young boy-- I believe three years old. I come to Krakow because my father, he a profession musician. And Tarnopol not so big city. So we make the home on. And family moved to Krakow, too. So I lived in Krakow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there music played in the family? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Really, my family from my father's side all are musician. And my mother's side they all are musician. Yes. And they used to-- my father used to work in the most elegant nightclubs, and he used to play in radio. That time, they don't have a record place. Live orchestra used to play. And he used to travel from the big-- Warsaw, Lodz. And you saw places where the people go-- 

My name is Nathan Auerbach. I've been born in Poland in Tarnopol. My birthday is April 22nd, 1930. I was a young boy in that time-- three years old. We immigrate from Tarnopol to Krakow, because my father professionally a professional musician. And my father used to play in nightclubs, big nightclubs. And in Warsaw radio. At that time, they did not have a record place. They used to using the best orchestra. And they used to play. 

In fact, from my father's side and from my mother's side, they all are musicians. From my mother's side, my Uncle Max Goldring, they call him the kink from romance in Poland. And he die of-- they'd been hanging him off the street with his wife and his son Stanislav, in Poland. This will be found out. 

Now I continue. I used to see my father occasions, because he used to travel in Poland. And we say increase what time, I have from the school vacation at three weeks, four weeks. And I used to go to [INAUDIBLE]-- my father used to play they called it [? [SPEAKING POLISH]-- ?] I know this Polish. I don't know. Anyway, somebody know. 

And in wintertime-- this here winter. In summer times, we used to go Kcynia beautiful you saw, my father used to play in the orchestra. And this way, we used to see my father. And occasionally used to come if you are lucky of the pesach of the seder very happy occasion. But his living not always allow to being so close, because many times you are far away. 

Many times he'd been working in Krakow, three months, four months, because they're used to working by the contract. Three months contract, two months, six months. It depends. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there music in the home? Did people play, sing in the family? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes. My mother supposed to have been opera singer. But my grandfather very old fashioned. And he not allow to go to Vienna, to Austria alone. And she was to train her voice. And they said, the father said no, it's no. And my mother never went. And I remember my mother used to sing it beautiful. 

And I think I have a little bit of gift from my mother, because I used to sing in the choir in high school. And unfortunately, my mother die-- 1938, November 11. She a very young woman. And from that time, I lost my home. I used to stay by my grandmother. After four weeks, she died, because she couldn't accept her daughter dying. And they've been buried in Krakow, they call Plaszow. 

And after I stay in all my aunts' houses through 1939. And my if the war started September 1st, 1939, the German attacked Poland. My father-- my brother is four years older from me. So my father took my brother. And my father been gone. I ask what the mobilization is. And yeah, a big panic, I remember as kids in Poland. 

So and he said they'd come. He said, well, the left, the left, the left. So he afraid, you know, not to go because they think he's a deserter. Right? He don't want to go fight for Poland. But in this war, my father in the Austrian army. He born in Austria, and he fought with Austria. And after two weeks, the south-- the part of it, they lost the war, you know, under the Warsaw, the capital from Pole-- the hold-- I don't know, I don't know. Maybe a couple of days. 

And they come back. I am very happy. They come back. To see that we're alive. And I went back to school, you know, after a couple weeks. The stayed up the Germans. They are better organized. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's in 1939. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: '39, in the war, yeah, which started the war in September. We say maybe end of September, I went back to school. I think I had six years out. I went to fifth grade. But my mother, I have five half years out, I have a private teacher. So in first grade, I am the top student. So that the teacher, he'd say, you know, you're too smart. You know too much. But I push into the second grade. 

So they pushed me into second grade. So I-- '36, I have-- I think around the fifth grade, the war started, if I've been correct. And I've been gone maybe about-- maybe two weeks. And they called-- here they called the principal from the school, and they used to called the director from the-- he come with a big stomach, with the glasses. His face-- I don't know he looked happy, not happy, I possible. I don't know. 

But he say, all Jews, kids, stay up, we stay up. And immediately go home. Never come back to school. There's the order. So I left the school. I said to my father, they throw us out from the school. And I said, why? My father had been thinking maybe I did something bad, I'd been a bad boy. I said, no. Because I've been a Jew. They don't want me-- I go to school. 

And so I have the old books and to organize private school. No legal, you know. We have teachers or somebody. We say we used to go to high school, or to college. So they tried to help us, the all kids. So we really know how to write, to read. And some been working for a while after they used-- the Germans used to come and pick up of the street, because left I in mind this very important thing. 

If I've been correct, I think October 1939, every Jew, after 13 years old, of the right arm, you had a white and blue David star. You have to wear this. And many from my teachers, they used to get a card from the Germans. They used to send them to concentration camp, to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] this mean to work in shoveling the snow. And they used-- many times, they used to never come back. And they killed them. They sent them to Auschwitz, they sent them to other concentration. 

And in fact, I think after 9 o'clock, the Jew couldn't come out from the house. They have to stay. If I have been correct. If we come out, they show them off the street. And that's been continued. And meantime, they've been talking about, they go take all Jews in Krakow, they go send to Plaszow. Plaszow is not far from Krakow. And this is a cemetery-- a Jewish cemetery where my mother and my grandmother together are buried. Because my grandmother die [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] It's been four weeks after my mother dead. 

And I went with my father and my brother-- '39, beginning '40-- to see their freeze in the last time I saw the grave for my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was the last time you saw your mother's grave was 1940. Because? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: 1940. Because they clean up the cemetery, then built a concentration camp. They called Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: On the site of the cemetery. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Of the ground for they simply clean up. You know, they took the bodies, and they cleaned up. We no got the permission go to the ghetto. And to Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You did not get-- 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Not get the permission. So my father had been thinking, maybe we go to Warsaw. And my father talked with a friend. What are you doing, he said. One said, no go to big cities. Happened the same way here in Krakow. Better pick up a small city where we can-- there's a beginning where we can survive in this most. The German won't bothered us. 

So my father-- we went with a transport to Lublin. Meantime, my brother walk one time in evening, before we left to Lublin, about three weeks. He took that the David star. And the Polish police asked him if he passed. So he's Polish Christian. He not have this. And they arrested him. 

And my father found out. So I and my brother went with my-- I with my father, I went to prison, and I ask to see him. And we saw him. And we give him a little bit courage, because the really bad luck, he had good luck. Most, they used to send them to Auschwitz, to Berkenau. They used to destroy them. And he went deep-- I was, well, we went to Lublin. But we never know this. Krasnik. 

But before we left, my father talked to neighbor where we used to live in the same building. If my father had some feeling, he'd go come back and he'd go ask where we are. So my father ought to know we got to Lublin. And we left Krakow. I remember this very clearly. March 6th, 1940. With a train to Lublin. 

And we would come-- oh, but now, I don't know how long it took us. Travel with the train 12 hours, 10 hours. We'll make a short story. We come to Lublin, and we've been thinking we're going to stay in Lublin. No. They say we go to city of Belzyce. This is 20 miles from Lublin. And they have horses, a wagon, they not have cars or trucks. And we went-- we did travel from Lublin. And we come to Belzyce and a synagogue. 

And they call it Moshe Shochet This means of English, moshe butcher. Butcher. And he is very active to the immigrants who used to come into this city, he used to cook in the shul and give us hot food, soup, bread. The best way they could give it. And the people are very gentle. They used to in the apartment. They used to have two rooms. They used to give us one room. They share with us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Jews of Belzyce-- 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Belzyce Jews, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Very helpful to those who came-- 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yeah. Yeah, for the German Jews, for the from Krakow Jews. And most the Jews, they have stores. But they have to clean up. So you had empty stores. But the stores, they used to make an apartment. They used put a bed and everything where the bed's in it. They used to live in this. 

And that's our ghetto. We got in the ghetto. In day times, we could go out in the green. And we used to go around. And after 9 o'clock, we used to go back and stay home. We couldn't go out. And they used to come and inspect the anger from Lublin. He had the-- the chief of-- boss from gestapo from Lublin. I remember very clearly the charm face with glasses. And he used to all the time ask the Judenrat-- the Judenrat, he had the representative from the Jews-- for money. 

And they asked some Jews will work against the Jews. They give the information to the gestapo. His name are Goldberg. I don't know how they are-- I think they are butchers, the father had business. They used to kill the cows he used to sell. And the final, I think, he had hiding place meat. They used to risk their life, really, and bring the piece of meat because we are still in ghetto. We no arrive in country. I talk about 1940. And he come, and the father had three sons. And he said, and four people, expect the anger. He took a gun with a smile on his face. He killed one by one. 

The youngster, he got the bullets-- I thought of the left side-- and he make believe he's dead. And he left them. And the Jews called the chevra kadisha to come, and they took the three bodies-- yeah, four, but one survived, he got wounded. And buried them, the father and the two children. And he's the youngster he say, I want to live. I want to live. 

And yeah, one doctor-- German-Jewish-- I can't remember his name. I used to remember his name. He-- we have a hospital. And he couldn't make operation. He had nor the equipment, he had nor the knowledge, I think. And we promised him, you know, come in, one doctor for you are bleeding, and he'd go, prefer operation. Only we make him good feeling. The doctor never come, and he die. 

And I went-- I helped them to better him. And I thought of the left side with a Band-Aid he had covered the hole for his-- this I know, the left side, he got a better heart. And I remember the doctor explaining, impossible to save his life. And he's screaming, wants to live. I don't know how. I-- our kids. Let's see now, 1940-- I got 10 years. He must be in that time like 17, 16, you know. 18. That's age. 

And after a couple months, we get up in the morning, we're surrounded by the SS and Okhrana. And this started-- look-- feed the call of German Polish and the Judenrat of Jewish. All Jews have to come in to close where the synagogue is. By the synagogue there are old Jewish cemetery. And there's, yeah, lots of room so they could come in. And they used to stay. And the German used to pick up. 

My father and my brother, they run away. And my father said, look, you're young. Watch out. Don't go to the place. I said, OK, daddy. I going to listen to you what you say. And I used to walk and whistle, make believe I-- had nothing to do with me. I've been no Jew. And they used to whistle to me, the SS. Some in the Okhrana. The Okhrana really would do-- they've been doing the-- they got the helper to kill them-- the Jews. 

And I used to help so many. I mean, they used to shoot people, you know, old people, sick people. I remember one time that this day, yeah, one man, he could never work. I don't know. I don't-- I not understood his-- his sickness. But paralyzed, or he had a wheelchair. He had been sick for years. And he lived off the first floor. 

And you know, it's a small city. And the houses used to build this way-- if you want, you could go through from the one house to the other street. And he listened, somebody hiding in the room, and they kill. The screaming from the women, from the men. He got so scared, he'd get up from the chair-- he walk out. What happened after him, I don't know. 

And I have been walking around all day. This been continued all day. We said maybe about 2:30, I don't know how, yeah, one barber, he are not Jewish. He are Polish Christian. But he call his false Deutsche. That mean maybe his grandmother, or his grandfather, or somebody from the family used to be one time a German. And he accepted German citizenship. 

And I look-- he talked with one Okhrana. I remember the face. A round face, red, black uniform. And he looked, and he saw with the head of me. I right away know what he talk. I don't give a-- I no wait for the time he go call me. I run away. And I hear this-- he loaded the gun. So we've been-- we be run as a cat with the mouse. I come one side street, he come, I went the other street. And we will go back and forth. 

And that's almost 3 o'clock. How I know, because of the-- I saw the clock. And the sergeant from the SS, he whistled. This mean, the job is finished. How he-- and he got tired, possibly, because they come about four o'clock in the morning. This here three o'clock. So they are tired, too. So he possibly let me go. And that's where I save my life. 

And I remember before they left, one used to be announcer for the Judenrat-- what they're supposed to doing, what they're not supposed to doing-- they used to tell everybody. They used to scream in at a strong voice. And I can't remember his name, too. I used to remember it. Tall, strong guy. And they have the old Jews of the trucks to Majdanek-- young people, Majdanek, my cousin here, too. Her name here Rosa Winkler. 

If you know, and at the time, I go Auerbach. Auerbach. Because my grandmother are Auerbach. I don't know why, they do-- used to do this. My grandfather are Winkler. Really, my name, it supposed to be Winkler. But that's where we go, and with the Auerbach will we stay. And her name are Winkler-- Rosa Winkler. Some from my father family accept Winkler, that's where I went and so far. And she went to Majdanek. 

And I saw the guy jump from the truck. I don't know-- you know, he had no chance to survive. So the term [INAUDIBLE] and one Okhrana took the rifle, and they shot him in the head. I saw that. And they left. They left. They are almost [INAUDIBLE], I think. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They left with most of the Jews from the town. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yeah. The lost-- they left with from the town, and they went to Lublin, to Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to you? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: What happened to me? I've been waiting-- I don't know where my brother or my father is. An after an evening, I saw my brother. My brother come. [INAUDIBLE] I said again, crying from happiness, they survived. And my father, yeah, happy. And we've been living again in the ghetto. And life been going on. And now, if I call normal, in this way. 

In 19-- beginning '40-- let's see, '40, '41-- they brought all from small, from the village to Belzyce, the Jews. And my father says, I no like this. Something going to happen now in Belzyce. I think they go finish the ghetto, they go send us Majdanek, or, Treblinka. So my father, with his friends, they decided for one, from the empty store where the Jews used to have it, they cut the floor, and they make the cellar. 

And a couple of families-- and I, and my brother, and my father, we went in. And somebody of the top covered it with all kind of books. And you will stay, all night, all day. We have a feeling that's going to happen next day. Something-- instinct to us. We-- we used to by instinct know, this way we could survive. Nobody really tell, that's going to happen tomorrow, but happened already next day. 

And many that used to-- that they run away before that night, but the next day it supposed to happen, to the woods. And they used to-- some, they used to hide by the Christian, if they are lacking. And I think from the Judenrat, they pay, they expect to earn lots of money. And he been hiding them in the [INAUDIBLE]-- they are the Jewish police in the room in the prison. And he been watched them. So they could nothing do. 

And they clean up the old Belzyce, the old Jews and send them to Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 2: While you were hidden in that cellar under the floor. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes. In the time, I [INAUDIBLE]. I don't-- we've been hiding. We don't know what's going to happen after we come out. Where we go? What's going to happen? But the moment my father decided-- we see you later. We've been living from hour to hour, from day to day. We come out, and we saw-- they started to come out. Not too many, but maybe about 800, 1200 people. Women, children that we are hiding. 

And they expect the anger. You ask so much money. Well, one thing I want to mention. They used to ask-- they used to come at the gestapo couple days before supposed to be in action to kill the-- money, they wanted-- gold, diamonds. And they used-- they used to, yeah, they used to say, this is for the ammunition we have to pay. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who said that? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: The Germans used to say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Germans said that they needed the money to buy the ammunition to kill? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: They kill the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Jews have to pay for their own bullets? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: That's right. And I remember, they used to-- they used to send the Jewish police all these things to the Jews that they have-- the, that they have money, and they used to force them to give so much money. And Poland goes a lot, this here in American dollars. I don't know how much. I haven't idea. $40,000, $50,000, $100,000. I don't know. 

They got diamonds and the gold. And they used-- now, I go back to Inspector Angen, the chief from gestapo. He had the old Jews. What do with us? So he said, well, I go build here arbeitslager in Belzyce. But he asked lots of money. And the people been giver there. Earring, diamonds, rings. Everything what I have. Everything what I have here. They give everything. He got what he wants. 

And in the-- from the synagogue, he make the arbeitslager. Under the supervisor from Majdanek-- they are division from Majdanek. But guards we have a-- the orders this, the Jewish police. And we used to go out in the morning. We used to work and build a road. And we used to come in the night. We used to get a meal-- soup, piece of bread. And again, next day, and again. 

I mentioned the guy-- Moshe Shochet, the butcher. He had-- his father had lots of children. And he'd been hiding in a village in Pole someplace. But he never went. Only his brothers, and sisters, and his mother and father. And you find out he give-- they give all money what they have to the Polish family. They took the money. After one week, they reported to the Polish police, over to this-- to the gendarmerie-- to German. They come and took them out from the bunker, and they killed them all. 

So he-- I don't know how-- organized with fellow boys, and they have a broken revolver. One night he come to Belzyce, they attacked the Polish police, and he took the all ammunition, hand grenade, rifles. What he did, I don't know. But-- and he started building up guerrillas. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Moshe Shochet built-- 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Moshe Shochet. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --a guerrilla gun. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yeah. I remember he had a long beard, and he cut off-- he had-- the hair never come here again, so pink was he. Anyway, and Moshe Shochet, he had the leader from the [INAUDIBLE] army. Never been in the army. And he used to kill the Germans, he used to rob the guns. He used to blow up the trains. And he'd come a night before-- before that [INAUDIBLE] from Bedzin commanded from the SS, Johan Feiks supposed to take us. 

He said-- he said to us this way. I have a 11 guns. I say, who wants to go with me? Now is the time to go. He said, maybe tomorrow is too late. Fact-- nobody wants to go. Everybody afraid. Women, children, they don't want. They haven't the time-- some, they have a wives and children. Nobody listened to him. I said, OK. 

And few days later, I don't know how he'd been in this area, and he said, the German are coming-- the Feiks from Budzyn. And he opened fire, and they had a fight. And he, you know, let them come into-- to Belzyce. And set on I-- arbeitslager, the time we called. But I think he give up, because he not have so much ammunition, only you have to save. And remember he don't have so many man power. 

And we get up in the morning, we are surrounded from SS, from the Okhrana with the black uniforms, with the rifles. And I've been hiding under the bed, and the German-- and the German will say, get out. Well, I see hand machine gunners and young boys. I say, oh, this is death. And yeah-- panic some, not organized so. 

So I sneak out to the other group, and I am between the oldster. So that guy really don't know what happened with me. And he could not remember me. I got lucky. That's why I said, I-- I-- I now lost my orientation. I-- I-- if I saw death, I always been thinking, how to die, make it easy for myself. And I said, well, I go try, I said. If you kill me, kill me. But I have nothing to lose, or I can win it. And I win my life. 

And my father saw, you know, the German Jews, and the state is separate. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was a bigger pill. All the Jews were outside. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Outside again. Oh, yes. The all are outside, because the trials are outside at 7 o'clock. Women and children, and the father. Separate 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, selection. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Selection. You know, women, children, old people, yeah. And I remember in front of me is a beautiful woman. I'd say maybe 19 years. Black hair, beautiful fig-- figure she had. Black eyes. And she had a little baby, maybe two months old. And one from the German SS men, he say, you're so beautiful. you know what? Throw your-- the child, and you can go to the group, you can work, and you can live. She said, I've been the mother, or I go with my child, or you can kill us both. I say, that's what you wanted? She said, yes, I want. 

He took the gun, they had to force the head to the left side. I saw this. And he shot her. Frees the child. Does it mean he wants to give it head chance? She said no, go shoot me. No, she said nothing. She'd been waiting for the bullets to kill her, and give her the bullets a second later, I mean, two second later. And she fall down. She had death. And I saw it. And I saw that they use-- they used to kill women and children screaming, now, I can't describe. 

My father thought the group-- the German Jews-- stay separate. So he found out the German Jews that they take to Budzyn, they're not going to bother them. So he come to-- to one for the officer. He said, I've been a Austrian citizen. I can go too? I said, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A citizen of Austria. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Austria. Yes. And he say, I used to be in Austria soldier. I say yes. I said, I have two sons. I said, take them too. So he took me and my brother. And we stayed. And we left almost half way-- in the middle, actually now, they used to dig the grave, and they used to shoot them. Some, they used to get a shot in the legs, some they used to in the head. And they used to throw the dirt to earth off the top. And they used to-- it used to go up and down, because they are living people. 

And yeah, one-- this-- the son bury his mother. The mother, you are still alive. And she said, Moshe, [non english] But Moshe have to [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Moshe, don't bury me alive. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Not bury me alive. I've been your mother. I still living. But Moshe had no choice, because the German are given the choice on he bury alive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He buried his mother alive? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes, right. Because she got the bullets not in the right place, not in the head. Maybe in the legs, maybe in the arm. And they don't give a damn, the Germans. The job have to continue, because they have a lot in the lines. They have to take the clothes-- on the clothes they have. Women and children and mens. Because they've been robbed of anything whatever. Before, I have-- I want to mention. They used to give the order. Anything what they have-- gold, rings, everything. 

They have to give them away. And one time they give order, the old German Jews go off to Wegliniec with the horses. And we went to Budzyn. This here May 8, 1942. We come to Budzyn. We sit off the grass. No food, nothing. Nobody talked to us. All of we be sit from the Belzyce. And we will wait. We don't know what we wait. 

After the hero, Johann Feiks, the murderer Come again. No got enough the blue boy he-- were he killed. He still, you are hungry of the Jewish blood for the children. Well, they used to throw the children in the air and shoot them like balloon. They used to take the children-- they have a-- yeah, they have a couple dozen small children. They used to-- one Okhrana used to take it-- in Belzyce. He had a hack, and he had something-- piece of wood. He hold by the legs, he cut the head for the chicken. And not enough. 

And he come back to Budzyn, and told us to stay in the-- in the compound he make, you know. And he'd been staying. We'd be staying opposite him. And he has a-- I don't know how to mention-- he had from leather-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: A whip. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: A whip. Yeah. And I-- my brother went-- Fritz, he said, to the right. I went-- I went after my brother. He told me to the left. My-- my father went to the right. And to left, yeah, left over children, a little bit, women, a few mens. I say, group that were left about 40, 50, 60 people. I remember one woman-- red hair. Yeah, May. Still you had chill a little bit. She had a green coat, and she stayed in the side, from the left side from me. 

And she said-- of Germany, she said, please my Liebig gentleman. And she kiss his boots. Please, no kill me. I want to live. You want to live? He took from the toes the woman and shot her in the head. And I got the all-- the-- from the brains of my clothes. So I said to myself, I am only 14 years old. I said, I see why I go. I said, why should I go? You stay in the line, when the right time come, and they gonna shoot me. 

I said, I go, if they carry me into woods, fumbles into the woods, yeah, maybe. less than quarter mile. And there's-- I don't know. 500-- 700, 800 yard. And I said to myself, I got on it from from the group. So I cannot run too far. So that everybody gonna shoot of me. So they have to kill me. So make me easy for me. 

I look, my father come out, and he go to the Johann Feiks oberscharfuhrer yeah, sergeant. Yeah, he got maybe 20, 21 years old. Yeah, from Sudeten. He are married. He had his own two children. And my father come to him and state of the intention. My father knows speaking very good German. And he said, I want a volunteer go to death to my son. Volunteer. The murder. Well, he gives him. 

I said, where your son stay? I say, here. get him out. Take him out. And my father-- my-- in the moment, my-- my brother cried. You know, let my father go. He said, well, you're leaving me alone. I said, you're older. You will survive. I can't let [INAUDIBLE] die alone. I go-- I want to make him easy. That's my father said to my brother, to die. So my father saved my life. 

I talked with many people-- a thousand people survive it. No place in any concentration camp happen. Somebody wants to go volunteer to death to save his family. That's only my father. His name is Oscar Auerbach. Hebrew name is Yehuda Auerbach. And I, my father are in the first war medic. And he used to-- people used to get wounded from wood. They used to pick up the machines, and they used to cut the poles to fit. 

My father used to patch up. He used to heal them every day with water, with Band-Aid, he used to-- anything, doing what he could to help it. He-- he saved them, he healed them. And I call my father is a hero, because he risk his life. He couldn't live. What happened to him-- opposite. He say, go in. So my father died with me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Feiks could have said to him, join your son. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yeah. And join your son. Only he had to say, join your son. My father-- yeah, he knew he'd go 100%. But 10-- I don't know what to say. He like this. And my, uh-- why I stayed. So I come out, my father-- my father had me and my brother. And I stayed with the company. And 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to Feiks 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Feiks 

INTERVIEWER 2: Feiks Johann Feiks 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Johann Feiks is one here barber, his name is Jack Graginsky. His wife is almost-- mental, she's a vegetable. I-- I know he, at Budzyn. He used to be a prisoner. Polish army, they used to wear uniforms. But I don't know him from in Budzyn. And he got barred the Feiks. He said to me, 1952, the jack barber, the Jew, where it used to be Budzyn. Went to Bridgeport to school, be his license. He saw him, he recognized, because he think a left had-- one finger hand missing. 

And he-- I used to-- that Jack used to shave him, and he recognized him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So the barber who used to shave Johann John Feiks 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Feiks the commandant from the Budzyn oberscharfuhrer 

INTERVIEWER 2: Recognized the same John Feiks in Bridgeport in 1952? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Bridgeport, Connecticut, United States. Yes. And he saw them, he said, all at one time. And he never saw them again. I come 1960 from Israel-- well, just a minute. I better continue. I have to continue. OK. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, you can say, you-- what, were you try to find John Feiks 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: I-- I-- I tried to find-- I took Friedman come to New Haven. And I introduced-- I said, if he know from Budzyn a Johann Feiks Yes, I have off the list. And one day, I got a call. Let's see-- Saturday. He say, I come to you tomorrow. Pick me up from the train. This is May '68, 12. And I pick him up, I with my wife. 

We went to Bridgeport, Connecticut and we've been looking all barbershop. And we look in the telephone book. They are all a Miss Feiks but no Johann-- of list, the first name Johann Feiks I don't know where he is. And now, I go back to my story, because this is. 

So we belong to the fifth company, and they are-- any barrack had-- the barrack of fifth and the company of fifth. They are from Warsaw Jews, and from Belzyce. And I-- some of the work is zigland. This is a project they used to work in Budzyn. I, my father, and my brother, they sent us to Hankelweg Hankelweg this yeah manufacturing where the German used to build airplanes. 

But I've been working with my father, load up from the trains, from the cars, the heavy machines. Pass one for the [INAUDIBLE]-- [INAUDIBLE] really also here in America a private the watch the manufacturer. But they are more military. They have a conscience so far. And he asked sergeant. And he said, who is that young boy? My father said, that's my son. Oh, this is too heavy work for him. I said, you asked my father what his profession is. His profession. 

My father said, I've been a musician. I say, I've been a musician, too. And they started talking. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was a German. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: German. They are German. His name is Sergeant Winkler. Almost the same with my cousins. And he said, I will give him a job he go work in the building 13. 13 they are building, where the [INAUDIBLE] had the building. And the builder, they have a local gestapo. My job here-- deliver mail from the office to the post office and pick up from the-- from the post office. 

And yeah, one of the chief from the gestapo are baker. He had from Posen. He spoke Polish. Yeah, easy for me, because that time I could speak in German. And he had a girlfriend Yulke Yulitzfeld, he called. She come from Lemberg, Poland. And they have-- she have very friend to me. In fact, many times they used to have a pass to go out of the bicycle to go to her house. And the beck-- the chief from gestapo-- he volunteered. I never run away, because I have a father and brother. 

And this seat now I possibly never run away, because I never wants to live with my father and my brother in the concentration camp. They used to send me pick up they forgot sandwich home or something. A small thing. If she want something, I went. And one time, they used to have been-- used to work in tailors, shoemakers, barbers. And one guy used to be-- he used to take care of-- they have 25 well trained dogs. He used to feed the dogs. And women used to from the concentration camp used to clean the office. 

And one day, they come to me, the guy who used to feed the-- the dogs-- he said, listen, Nate. I used to go to the [INAUDIBLE], the gas, the room-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: gas room. 

NATHAN AUERBACH: gas room, and-- and clean them, and make a fire. I used to clean the ashes with the-- for the core, make a fire. They say, I want you steal from them ammunition, revolver. And I said, you know what you ask for me? They going to kill me. I said, are you want to live? Sure, I want to live. 

I said, we take you with us. We run away. We make plans. But we need guns, ammunition, hand grenade. I said, but on the condition, I said, you go take my brother and my father. If not, I no go. I no make it, not one step. We all together. Are we going to live, I said, with my brother and my father together, or we go die. I not go save my life myself. Fritz said no, it's too much. Only seven people, we can't take you. I said, if it's too much, it's too much for me. I can't risk my life and do this. You know what you expect from me. 

So they say, OK, we go take your father, your brother. So I used to clean the asher, and I used to take the basket made of paper. I used to put a hand grenade, a couple of bullets. I used to. And we set up a place, somebody come and pick this up. And this been going for every days, and weeks, and months. And they're prepared. And this come happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The guards? The guards never missed this bullet? 

NATHAN AUERBACH: No. They really-- then the guards never missed it. They don't know. There are lots of ammunition stack up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They let you -- 

NATHAN AUERBACH: Yes. They left me in, because I have-- I have small kids. I used to take a broom or sleeping and all. And think they get. They let me in and they trust me. Because I used to work in this place one year. And I know [INAUDIBLE] at the [INAUDIBLE] used to be an officer in Poznan. He once put on some-- somebody on my place. They beat up my father. He had-- had been-- he is a Jew. And he beat up very bad, my father, in his head. 

And I know he live here in the United States. He's a dentist technician. Where he live United States, I don't know. But he have paid for what he did to me. I included him the same as on the German for me, because he almost killed my father. He wants money. My father said he had no money. And he explained how I got the job working in this building. They called the 13-- building 13. And I will collect the guns. I used to take in my-- the tommy gun. And I used to-- I used to-- 