SUBJECT: There was this period of movement and traffic. And then, after which, we-- we were still in-and-out from the concentration camp at night, to get to our bunker, and work all night. Come back before the head count to the bunk-- to the-- for the count head, be counted there, and go out to work. 

And this we did for six months. We finally built it, and it was a cave. We started out with a cave, underground cave, under the city canalization. It was a little [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] when the tide was coming out. A very big canal, very big canal, almost the height of the-- almost the height of a 14, 13, 14 years old boy, average. 

But it narrowed down to the arteries, it narrowed down. And we had to-- that's the way, that was where we entered, and through which we also shipped out the excavation, which we needed. All the earth, and the dust, and stuff. We were three months, underground, and we were uncovered by the Germans. I was the-- so to say-- the leader of the bunker, and I was arrested personally by the SS. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many people were there, underground? What was the-- 

SUBJECT: 32. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 32. 

SUBJECT: 32. This was our tragedy. 

[SIGHING] 

This was our tragedy because we built it for 12 people. And this is also involving my, so to say, theory about family ties. There were certain complications that we-- we had to have professional people help us-- in the water, plumbing, electricity, and also under the beams with which we supported the bunker. 

And I involved three more people, outsiders, who were professional bunker builders in camp. There were about 50, 60 bunkers in our-- in our camp. But they had the places already for them. They had places reserved for them to go. And this was our guarantee, that they are not going to come to us. We knew that they had places which they had built, and we knew where it is, because we-- this information we exchanged in case something happens, that we are uncovered, then one or two of us can run away, and we should know where to go. 

That wasn't common knowledge, but we had-- we had, let's say, another place to go, a second place, second base, so to say. But on the day when we entered the bunker, instead of 12 people, we had 31. Because these people brought along their family. They decided that this bunker is safer than the one that they had there with the others. You said, well, coming along, well, there might well another four people. But not 30. 

So the food that we prepared, instead of lasting for six, seven months, lasted only a few weeks. The air was stale, impossible to breath in, was impossible. Biggest problem that we had was garbage, the garbage cans. And other problems-- to say, to say little, is to say that when we uncovered by the Germans, we thanked God that we were uncovered. We couldn't bear it any longer underground. But I was arrested personally. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they get to uncover you? Do you remember the moment? 

SUBJECT: With dogs, with police dogs. Whether someone has squealed, whether someone has heard noise, there was a lot of-- a lot of quarrels going on there underground. Jealousy quarrels, and many, many direction-- many different way of [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] I studied psychology myself, but each-- there were different types of quarrels then there were-- in concentration, we didn't have any quarrels. But there, we had. When we were isolated, there we had. 

We were uncovered, and the German, the German lived above-- whom I knew, because we knew before. I only-- we were thinking-- we were planning, that was the plan. That no one's going to look under a German's house. No one's doing a search under a German's to find a Jew there, right? And he claimed ignorance, he didn't know. 

But the Germans, they weren't taking his word. They wanted to know whether he knew or he didn't know. And I said, no, he didn't know. They kept me as a witness to the fact that he was-- they hired, his family hired a lawyer as a witness to protect him. And I was taken from Plaszow with a special card to Lvov to attest during the court case, court session. 

But it was to [INAUDIBLE]. These testimonies were torture testing me. My nose was broken, you can see, one side goes one way. I was hit in the nose, and I was in Einzelkammer for two weeks, in the Lvov, in major SS headquarters. But I stood by him, which was true, that he didn't know. 

What I felt was-- I also felt also that as I long as I say that I didn't know, they will keep me. They will want me to be alive to-- at least I'll have some part in the outside, and they'll be interested to keep me alive. But the front has been a military action, and the front has changed after Stalingrad. And I guess they start to think of closing down these concentration camps, including Plaszow. 

At least they took us from Plaszow away. I was taken from Plaszow, as I say, to Lvov. That's quite a distance. From one side of the park from the other. And I was taken from Plaszow including 5,000 other prisoners, to Mauthausen-- through Auschwitz, we were waiting in Auschwitz for four days in the trains, because Auschwitz didn't have place for us. In the trains, locked up in trains. 

One third of the people in the trains did not survive the voyage-- most of these. We came to Mauthausen, we had a year at Mauthausen. Mauthausen-Gusen II, which was part of Mauthausen. And that was the work of Messerschmitt. And we were building tunnels for the hangars of the Messerschmitt planes, and for the-- also, workshop to them, was under the Tyrolean mountains, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see the quarry in Mauthausen? 

SUBJECT: I worked in the quarry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You worked in the quarry? 

SUBJECT: I was in the quarry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see the parachutists, as they call them? 

SUBJECT: Did I see what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: They talk about people in Mauthausen were pushed over the cliff. Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: This happened every day. This happened every day. As soon as somebody became a-- became not fit to work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ill, you mean? 

SUBJECT: They would kick him or something. And they would save to themselves the work of bringing him to the crematorium I worked in-- I have the story of from one stone, two, in my book. I don't know whether you read it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I don't remember now. 

SUBJECT: They used to be in the Steinwerk in the-- where they had the-- there used to be the order-- one large stone, or two small stones. And when I came down-- this was the work-- this, up and down, up and down, like a chain. 

I came down, and after the explosion, they dynamite explosion, they explode the portion, and we have to carry up the stones, uphill. So the order was for one large one. But when the-- when the prisoners came down here, then right away after, there was a group of 200-- 200, even after the two stones that you can find, small stones that they can carry up. 

By the time I got there, I already was very sick. By the time I got there, there was only one stone, it was quite large. I couldn't-- really lift I couldn't-- I had to pick it up, I picked it up, I carried it for a while, carried it for awhile. But then I felt that I wouldn't be able, whole body was bleeding. And I dropped it. I dropped it really with resignation, that I can't-- whatever may happen, whatever happened. 

I later made a poem about it, and the poem's in Yiddish, the article is in English. I published it for a book of poems that I've written in concentration camp, and that I have saved. So I dropped it down, and when I dropped it, it split in half. I had the chance, I picked up one, unnoticed, and I went. And I call this article, "From One Stone, Two." 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it for you a miracle? 

SUBJECT: It was a miracle. I felt it was a miracle, because the SS were standing apart, let's say like 15, 10, 15 meters apart from one another, I still walked though [INAUDIBLE]. [? Magical ?] system. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rabbi, was the feeling that God was with you? 

SUBJECT: I had felt always that there was hashgakha pratit, some kind of a pre-determined decree that I should survive. Because I have survived not once, but 100 times. I've just spoken to someone outside, and he told me about this pessimistic feeling, the fears. I never had fears. 

That may have been the difference between me and others, I was not afraid. I always felt within me that I will survive. Whether I would have survived or not, but I hoped that I will survive, and I was only sure that I would survive. And it's interesting when we were separated, my father, bless his memory, we went from Plaszow, went to a train to Buchenwald. I went to a train to Mauthausen. 

He ran over towards me, he wanted to join our group. He was caught by the SS men, hit over the head, and his head was bleeding, and they got him back into the-- you know how they divide the groups. And he was amongst the elderly, and all the younger people were sent to Mauthausen, 'cause it meant work. He went over twice, as a matter of fact. The second time was when his head was bleeding, he was holding on to me. I should watch out for him for my brother. He was with me. 

Anyway, when I was liberated, I was already, that time, like having a coma. I weighed about 70 some odd pounds, 35 kilo. But my brother was with me, and he kept it better. There was already too much to drained out, too much. So my first words were, "My father's alive." 

And my brother was laughing, he was then only 17. 10 years, 16 or 17. He says, how can you expect your father to survive? He's about 56, 57 years old, no one was alive in that age. But I'm sure. And he's alive. How he survived there, in Buchenwald, that's amazing, which is also interesting. 

There were a few people in Buchenwald that have known of my father, from before the war, because he was famous in our town. Not only in our town, but in our country. He was one of the two or three rabbis with a shtreimel, You know what that mean? And they protected. The prisoners protected. 

There's a writer, Zirelson. He's the [INAUDIBLE] Jewish [INAUDIBLE]. New York, young fellow. Younger than my father. He used to attend every day a shiur of my father, morning. I also give a shiur, because everything's important. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A what? 

SUBJECT: A shiur, a class. In the morning, we take a class-- whatever we wanted to talk about. And one day, he had most of the block. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A shiur in Math-- 

SUBJECT: In Buchenwald. All 

INTERVIEWER 1: Daily, a lesson. 

SUBJECT: Daily, in the morning, a shiur. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they allow it? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was it allowed? 

SUBJECT: It wasn't allowed. We got up a half an hour early to [INAUDIBLE]. We never get in the [INAUDIBLE]. We [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] I [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] in Gusen I [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] every day. With a group of people, not alone. A group of people. We done it every day. 

I had a-- in Plaszow, and also in Gusen, we had one plate kosher, for kosher food. We had a couple Jewish people work in the kitchen, and we made one kettle, it was kosher, we knew. Anyway, so the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] has just [INAUDIBLE], by the kapo. Who is the leader? Who was doing this? Who was the organizer? Zirelson took it upon himself, and he got a beating. 

They protected my father, they protected my father. Because they wanted to see someone survive that could tell the story, and who would-- whose words would be accepted, believed. So there were many people, let's say, who survived, and had a story to tell, who couldn't tell it. Didn't know how to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And Rabbi, why was there such a long silence? 

SUBJECT: Why what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why was there such a long silence with you? You said until 10 years ago-- 

SUBJECT: I could not. I didn't start speaking, starting writing about it, until 10 years ago. I married an American girl, and she did not want to hear about it. My in-laws didn't want to hear about it. They said the truth is, you should forget it. I myself was disturbed for many, many, many months. In the middle of the night, I would wake up, and nightmares. 

You know what I would do to convince myself? I would reach out to see whether I have shoes. When I touch my shoes, I knew that I'm out, was a free-- because in the concentration camp I didn't have any shoes. We had these wooden-- now, when I see all these ladies walking with the-- with the Dutch and Swedish-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Clogs. 

SUBJECT: Clogs, I say, they made it a luxury, this is what we had. But anyway, so, just as much as it is important now for people to know about it, it was important for us to forget about it. Until we, at least, reach a physical stage, now that I am able to talk about it. I must admit, I'm quite often invited to speak about the Holocaust, nationally, different cites, New York for many times. 

And before I-- when I prepare myself, it's about five or six days that I become emotionally so stirred up, falling back into these-- the details, reviving the details, and I have written some of them down. But I am later so exhausted after those experiences, like I would be liberated yesterday. So it isn't easy. People didn't want to hear, people who couldn't hear. 

There's one thing which I have brought out in my recent article, which I-- this series of articles-- is one lie that has to be-- that has to be spoken about and denied as vigorously as possible. And it cannot be done by anyone else than ourselves. One of the basic lies-- two, there were many lies, two, three basic lies about the Holocaust survivors. 

One lie was that we didn't fight back, we didn't resist enough. And that's a lie. In our town, I would say there were at least 50 occasions of resistance, of acts of resistance against the SS. We blasted out-- we blasted out oil tanks, we cut their tires, we destroyed whatever was in sight, But whenever we did it, we always erased the trace of any Jewish partnership in that act. 

Because we had the experiences we have known. I have participated in several of them, because I was in a very sensitive spot in the [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] which was the name of the refinery. I could have blown up the whole thing in one shot, in one match. But we didn't want to do that. We didn't want to do it, because we were then going to be liquidated right after, they would liquidate 1,000 Jews right away, because they wouldn't have any work from them. They take them out to shoot them. 

And there was always the revenge, immediate. Not waiting, like United States is waiting right now with the action against Iran. The German Gestapo, when they had something, very minor excuse, minor excuse-- one of the most common way of resistance was spitting in an SS man face. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

And usually the SS man would take out and shoot. But that was the greatest heroic act that the person or the Jew could have done. And there was resistance all over. Why the people don't know, why the world doesn't know about it-- there are many reasons. 

Number one, most of those people that participated did not survive to tell it. The Germans themselves did not report it. They were embarrassed to report when a Schmutzige Jude did something to them. They didn't report that stuff, they swallowed it down because of their pride. The pause that war made-- we investigated it-- were destroyed by the Germans. 

The only two basic acts of resistance that are historically now accepted was in Vilno. But there were acts of resistance all over, in concentration camp, and in each village, and each town. But no Jewish-- we tried, we tried to hide our Jewish initiative in any kind of act of resistance. So that's a great lie, that we did not resist. 

There's also another lie which I wanted to refute this, because time-- the lie, which a lot of people say, that Jewish people-- that the Jewish prisoners, the survivors of the Holocaust, as well as those while they were in Holocaust-- were not religious. And that's a lie. 

Because everyone was religious. And I can give you proof. Number one, our suicide ratio was nearly none. And a lot Russians, the Ukrainians, and Spanish people that were at Mauthausen committed suicide every day. We didn't have Jewish people commit suicide. It was all-- every Jewish, every Jew had a hope, and fought for their survival. And that's the religious belief of Judaism-- survive. 

We [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] we tried to eat kosher. We asked shales, we studied. They said we didn't eat any bread. Kashrus, most of the time, I exchanged my soup-- when there was not kosher soup, you know, the soup was made out of horse meat and horse bones-- for a piece of bread. The ratio of bread-- what can I tell you? Ratio of bread was-- was calorie-wise, one third of what the soup was, because the soup was soup. It had vitamins in it. 

But we exchanged it. We exchanged our ciggarettes for bread. We were a whole group of people. Last but not least, what was the song that we sang all over the concentration camps, in ghettos? What was the song? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ani Ma'amin? 

SUBJECT: Ani Ma'amin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you sing that? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember how you sang it? 

SUBJECT: Oh. Ani Ma'amin. And even the-- even the Partizanlied which the-- [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] What was it? [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] Never say that this is the last, no matter how cloudy the skies. Because there's something better through the clouds. And there will come the day, we'll be here. 

So this the story. I don't know of any other religious, ethnic group that could have survived religiously a period of six years with 1,000 forms-- not one form, one type of thing. OK, get a-- get a group and you hijack a group, or you keep them as prisoners, whatever. But there were different types, each day was different. 

And they-- the types of the terror and the fear, and the tension that we were exposed to changed continuously. But throughout all this time, as a general, most of the Jewish people were religious. Even those that came into concentration camp, assimilated-- assimilated completely-- became quite often religious. 

I remember the Steinwerk inside of the cave, when we were building the tunnel, I kept a calendar. We got up on one of the racks, and I said, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] And I started the chant [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] and all of them-- there were about 600 in the cave that time, because it was a night when some Allied planes were around. And they have chased us in, into the caves. 

That was the first thing that they do-- that they did. You know, to keep us under control, the SS men. And I chanted [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] with all of them, and there were 500 or 600 people. With the echo reverberating throughout the canal, throughout the tunnel. How can you say that these people were not religious? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rabbi, the Ani Ma'amin. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I hear it in my ears. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But I would like to hear it from you. Can you? 

SUBJECT: I certainly believe today it's easier to sing it in there. It was-- I don't know who ordered, who was the composer of the chant. Some say [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] was it, but I don't think so. Whats the melody? You want to hear it now? 

[SINGING "ANI MA'AMIN"] 

And the group would always join in. 

[SINGING "ANI MA'AMIN"] 

People sing now. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] would sing this song. It was always the song that would begin any program. We organized programs even at Mauthausen. Reading poetry, writing poetry, I had a whole-- I published a whole book, in Belgium, after the war, in Yiddish. Songs that I'd written in concentration, of which one of them is the "Ballad of the Stone I call it "The Ballad of the Stone." 

But the program always started with "Ani Ma'amin." Always started with "Ani Ma'amin." How can you say these people were not believers? Of course we-- we had doubts. We challenged God with questions. We said how can God allow this? 

And these were the things that they would turn to us, those anyway that had the Jewish background, the Hebrew background, the Talmudi background, the scholarly background. And we told them, this has happened to us not once, not twice, we read it in the Haggadah every year. It's part of the text, the Haggadah [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] In everything, in every generation there is a new enemy or antisemite who wants to destroy the Jewish people. 

And this is one thing that we will overcome. And we always knew, even those that died felt up to the last minute that we will overcome. That's how, the way we see it. 

CREW: Is it finished? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, I don't know. 

SUBJECT: The interesting thing is-- I missed this, anyway, [INAUDIBLE]-- is that the young generation, our children, our sons, still the older ones, now the younger ones, are never too tired to listen to the stories again, and again, and again. [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] tell us again. So I said, you know it, I told you the story. I think I told you about one story, but it was-- there were millions of stories, thousands of them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because you, Rabbi, have a way of telling. 

SUBJECT: They want to, they want to hear. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You have a way of telling, and you have a way of making us understand. I have to ask you to do something. I'm sorry, I forgot to ask you about it. It's a release, it's a standard release. 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. 

