CREW: Rolling. 

SUBJECT: I forgot to mention that there was about 160 children aboard the St. Louis, if I rem-- more or less. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to those children, do you know? 

SUBJECT: Most of them didn't survive. The ones that got to England survived. In fact, I'd like to mention there was another family from my small town that was aboard-- I forgot to mention it-- by the name of a Goodman, Mr. And Mrs. Goodman and the three children. There was a boat-- they came from my small town-- and there was a boat with us. 

In fact, some of the pictures I showed you, they was on that picture too, the Goodman children. They landed-- luckily for them-- they land that in England. After the war, they emigrated to Australia, and they live now in Australia. In fact, Mr. Goodman died since then, and the three children and the mother is still alive in Australia. And they came from my small town too. 

INTERVIEWER: But most of the children on board the St. Louis died? 

SUBJECT: Most of the children that-- well, I would say all that went to Belgium or Holland didn't survive. Because Holland and Belgium is such a small country, it was very, very hard to hide out there. But France, it was a lar-- a biggest city, and I-- a bigger country. And I would say the French people was good to us. They was good to us. 

I had a girlfriend that was hiding in that convent during the war. And after the war, she went to Israel. She was not with me on the ship, but you know, there was many, many thousands and thousands of French-- they hated the Germans. I would say more French people hated the Germans than agreed with them, became fascist somehow. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see the film, The Sorrow and the Pity? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear about it? 

SUBJECT: I heard about it, but I didn't see it. 

INTERVIEWER: But your experience was that the French people helped. 

SUBJECT: Yes, absolutely, abso-- there was always some-- there's some bad eggs all over. But in general, they did help. In fact, I'd like to mention the head-- the man that was the president of that organization, that French youth organization, he knew-- there was about 14 or 15 Jewish boys in that home. And he knew who I was, and he knew who were the others was. But he helped us, he helped us. 

INTERVIEWER: We were at the point in your story where you had to leave Ardennes, and then you went back to Limoges, and what happened. 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, in-- in Limoges. When I was in Limoges, we heard the news that the American's French forces invaded Normandy, and the start of the liberation. And at that point, I saw the Panzer Division-- very, very young people. I never saw so many young people. They looked to me like 16, 17-year-old boys. 

INTERVIEWER: In the German army. 

SUBJECT: In the German army, in the SS uniform. In Limoges, I saw them there with big tanks and everything. They went to a town about 12, 15 miles from there, and they destroyed-- they burned the whole town down. They took the men and put them in a barn, and burned the barn down. And the children and the women into a church, and burned that church down, because they claimed that the whole town was full of the French underground, the French Maquis. 

INTERVIEWER: And they killed all the people in the town? 

SUBJECT: They killed-- a few, one or two men jumped out through the window of the barn that was burning and survived on to tell the story. But I know France did never rebuild that town. That town is a souvenir of what happened during the Second World War. It's called off Oradour-sur-Glane, it's about, I would say, 15 miles from the city of Limoges. 

And I was very close-- I heard about it after. In fact, I saw some smoke, and I didn't know it was at that point. But the SS, that was the last Panzer Division SS did that job. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you, and liberation, and where were you, and how did you reunite with your family, with your brother? 

SUBJECT: Well, after the-- after we heard the Americans land, we was very happy about it. And we thought, sooner or later, all this nightmare is going to end for us, and we would see our parents again. Because we made up after the war, we would meet in Poitiers all together. Wherever we was, we would meet in Poitiers with our parents and sisters. We all would get together there. 

And after the war ended in Fran-- no, not in France alone, because the war wasn't ended yet. France was free, but Germany wasn't freed, and the camps wasn't freed. But after everything ended, we went back to that town where my parents was living. And we looked for them, they wasn't there. 

We looked for our cases that was never opened. Most of them was never opened, the 26 larges cases, with furniture, and Leica cameras, and Frigidaires, and sewing machines. And we didn't find anything. It was taken by-- after my parents was taken, it was taken by them, by the Nazis, and shipped to Germany, I understand. 

The only thing we found is-- for some reason, I don't know why-- the refrigerator, which was a brand new refrigerator, and the-- we also found the pictures that I showed you from the ships. With-- actually, twice as many, because I gave you-- my brother has half, I have the other half. And we found my bicycle that was given to me by the Jewish community for my bar mitzvah. 

INTERVIEWER: In Germany? 

SUBJECT: In Germany, and I had it with me, because I-- that's all we found. So we went back, I went back to-- I went to that place, it's called Chateau du Moulin, that belonged to the French Boy Scouts, and I became-- by that time already I was older, and I learned-- I became a teacher to learn the boys how to become a cabinet maker. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother? You found your brother. 

SUBJECT: My brother, I found my brother, yes. He went to Paris, and he was in a home by the Orsay. And it was Rue-- it was called the Rue Rollin, this is where my brother was. But I was in the southern part of France. And by that time we start-- we tried to get to America. Well, we got in touch with our relatives in Hartford and in Baltimore. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any hope that your parents were somewhere alive? Did you try to look for them? 

SUBJECT: We went to different organizations, we gave our names and all this. And, but they didn't hear anything. So we don't even know where they went. My mother and sisters-- they didn't even know where they was deported to, which town, or which village, or whatever. 

But my father-- as I mentioned before, before-- he was, until January, 1944, in Paris in the Hospital Rothschild. And from that, in January some time, he was deported someplace, and never heard from him again. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you come to this country, sir? 

SUBJECT: We applied to come to America with-- our relatives in Baltimore and in Hartford sent us affidavits, and we went to-- I went to-- what's the name of the town-- Bordeaux, France, there was an American consulate. And we applied for it, and they asked me if I have any papers, and so on, and so forth. 

And I had to be checked. I had to prove that I was not a jailbird, that I was never in jail. I had to be x-rayed that I wouldn't have TB, because if I had TB, I could never come to America. Or if I had any disease, venereal disease, or any of those diseases. And I had to go to a doctor to be checked for all that. And that came out all right. 

And it took us about a year before we could get a boat, because there was very few boats to come to America. Well, after that, I went to Paris, and I stayed with my brother until-- we tried to get a board to come to America. In December, 1946, we got a boat. We found a boat called SS John Ericsson, and we arrived the 29th of December, 1946, in New York City. And from there we went to Baltimore, to our relatives, and then we went to Hartford, and we decided to stay in Hartford. 

INTERVIEWER: Your education was interrupted when you were-- 

SUBJECT: My inter-- my education was interrupted by the time I was 13 years old. I never went to school again, since that age, when I was 13. Except I educated as much as I could. I learned French, I-- I can write French-- I still can write, today, French. And I can read French. I guess I can read and write English. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you marry in this country? 

SUBJECT: I was never married, never. 

INTERVIEWER: But you have found a life here in Westbrook. 

SUBJECT: I came to Hartford, and I worked in a French-- Canadian French-- box company, because I was a cabinet maker. And then, some-- from the Hartford Jewish Refugee service, somebody told me there's a job available in Westbrook, Connecticut, in a hotel, what can you do? 

I said, I was a gardener, I could be a gardener. They need a gardener, so that I came to Westbrook to build Hahn's Hotel. I didn't speak English, and I worked there all summer long as a gardener. And then in the fall, he asked me, can you paint? Can do other things? I said, yes, I can. So he kept me over the winter, I was painting, I was doing a little of everything. 

And I stayed with him for eight years. And after that, I bought-- I bought a lot, and I built a house, and I opened an antique and gift shop. I never was married, I'm still single. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You're here. 

SUBJECT: And I'm here. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. I can't thank you enough. 

