INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: And in April of 1945, we knew that something is happening with the war because we've seen the first signs of the war coming to an end. They came to us, and they informed us that because the Russians and the Americans are approaching-- the camp Buchenwald is on the border of Schwarzwald, by the Czechoslovakian border, not too far from there. And in order, they told us, to save us from the American soldiers, they would take us along with them on a march. 

Now I know that the reason was that these guardsmen we had, apparently, they didn't want to be sent to the front. So they would just take the 300 helflinger, which are us. And they would just march us around the countryside and collect food for us. So that's what happened. 

We-- The first time we left the, the-- the camp, we went on a march. Took us seven days. We slept in the open in rain and, and-- at that time, it was-- we had a lot of rain in that-- in, in that part of the country. We slept in-- one, one night, I remember, they put us in-- in a schoolroom, where they blocked off half of the room. They put 300 people in a room about the size, maybe, twice of here. And we slept on top of each other all night. And if anyone stuck his head out, there was a German there with a-- with a whip. And he would hit us in the head. 

Then the following night, we slept in a, a barn, where a friend of mine, sticking his-- a friend of mine, say-- a fella I was in camp with that time. I didn't even remember his name now-- stuck his head out. And he was shot right there. 

We had-- we walked to-- we were fed-- we were fed a dead horse through one week's of marching. And that horse, which was schlepping along, and they killed him. They cooked him up. And that's what we ate. And when we asked for food three days later, the guy would say, well, we just gave you food three days ago. 

Uh, we went-- this is-- we went out for seven days. And apparently, there was just nowhere to go. We were close to the front that we had the Russians shooting over our head. We had some of our people escape. But some of them got killed when trying to escape. And these guardsmen brought us back to the camp. 

The first thing we did when we came back to camp, we went all for the basement, where they kept all the potatoes because everybody was hungry. I remember that was my closest, uh, call to getting killed. As I ran into the basement with everybody else, naturally, and I snuck through the-- through a basement window, all of a sudden, I could hear the bullets flying over my head. We had one officer who was a little lieutenant, Air Force lieutenant. He was-- he was actually an injured-- that's why he was never sent to the front. He was-- he was the head of the-- of the, uh, camp. He stuck his revolver into the basement. He was shooting. And the bullets were ricocheting back and forth, and screaming, who is down there? 

Naturally, I came up with my hands up. And he would just take me to, uh, the middle of the yard and brought a couple other guys. And I thought, this is it because, uh, either I'm going to be shot or I'm gonna be hung, which I've seen plenty incidents. The first day-- the first day in the ghetto, going back, the first day the Germans came, we all had to appear at the public place there where they hung three Jews. And everybody had to look at them. 

So anyway, this is where I stood there. I said, this is it. And he would call everybody out. And he would tell 'em, see why you don't have food? Because people like them are stealing from you. And this was the, the-- the philosophy of the Germans, naturally. 

And I guess I was lucky, or maybe things were too-- already too close that time that he just let me go because about a few hours later, we had to start out again. And from then on, we marched again for two weeks. Now, to describe that march is really-- it's, it's, it's-- it's impossible. We have-- naturally, we didn't take our clothes off. We marched. We marched. We marched, for two weeks, from one village to the other. 

And then the-- we started out, there was, uh, 350 of us. But it-- when we-- when we were liberated-- in fact, when we were liberated, there was 200 of us left. There was 150 killed or died on that march. I had-- I was with a friend of mine who was a very good friend of mine since childhood. We were in camp together. He was very sick. And I guess I saved his life by-- he was ready to commit suicide. And I dragged him, with somebody else's help. And somehow, the war ended. We were liberated. I saved him. 

But while at that march, which lasted for about three or three and a half weeks, we had one-- we had one incident going through a-- through a, a, uh-- through woods. And it says, 11 kilometers on it. And that lieutenant hollered out loud. He says, if you don't hurry up, the last one gets shot every kilometer. And sure he did that. 

Now, you can imagine people at their last strength, without food, running because nobody wanted to be the last. And every few minutes you could hear a shot. And sure enough, he shot 11 people. I remember like now on one of the road, it was in the daytime. That was at night. The following day, he had a father. We had some-- we had a few Hungarian Jews there from Hungary. Most of us were from Polish, from Lodz. And there was about 50 or maybe a few more from Hungary. And I remember this-- older man, his two sons being shot right under on the left, right, and pushed into the ditch. 

And, uh, that, that-- the only hope-- we knew, we knew we were so close to being liberated then because we-- there was one day we could almost see the Germans. Now, we were running away from-- the, the, the Americans. We were running away. We weren't-- if it was Americans or Russians. We knew there were not Germans. And they were shooting at us. And these people-- we still had-- now-- now you think, how could you not have taken these guards and, and, and, and fight 'em. I-- I guess when you're kept for three weeks without any food-- the food we got in three weeks would have amounted to maybe a, a, a, a-- maybe 8 ounces of bread, maybe a couple ounces of the horse meat, and everything else we could find on the, on the-- on the ground. 

Some of us-- some escaped. A few people-- not too many-- escaped. In fact, I met, uh, someone here who escaped from the same camp. And I didn't know him. And, uh, finally-- and I remember like now, uh, we stayed in a village in a barn that night. This friend of mine, who is in Israel now, he was just ready. He says, Leon, he says, I can go on no more. And, uh, before I know it, he shows me he cut his wrists here. There was nothing. He cut his bones. He was skinny. He had dysentery. He was-- he was swell. He was-- he was a mess. He was just-- I-- I start hauling him. I grabbed him. I-- I banda-- bandaged his hands. And I said, Saul, I said, we haven't got too long to go. It's almost over. And this was the last day. 

Sure enough, the following day, we get up. And again, we're walking. Where do we-- we didn't know where we were going. We were going from one village into the other. We just-- just like, like, uh, like a merry-go-round. And, uh, I don't know. Before we know, I hear shots and screaming. And before we know, the soldiers, the Germans, have taken their hands up. And that's how we-- and see there's some American, uh, couple tanks and one truck, a few American soldiers. That's how we were liberated. And it's just a turn. It happened just like that. 

And, uh, I remember I took care of quite a few sick fellas. I must have been one of the healthiest one in the bunch. I took care of them. I brought them into a, uh-- we were by Karlsbad in Germany, Karlsbad, the barn there in that area, where I made arrangements, uh, with some hospital there, American hospital. And I made sure they got taken care of. And then we left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what you thought or felt when you saw the American tanks and soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Food. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Revenge? 

SUBJECT: First thing. Revenge? I didn't think of revenge. There were-- the first thing we did was we-- I said we. Not that I wouldn't have done it. I just didn't think of it. We shot one of the guards. But before they could do anything to the other ones, the Americans intervened. And they took him into custody. They wouldn't let us do anything because they stood him against-- I remember there was a few fellas in our-- in our group who grabbed their guns. But one of them was killed. The rest of them were taken on the, on the-- on the American trucks and, and, and taken away. 

And what happened, all 200 of them, you imagine them-- all 200 of them, except the few who started running around, jumped on the two, on the two, uh, trucks, the American trucks. And they we're grabbing anything in sight. There was candy, chocolate there. And the soldiers were giving them out. That's about the-- that's, that's the only sight I remember. 

Now, naturally, it was-- I, I don't even-- it was just, uh-- you were-- I thought that the joy would be tremendous. It wasn't. They were just, just taken. And first thing was just get something to eat. Was it bread, whatever? There's-- and there wasn't-- we weren't-- I wasn't overjoyed. I was just-- the first thing I thought at that time was I had left this friend of mine. I said I was gonna look for him. 

And, uh, you know, such a long time. But I-- I don't think I was happy. I didn't dance from joy because I think we just-- I don't think we had any feelings for dancing or, or, or joy or smiling, anything. We were just a very, very-- it was an existence. That's all it was. It wasn't-- I don't think I could be happy. I don't think I, I realized what happened to me until-- I don't think I've ever. I don't think I've ever because too many things happened afterwards-- you know, finding out that my family's all gone or getting used to what things were. I don't think I've ever been very overjoyed that I stayed alive, at that time anyway. It was just either way. It happened, it happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever come out of that just existence? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I did for a while. And I don't think-- uh, I don't know. I don't think I'm, I'm, I am-- to say I'm-- wak-- I'm very happy I'm alive. No, I've never been. I don't know. I enjoy life. I have a family now. I enjoy life. I-- I do a lot of things. I'm very active in anything. But to say that, overjoyed? No. 

I got-- I, I've-- I don't think I've ever. I got something always in the back of my mind which is like a double existence, which something goes back, like-- I've lived probably a double-- a, a, a life before, and a life now, which is something entirely different what we have now. And I don't think I can ever forget that. I don't think I can ever, uh-- I did try the first years, you know, after-- after the war. I think I did try to erase everything during the war. And I-- in fact, I don't think I would ever sit down and talk about it if you asked me that, uh-- let's see. I came here in 1949, 30 years ago. If you had approached me, I wouldn't-- I don't think I would have. And my memories were much fresher then, but I absolutely would not talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you start feeling you could talk about it? How long, would you say? 

SUBJECT: Uh, it had something to do with, uh, my involvement-- it had something to do with the state of Israel. I think it was 1957 war, 1967. Things started happening where-- well, I-- the impression I was after the war, I just thought-- I was probably very naive-- that everybody knows they have done us wrong. And wherever we gonna go, people are gonna like us. But I don't want 'em to feel sorry for me. Just don't do it again. That's about the things I felt. And it's not gonna happen. 

And, and I was approached by people when I first came here. They said, uh-- they said, talk about it. Uh, Uh, what happened? Where you from? I abso-- even relatives, which I have some here, family of mine. Never would I allow myself to, to even talk about the concentration camps or, or, or, or the past and what happened. Never. 

And it was like this. I-- I think I tried to forget. Maybe that was what-- I tried to forget. I tried to get myself involved in the life here, and I did everything possible not to be admired. I wanted to Americanize. But then I meant-- I didn't want to-- I didn't want no part of what happened back home. I know-- I don't know why I did that. I know. Uh, it was-- it was like that for, for quite a few years. I would say till about-- for about 10 years after I came here. 

But then later on, I just started feeling different. I started to, to, uh, look back. And seeing, uh, that things cannot be forgotten, that you can't just, uh, walk away from it. Or you can't just say, this is it. Uh, I can't, uh-- don't talk about it. In fact, I was-- I was even ashamed to talk about it. I always thought that someone-- like, people say, oh, we don't want to listen about it. We don't want to hear about it. We know all we have to know about it. 

But, uh, it's not like that. I think I think about it more now, maybe because I get older. I'm getting mellow, to say. Think a lot about it. Too much, I think. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you very disappointed that people didn't, uh, respond-- you know, people didn't say-- know about it and want to help people like you? 

SUBJECT: Very disappointed that, uh, didn't-- at that time? No. I, uh-- no. People-- I, I, I've-- what I really, looking back at it, if I-- if I could analyze myself-- I don't think I could. But I think I felt that people-- people here, Jews and non-Jews, were guilty of not really trying to help us. Maybe that's why-- that's why I felt, let's not talk about it because it was wrong. 

You know, people may have said, oh, we feel sorry what happened. We know what happened. But I would feel, how come you didn't do nothing about it? Now, that was the real, the real-- I guess the real feeling I had. Maybe I felt angry because they didn't do much about it. In fact, there's nothing been done. Or whatever could have been done. I just felt there could have been. There was no reason for it. And I just felt very, very, very bad. That's why I just didn't want to. 

I felt all the talk is just, oh, we feel sorry. That they-- and they couldn't really understand. I think people now, uh, are start-- from what are my experience now, friends of mine-- not from European, but people here-- are starting to understand a little better after all these years, which is very surprising. They're starting to understand more of what's happening there and maybe feel more about it. Maybe it's told to them more often. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is your business now? 

SUBJECT: I, uh-- I'm in business for myself. I own a bakery. I would say I'm-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You bake bread? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We bake, uh-- it's a full line of bakery. We're a pretty successful bakery, pretty large operation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, when you bake bread, what do you think of? 

SUBJECT: I still have the habit of after-- I'll never leave nothing on a plate. I won't waste any food. And don't-- being in business, I have to-- we, we throw out plenty of things. It always bothers me seeing food being wasted. But that's-- that's not so much from what I went through. But I would say it's because at this point, I, I-- I'm still aware that there's still a lot of hunger to the world. And I see what food is being wasted here and thinking about different parts of the-- of this world, where there's so much hunger. People are so starving. I-- and I cannot, I cannot get used to the idea of wasting food. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have nightmares? Do you-- do you dream of this? Or have you blocked it all? 

SUBJECT: No, I did-- I, I-- I had a lot. I had-- I had very bad nightmares, uh, right after the war where I-- what happened after the war, when I was liberated, I went back to Poland to look for my family. So I didn't stay on in Germany. I took the first train back. And I went back to my hometown to my old apartment, to my old house. And naturally, that was my-- I broke down completely. That's about the only time I've broken down. Uh, that was right after the war. 

And, uh, I spent a little time there waiting for someone to show up. I thought maybe there's someone still alive. I spent about, uh, four or five months after war in Poland. And then I went back to Germany. And then, living in the DP camps for about three years. Uh, there was a period of life where, where everything just-- we tried to block everything out of our mind. It was just an unnatural existence. 

That's where my-- I had-- I had nightmares where-- I couldn't even explain them now. I always thought there was someone sitting at the door-- at the, at the window. And I'm almost-- it was almost like real. There was someone there. I had nightmares that I could swear I see someone there. And I could see it happens. And that-- it, it was awful. 

At this point now, I do-- I do dream quite a bit. I'll be dreaming tonight. I know that. I know that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, Leon,  you know, I tell you something. It's-- I-- you've really, uh-- when I think of speaking to you in a normal way to order a cake-- 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I mean, really, it's-- 

SUBJECT: Right That, that, that-- that's the worst-- but I'm not on the thing now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. 

SUBJECT: Not right now. That's the worst part. I can't-- I can't-- I live a very normal life. You know that. I am-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I-- 