SUBJECT: So the decision-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not yet. 

CREW: I just put it on. You can go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: All right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: So I decided that if they catch me again, if they ask me, again, whether I was Jewish or not, I would have an answer. Very simple, I was going to convert to Judaism. When I told my father he was delighted. He got the wrong idea, but I left it. And I went to the rabbi, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You decided to save this friend out of spite to save yourself-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, no. No, oh no, no, no, wait a minute. Don't impute heroism to me, which I didn't feel. I just-- yes, in a way, yes, but it had nothing to do with that friend. It was a matter of principle. 

Since in those interrogations it always seemed as if I had a choice, or at least a modicum of choice. I wanted to make a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Between-- 

SUBJECT: Between being a Jew and being something not quite Jewish, maybe even a little Aryan. I wanted to make a point. I didn't want to have anything to do with these people, not even if it brought me advantages. 

Of course, this kind of foolishness only a 16-year-old can commit. But I was ready to throw my life away, if necessary, for that. And I went, I took religious instruction-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was a conversion out of spite. 

SUBJECT: Yes, out of spite and once and for all, I wanted to have a clear cut situation. I didn't want to be one of those people where Goebbels would decide whether they were Aryans or not. So I went for the-- through a course of Hebrew, and learned that all the necessary prayers, and due course I came up for the conversion, for the ceremony. 

It was to be held in the mikveh of the orthodox-- little orthodox shul. And somehow I misunderstood the whole thing. I didn't know exactly what the ceremony entailed. I came back there, and in honor of the day, I had my hair done really beautifully. 

And I took along a bathing suit and I took along a bathing cap, and I came there, and I was told that the immersion in the mikveh had to take place in utter nudity. Oh, no. Nothing doing. I wasn't going to take my bathing suit off in front of a rabbi. And certainly, I wasn't going to get my hair wet after I spent all the money having it done that beautifully. 

So there was a hassle, as we would say, and finally we had a compromise. I was going to take the bathing suit off, provided the rabbi sat in the corner, looked the other way. But as to the hair-- uh-uh. I was not going to get-- to ruin that. I was going to wear my bathing cap. 

And so we went for the ceremony, and now I was Jewish. Sure enough, the next time they pick me up, same old question, are you Jewish? I said, yes. They said, well, last time you didn't say you were Jewish. I said, no, last time I wasn't Jewish. I'm Jewish now. 

So that, of course, caused a bit of consternation. And they checked up, they kept me there, and they said, all you have to do is call up the Kultusgemeinde, and-- and I'm entered as Jewish. And I was. 

In the meantime, my aunt had also used her connections, and from then on the word went around to leave me alone. I don't think it was my conversion that made-- that made them leave me alone. I think it made-- they left me alone because my aunt had the right-- had spoken the right word into the right ear. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you aware that the rabbi went-- really transgressed the law by converting you without your mother having converted? 

SUBJECT: No. No, really? Did he? That I didn't know. Huh, look what you learn, huh? No, I didn't know he brought me those, because there were two. But letting me keep my bathing cap on, but that was his problem. I wasn't concerned with that. 

No, I didn't-- you mean that's illegal? I mean, according to the religious law? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --mother has to be Jewish. 

SUBJECT: Huh, I'll be damned. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Or converted, I mean. 

SUBJECT: I didn't know that. Hm. But why didn't the rabbi knew that my mother wasn't Jewish? 

INTERVIEWER 1: He knew. 

SUBJECT: He knew. He didn't know why I wanted to convert, either. That is strange. Didn't know that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I also wanted to ask you, you don't mention it, but there is a thread through whatever you tell of really being on the verge of feeling very frightened. 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All the time. 

SUBJECT: Of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Frightened of-- even though you were, you uh, blew whistled into the dark. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I mean, maybe even the conversion was to finally be in and be caught and not have an ambiguous situation to fit. Are you aware of this-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, absolutely. That is, you-- you are so afraid of the water that you jump in. Oh, yes, I'm completely aware of that. And I am aware that we all were on a-- we were tightrope walking, and then one side was panic. I'm very much aware of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mention camps, concentration camps, your fate. What were they-- what was going to happen to you? What were you afraid of? It was the last bowl-- you know, you're really talking as though-- 

SUBJECT: OK, I was afraid of-- I was afraid of being tortured. Because I knew people who came out of-- at that time, sometimes they still came out. And I remember the way they would not talk their experience. There was a wonderful silence. They were told, if you open your mouth, that's the end. And they did not talk about what happened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any particular person, or-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. For instance, I spoke to the brothers of that friend where I went after I was released from jail. And of course, whenever we found somebody who was in a concentration camp we would ask, well, what was it? Dead silence. I'm here. That's enough. Sometimes with a tooth missing or something, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you imagined it to be what? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You imagined it to be what? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I think that the-- well, you know, we all have our-- our unconscious fears. In what book was that demonstrated so well? I think was in, uh, was is in 1984 where there's that one guy who is afraid of rats, and his horror is that somebody brings a cage-- is that it-- with a rat to him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: We all have our weak spots there. My personal terror was teeth. I was afraid of having my teeth knocked out, my teeth broken, my teeth pulled. For a long time, until after my analysis, I had nightmares about teeth. 

And so my-- you don't really formulate those horrors. You know, you can't. They have to remain nameless, otherwise you lose your grip. By keeping them sort of abstract, you can hold on. Once they become real, you are lost. 

Although I have later found out from friends who went to concentration camp their experiences, that, too, is like what we just talked about, jumping into the water, so you wouldn't be thrown in-- that the reality is so horrible that it pushes away the psychological fears. 

And I remember one instance-- I don't want to mention the name, because the man is prominent, his name is prominent. We called him the beautiful, all right, let's call him Hansel. It was not the name. Beautiful Hansel, he was a very handsome man and a very neurotic one. I was friends with his daughters. 

And he had the most horrible stomach ulcers. Constantly went from one cure to the other. You, uh, you-- usual bit. And then they put them into Dachau, to the concentration camp. We said, that's going to be the end of him. Nobody's going to give him a special bath, nobody's going to feed him any medicine, nobody is going to bring him blankets when he shivers, and so forth. That's the end. We knew they don't have to kill him. He'll die. 

He came out, and he was a cured man. He lost his stomach ulcers. Because the reality-- he had to cope with the reality of the concentration camp, that left no psychic energy for imaginary illnesses. And he never had an ulcer again. 

Also, many people who had severe heart-- uh, heart conditions would not get heart attacks in the concen-- concentration camp. Contrary to all expectations, very few actually did. The real-- the illnesses that were, uh, psychosomatic fell off as soon as you were in a situation that was really dangerous, physically dangerous. 

Well, where was I? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. There was the Rassenkunde. 

SUBJECT: The Rassenkunde? Yes, oh yes, Rassenkunde. I really can't tell you very much. I only remember that, uh, there were lots of pictures, of course. What does the-- what does the Aryan look like? And then there were subdivisions. There were the Alemannians And there were the [NON-ENGLISH]. And there were the this-- the Nordic and the Celtic and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you explain what-- 

SUBJECT: Like, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --what this whole topic is? 

SUBJECT: The topic of Russ-- of Rassenkunde? Well, of course. I don't have to mention that Hitler was very-- uh, was out to purify the re-- the race. And, uh, he categorized humanity to various races and sub races. And the Jews and the Negroes, they were out in, I don't know what you call, left field. And then there are the others who qualified. 

The Aryan race was not homogeneous. It consisted of subdivisions, and you had to learn into which group you belonged. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In school? This was a regular-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. That started in school. It permeated the whole thing. And one day, we had Rassenkunde, too. And I remember the geography professor, who also was not a Nazi, had to teach it. I don't know why they picked on him. And he managed to show such distaste, without actually offending the authorities, that it carried over to us. And he did something very clever. 

I have all the, well, hallmarks of a very good Aryan. So when he demonstrated in class, he had those big charts, and the various shapes of the skulls, various shapes of the nose, chin, so forth, stature, body build. He would then point out the children in class and say, now, this is an Alemannic head formation. This is this and that and so forth. 

And whenever it came something that applied quite obviously to me, he would go to me and then look, and as invisibly sort of shake his head, uh-uh. Go to the next one. But of course, it was perfectly clear that I had the Aryan characteristics. And he was pointing it out. He was making a subtle point by saying, look, this is how-- how much you can rely on that sort of science, sort of science. 

I can't remember-- I can remember that one instant, but I can't remember another one. Was that a one and only lesson? It could have been. I have no idea. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After you went to the mikveh, you were converted. Did you feel differently? 

SUBJECT: No. Absolutely not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: More Jewish pastors, any-- 

SUBJECT: No. I'm sorry to say, but I felt exactly-- this was not after all this, was not a, for me, a religious experience. This was a-- the choice of siding. I was rather proud of myself to do that in that times. I needed that pride. That would assuage the fear, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A relief. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. And then, well, it didn't, as I said, it did not make any difference to me. By that time, I was looking for an affidavit. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For them that you're-- you mentioned that, um, your aunt had a-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. That is quite an interesting story. She had worked for a Jewish jeweler for a long time. And the man wanted to retire, and she wanted the store but she didn't have enough capital. My father lent her the capital without interest. And she took over. She was terribly clever. She made a big-- she expanded. I mean, she was doing very well. 

And when Hitler came to power, she did-- she said she never joined the Nazi party, but she made it appear as if she did. And I'm not so sure that she didn't. Because-- not because she was a Nazi. Most of her customers were Jewish. But because more and more of her Jewish customers came for help. Get my money out, get my gold out, and she knew she could do that only if she were above the putsch. 

She had-- she had obviously intimate connections with high Nazi officials. And although she was never-- she never joined a Frauenschaft, of that I'm sure. She, uh, was known as a reliable, a politically reliable person. 

At the same time, she had a regular underground railroad in all directions, getting money out, getting gold out, helping people out, getting money for people so that people could get out. And it must have been fantastic, because when the military-- when the military government picked up after the war to check on her credentials, she got so many recommendations, or affidavits, from Israel, she didn't know what to do with them. 

He got-- she got my mother out. She prevented my brother from getting to the concentration camp. She got my money out. She did this, she did that, and she did the other thing. She even got her old boss safely stock away before they could take him, take him off to a concentration camp. 

So she had-- she was doing her own, her own rescue work. And my father was so down on her, because he said she's a Nazi. And he wouldn't talk to her, refused to talk to her. I was the only one who talked to her. And she got out of the war. 

Needless to say, she also was one of the first one who built up the business again, because the Jews who then came out of the concentration camps and so forth, and who had access to watches and to jewelry and to things, especially watches. There wasn't a watch to be had in-- or a clock or even and alarm clock to be had in all of Munich. They had access and she was the one who had the connections, you see. They knew about her. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your mother in all this? 

SUBJECT: At home. OK, does that answer your questions? She, uh-- she was 100% loyal to my father. She would never have divorced him as some Aryan women did. It was completely out of the question. They had a very happy marriage. They loved each other very much. 

She was-- she acted as a buffer between my father and me, which was very useful. Because I think we would have killed each other otherwise. My father more and more woke up as as time went on. And I despised him more and more for his weakness. He would have crying fits and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Terror? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, you know, you don't want your father to show that much weakness. It's very bad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That much fear. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And at the same time, he was trying to terrorize me. And the two, you know, bad combination. Very bad. And then we, yeah, while my father was young, he soon picked up a couple of lame birds in his family, among them, a woman, a widow with a son who had some trouble with his spine. And she worked and supported herself, but he gave her an allowance, additionally. I don't know whether it was a regular allowance. I don't think it was. I suspect that it was something that he-- it was a hand out. And my father could be generous and ungracious at the same time, if you know what I mean. I'm sure it was a hefty handout, but I'm sure he made her feel like dirt by giving it to her. 

And this woman lost her job, of course. She was working for a Christian firm, and hired herself out as a practical nurse to an American who went to a spa. I think it was Carlsbad or something like that, and she went with him. And then you have one of those fantastic stories. He married her. And he was a millionaire. No doubt about it. 

And she promised my parents that there wasn't anything she wouldn't do for us, and of course, we would have affidavits. So when we asked for affidavits, of course, she couldn't give it to us. It's the usual story. Don't trust [GERMAN] Strangers are better. 

And I couldn't get anything for her. I couldn't get anywhere with her. I didn't have anybody else. Yes, we had-- excuse me. Don't trust [GERMAN]. We had-- I had an uncle and an aunt here on my mother's side. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Here in the United States? 

SUBJECT: Here in the United States. They had emigrated in the '20s. And they weren't going to put their money as security for me, their hard money. Oh, no. Nothing of the sort. So there was nothing forthcoming from that direction, either. 

I got an affidavit through a friend of mine. It's a long-- it's a sort of a peculiar story. Do you want to hear it? It's-- it's-- it's an odyssey, "Odyssey" and "1,001 Nights" rolled into one. 

There was in Munich a family-- I cannot mention the name because they're still very prominent in New York-- with an only daughter. They were-- really, they were really rich. We were wealthy, but they were rich. They had a butler. The mother kept horses, had a groom, had maids. You know, the whole upstairs, downstairs bit. 

But she was very good friend of mine. She was not snotty. And she left very early. The father had a business in Munich, in London, and in New York, all the established firm. And quite early, he closed down the Munich. He cut all his-- imagine that, I don't even want to mention what it is-- out. 

And my friend went to-- went to Switzerland to study languages and all kinds of other things. We stayed in-- we corresponded. She went back and forth to America several times. There was no question that she had no-- she had no trouble. 

And one day, this girl was traveling from-- from-- I don't know from where, to Zurich. She was on the Orient Express. And a-- the conductor came in and said, look, you are an American. She had talked to him. And were for three days on the Orient Express. There are couple of compartments out there, so there's another American, and he's also by himself. I think you two talk to each other. 

So she said, all right. And she went over, and there was this man sitting there. And it turns out that he had come from Istanbul, he had made a ground tour all over Europe, and he was going back to America. And they talked. 

And my friend got out in Lucerne, and he went on to Zurich or whatever. And he-- of course, they had exchanged addresses, New York addresses. That was the end of it, for the time being, until I wrote-- by that time she was in America-- I wrote her and ask could she help get me an affidavit. I had to get the heck out of there. 

And she wrote promptly and said her father couldn't. He was over extended. He had given so many affidavits, but she would try and see what she could do. And the very short period afterwards, I got an affidavit from a complete stranger. It seemed that she had walked into this guy's office, and she was fabulously beautiful, but fabulously beautiful. And there was all of a sudden this beautiful creature who had briefly gone through his life on the train, and there she was standing, and said, I need an affidavit for a friend. 

This man was a philanthropist. I was not the first who got an affidavit from him, nor the last. And this is how I got my affidavit. It was still a hassle to get out, because now came the endless running around from one office to another, a stamp here, a piece of paper there, permission here, another stamp there. Literally, then I went from one to the other. 

And there I had something else that's hard to learn. I had to learn that you can bribe. I became a very expert briber. In the beginning, it was horrible. Do you know that it was worse than many-- than anything else I ever did? I don't know why I felt dirty. 

But you learn, especially when your life depends on it. And after a while I was quite good at saying, you know, of course, it mustn't be obvious. You can't say how much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So how'd you do it? 

SUBJECT: Well, um, that depended on how high up the guy was. If it was a little son of a bitch, on whom it depended whether you would have to wait four hours or not get in at all because the thing is that long, or you were taking within a reasonable number of hours, or a reasonable time, then you can do it with a box of cigars. 

You can say, you do like cigars, don't you? You know, it just so happened my father is not allowed to smoke anymore. Give him an out. Tell him a story. 

Or if it is a higher up one and he looks greedy enough, I always had an awful lot of cash on had at that time. I had to. You see, that was still available to us while we were in. I would just drop a hundred mark bill, and let him pick it up. They all of a sudden-- they are gentlemen. The lady doesn't have to bend down and pick things up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they ever hand it back? 

SUBJECT: No. Never. Absolutely never. But I hate to say this. I also had to bribe the secretary of the American embassy-- American consulate. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that? 

SUBJECT: I had to bribe her. Mhm. She got a very, very handsome handbag. She was perfectly nice. She even put me up overnight. That was included. But it was-- it was known that she-- she accepted favors in return. 

But by that time, it didn't bother me anymore. And I must admit, that when I got back, I, at one time, I needed a-- what is the word for-- a stamp to get in my car registered. And I tried it on the guy. He sat there with a box of cigars on his desk, and I said, uh-uh. That is something that looks familiar. 

And I said, when I come back this afternoon, he hadn't told me to come back this afternoon, he had told me it takes a week. I said, when I come back this afternoon, would you be so kind as to accept some cigars? It worked. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was-- 

SUBJECT: That was after the war, yeah, 1950s. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. And you left Germany then what year? 

SUBJECT: That-- I left in '38. I got all the immigration stuff together. I got all that horrible paper war, I got it all licked single-handedly. And not only that, but I started the same thing for my parents, because I knew my father was hopeless. 

And what I couldn't finish, I gave to a lawyer who specialized in that sort of thing. But then you have to keep your fingers crossed that the guy doesn't wind up in a concentration camp before he is finished with your papers, you know? And then I left. I flew from Munich to Rotterdam. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What month? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What month? 

SUBJECT: October 6, 1938. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember boarding the plane. 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes. I do. I do, indeed. It was a little Lufthansa plane that would take me to Brussels. In Brussels I would change planes and go from Brussels to Rotterdam. 

And, uh, no. We were going-- yes. Uh, it was a itsy-bitsy bit of a plane by-- by-- by present day standards. I think there was room for 10 people or so. And I got on, of course it was not pressurized. It flew quite low. And I-- there was a sort of a not very good feeling. I also was afraid I would get seasick for some reason or another. 

Of course, I was upset. But again, that I would not allow to come to the surface. I didn't cry or anything when I said good bye to my parents. And I kept my neck craned, looking out. And then I saw the rain. And we were over the rain, and I knew we were out of Germany. 

And that was such a feeling of relief. That was wonderful. Now nothing could happen to me anymore. Absolutely nothing. All right, I'd come to America, I would be hungry, I would have no friends, I would have no relatives. That was all right with me. I was out. The physical danger was past. I've never again felt so relieved in my whole life as I did then. 

Then I came over. I had a marvelous crossing. I had-- we had first-- I had first class tickets, because I could pay with that in-- could pay for that in Germany. And I fell in with a group of students and a couple of mothers with went along, from Georgia Tech. 

But it must be explained that shortly before I left I took up English. I had not had it in school. We had Latin and French. And I took it up with a British lady who was married to a German. Spoke very beautiful, beautiful British. 

And her idea of teaching English, practical English for somebody who has to work and we make a living in America, was to give him or her the-- a copy of the-- of Oscar Wilde's Ideal Husband. That would-- [LAUGH] that for pay. I read The Ideal Husband. I read Lady Windermere's Fan. I read-- oh yes-- uh, the Kennedy, The Constant Nymph. 

I was quite good at reading this sort of comedy of manners. Unfortunately, I didn't know any English. I picked it up. I'm good at languages. I picked them up by ear. That's the hitch. I picked them up very fast, but I was surrounded with young people who jabber their way and took great pleasure introducing me to my new experience in-- in America. 

And then when I finally landed and got out, and for the longest time, for months afterwards, I noticed that people had a hard time suppressing their laughter when I opened my mouth. And I knew it couldn't be my German accent, because there was so many people at that time with German accents. That was not enough to cause such-- such mirth. 

Until finally somebody explained to me, of course I knew barely any English, of course I had a horrible German accent. But superimposed on that was a Georgia drawl. And it must have been very funny to the New York ears. I got rid of that afterward. 

Then I got stuck in the Ellis Island, yes. They wouldn't let me land. Because the man who gave me an affidavit and who came to pick me up was only 20-- he was only 20 years older than I. And the Americans were afraid that his motives must be evil. The fact that he didn't even know what that looked like, had nothing to do with the fact. But he has to have evil motives. 

So they put me-- they got me stuck in Ellis Island, and then there was a dock strike, which paralyzed the entire harbor. And I was there for three days. That in itself is an experience. Until finally, his mother could be found. And she came out. And she-- under her aegis, I was allowed to enter the United States. 

Well, Ellis Island was fun, too, because we were divided into three groups, like gold, the Jews, the Chinese, and the others. Uh, I didn't want to stay with the Jews because division was not a social or religious one, it was a dietary one. I couldn't stand that kosher food. I found it was very heavy. It was very greasy. I wanted to eat with the Chinese. 

So each time I could I slipped away, I went over to the Chinese table. There was always somebody who yanked me out and went back to the other. It was horrible. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can I ask, what do you think now about being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: It doesn't bother me one way or another. But I identify very much as a Jew. There's no doubt about my being Jewish in my own mind and in my own convictions. It is not a-- it is not a religious feeling, but it is an identity, a very strong identity. 

I would never say, when somebody asks, are you Jewish, no, I am half Jewish. It wouldn't occur to me. 

Well, then I came to this country and I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did this change you, the German experience? 

SUBJECT: What do you mean, "change me?" 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you different? 

SUBJECT: From what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: From what you have been were it not for Nazi? 

SUBJECT: How could I not? Often, I would suggest-- I always claim Hitler did me the greatest favor anybody as far as I'm concerned, personally. Hitler was my greatest benefactor, because through him, I became a person. I would not have become a person. I would have-- I would have knuckled under, sooner or later, because it would have been pleasant and the thing to do. I would have finished my gymnasium. 

I would-- already, we had made plans that my father wanted me to go to finishing school and then get married, of course. I wanted to study. So he said, all right, first a year in Switzerland, then you can study. So we had that. 

And it would have been the question of [SPEAKING FRENCH], in the Simone de Beauvoir sense. And I have no doubt that would have-- would have married the right person. But this way-- but I would never have developed. Never. Not under the circumstances. 

Well, of course, I shouldn't say that. Well, how do I know? I may have had a lucky break. I may have met somebody who shook me out of-- out of this milieu. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Does the fear stay-- has the fear stayed with you? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The dread? 

SUBJECT: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Once you crossed the line, it was all gone? 

SUBJECT: It was all gone. Yeah. I had later on, I still had personal situations where I would have sort of a panic. And it took a psychoanalysis to get rid of that. In a way I would get that [GASP] feeling. I usually could get over it quite-- quite easily. But I thought it was a damn nuisance to get it at all, because it cramps your style at the point when you don't want to have your style cramped. 

So I came to this country, and the man who gave me the affidavit got me a job in the garment center. But of course, this wasn't the kind of sewing at all that I had been doing. I was trained by-- let's put it that way-- I was shown around. They were very nice to me. And they sort of handed me on from one to another until I got a foothold. It was not very successful. I was miserable in that milieu. I just couldn't take it. 

And in due time, I did all kinds of odd jobs. I met somebody who was a chemist, and he found that I was very useful in the laboratory. And he started teaching me, and that is something for which I had liking and talent. I decided I could not get anywhere without further education. My education was neither fish nor fowl. It wasn't-- I wasn't trained well enough, manually. Yes, I-- of course I sold-- usually I sold in little ateliers run by other refugees. But I had to get-- I had to get away from that. 

So I decided I would try to study. It was difficult. I wanted to go to Hunter College, which was free. For that I needed Regents Exams. Regents Exams, I couldn't take unless I finished high school. High school, I didn't have, so I went to a evening high school. But I found I just couldn't stick at it. It was too boring for words. There had to be another way out. And I found one, only it wasn't free, named Columbia University, the school of general studies. At that time it had a marvelous program. It was a first rate school at that time for people just like me. 

You could enroll without matriculating. And if you maintained a B average for the first two years, you would be matriculated and get full credit for what you had done. That was no problem for me. 

But since I had to support myself, it had to be done very slowly. Took me eight years to get through Columbia. But I graduated cum laude in English. Started out as a chemist, but then switched. 

And by that time I had been married for a year or so when I graduated. My husband had a job here in New Haven. We moved here. And nobody needed an English major. Absolutely nobody. So after working as a public relations person for an insurance company, and things like that for a while, I decided this isn't going to lead me anywhere either. And I was going to go back to school and get myself a doctorate. 

And here again, I was rather naive. Since I was here, I decided to go to Yale. Never occurred to me that they might not take me. And I got in, comparative literature. For the first year and a half, I had to do it again on part-time. My husband didn't want me to go back to school. And he certainly wasn't going to finance my doctorate, so I took a job-- oh, my god-- my first teaching job. I took a job in a private high school for intellectually under endowed and financially over endowed students. 

I taught everything under the sun, except German. I don't know why not. For the German they had a French woman. But I taught French, I taught English, I taught ancient history. I didn't teach math. 

And if anybody-- if they needed somebody, I would teach it. And back to Yale at the same time. Then my husband got a Fulbright, and I went abroad with him. Our marriage was pretty shaky by that time. I didn't-- and it got shakier. 

And I stayed in-- we stayed in Zurich, and I decided to go into analysis there. Then when my husband returned, I did not return with him. And when I was through with my analysis I came back and got a divorce. 

Now I got a-- since I could go full-time, I got a beautiful fellowship for Yale. I also got a job as a-- first in the library, then as a teaching assistant. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you finished as-- 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your PhD is in-- 

SUBJECT: Comparative literature. And then I got the job that I'm holding now as a part time basis. You know, I don't know how I did it. I worked 26 hours a day-- a week, teaching, and at the same time I wrote a dissertation, and at the same time I had the liveliest social life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: And that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: You're welcome. Oh, please, for everything I-- Can I see that thing? 