INTERVIEWER 1: Hello? 

SUBJECT: Is this going to be long, short? 

INTERVIEWER 1: About an hour and a quarter. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And remember [INAUDIBLE]. Are we rolling? 

CREW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. As I describe to, uh, [INAUDIBLE], we're going to be interested in, uh, getting your descriptions about the things that you saw and the things that you heard going on around you from the time when you were in your town in Yugoslavia, uh, and as best as we can the entire process. And Dr. [INAUDIBLE] and I will be trying to help you to describe things better and we'll help each other-- 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --to do the best interview we can. Um, perhaps we could begin back in, uh-- 

SUBJECT: 1941. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Maybe even a little before. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We want to also know about you. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The person who came into [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, 1941 would be the time when the country would, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I understand. But we want to know about where you were born-- 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --the date just a little bit [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: OK. OK. I was born in Novi Sad, Yugoslavia in 1925. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your name is Martin? 

SUBJECT: Martin. I was called Mirko originally, a Serbian name Mirko-- Mirko Ripp Yeah. I changed the name coming to the, uh, United States. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were born in what year? 

SUBJECT: 1925. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In? 

SUBJECT: In September. And, uh, that was a nice years to grow up in Yugoslavia those days. Uh, my parents, they have a business, good growing business. They have a restaurant, they have a furniture store. I was very lucky, very lucky. Going to the school with the Serbian kids and everything, never a problem. I grew up-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sisters, brothers, [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: I have four brothers and one sister. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have an orthodox family? 

SUBJECT: No. No. We-- we are not coming from the orthodox background. A regular Jewish family who would take care of the-- you know, of the religious things every occasion. Uh, my parents, there was a-- they coming originally from Hungary and they lived in Yugoslavia. And in 1939, one of them my brother left for the United States. That was the oldest brother. That's just before the war broke out. 

In 1939, already started a problem. I was in my teens. We heard that the, uh, world war going to start. Start with Poland in 1939. And it was very scary at that time because there had been a lot of talks about the Jews, they're going to be, uh, you know, round up in-- in Poland. And we worry about that, what's going to happen in other countries? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember hearing stories? 

SUBJECT: Yes we did. Matter of fact, I-- I was a-- uh, grew up as a Zionist in Yugoslavia. I belonged to the Zionist organization. Those days, I-- I saw a book and I-- matter of fact, I took it home. It was a story about the concentration camps in Germany. And I couldn't believe it, and that what's going on already in Germany. There was publication in Yugoslavia what's going on in Germany. My parents, they would-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Book [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. In the Yugoslavia was even a song about the-- those people working in the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. I going to even tell you who was there-- who wrote that book, Rudolph Waldheim. I could remember that far as a kid. He was-- he was an Austrian-- Austrian, not a Jew. He was writing a book that-- because he was on the theatrical play against Hitler, they took him to the concentration camp. And later on, they released him and he had to leave Austria and he wrote that book what's going on in the concentration camps in Germany because they took him to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you remember a [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: That book I would say 1938 or '39. I-- I think [INAUDIBLE] 1938. There was a song in it that they're going to work every day in the-- in the dirt and they're coming back to their barracks and they get beaten every day. It was unbelievable book about the concen-- and I-- later on and I find myself in the same thing couple of years later. I was in the same situation where I-- in that book. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you believe it? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did because I belonged to a Zionist organization and we were very well-informed for what could happen to us. So what happened here, then in 1941 when the German Army overran Yugoslavia, their partiality Yugoslavia to the-- the-- the-- the-- what they did, they sliced the Yugoslavia in parts. In other words, Hungary got one part that went all the way down to the Danube. They have-- immediately, they made Croatian state. I don't know if you ever heard of it, Pavelic, he was in charge in Croatia. 

They [INAUDIBLE] Serbia. The Bulgarian troops would go all the way down to Skopje. Uh, Italians occupied Dubrovnik, Split, and that area on the Adriatic Sea. So in the moment they split the country in pieces, just happened that we fall in Hungarian hands. Now, one of them my brother, he was in the Yugoslavian Army in Skopje. And a week before that, the German, uh, Luftwaffe bombed Skopje. They demolished the whole-- almost the whole city of Skopje. We were being worried about what happened to him, but he was already out on the front in Albania. 

Yugoslavian troops in deep in Albania 70 kilometers. And the country falling apart. They give himself up, the Germans. So now going back, he find himself back to Serbia. He fall in the hands of the Germans. They put him in the prison camp. Now, when he was in the prison camp, there was prisoner of war in Belgrade. Now, we're living from Belgrade 80 kilometer, what is not too far away. And a lot of Serbians-- because even if it's-- now, uh, Hungary, they used to go cross the Danube in Serbia to see their relatives and they saw this big camp. 

And they was looking in the camp and they recognized my brother there in the camp. And this Serbian fellow says, look, I'm going to go back and I'm going to talk to your father. I get you money, I get you whatever you need. So my brother said, look, anything what I need? I'm going to claim that I'm a Hungarian, I'm not a Jew. And that's the only way I'm going to be released from this camp. So round up people, asking questions, and he said he is Hungarian and they release him. So now he's coming back as a free man to Hungary. Meanwhile-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But not as a Jew. 

SUBJECT: Not as a Jew, as a Hungarian. Now he's home. We are very happy that the Serbian man help us out to find him. Meanwhile, Hitler gets organized everywhere around the-- in all the cities in Croatia, in Serbia, in Slovenia, even in Hungary. This is now Hungary where we live, but this is part of Yugoslavia. Zionist organizations start to get also moved. Some of them people went with Hitler to fight. They left their families. They went right in the-- in the mountains. 

I had the opportunity. I did. I didn't. I waited. I was very young. We get all organized, we're going to go and fight the Germans. We didn't. We wait. Always say, wait, wait. There's nothing could happen to you. You're going to be together. If anything could happen, we are still together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who said this? 

SUBJECT: My father. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your father? 

SUBJECT: My father. Now, 1941, they-- we are under Hungarians now. We still got our restaurant. People would come in the restaurant, they would get drunk talking about a lot of things. We would find out from people we're going to start clean up the-- all the villages because the communists, they are getting stronger and stronger. We're going to make a cleanup. Sure enough, a couple of weeks later, they went into [INAUDIBLE], one village. They took all the Serbs and they killed them. There's hardly a Jewish population in [INAUDIBLE]. [INAUDIBLE], next little town around our city. All these little villages, that cleaned them all out. Now we have to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who's they? Do you mean the Serbians? 

SUBJECT: Serbians. They was killing them as a-- [INAUDIBLE] Communist. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Not the Jews. 

SUBJECT: Not the Jews yet because Jews is in the Novi Sad. That's the population here Now, my mother, she was a very wise woman. She was listening to people drinking and talking say, the next thing is the city of Novi Sad. We are going to clean out the Jews, the communists because they threaten the-- our government. My mother-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] those people talking? 

SUBJECT: The ordinary people drinking in the restaurant. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yugoslavians? 

SUBJECT: In Yug-- no, Hungarians. Hungarians. So my mother said, look, we're not going to wait any longer. I can take the kids. My sister had two little children. We're going to take them all and we're going to leave for a couple of weeks. We're going to go deep in Hungary. She had some relatives in-- in Hungary. It was just Sunday morning, snowing-- snow big. We have a horse and we have a sled. And I could remember my father got their horse out, they got the sled. We got all packed up on the sled down to the railroad station and to Baja. That was the little town in Hungary, Baja. 

We started up on the morning, we arrived during the night. 12:00 midnight we arrived in Baja. So by the morning, we got some rooms, accommodation, we find some apartment. So we wait for a little while. A week later, on the-- in the press, they said that the Hungarian Army finally brushed up the city of Novi Sad from communists and undesirable, uh, animals. And they had-- the have a big success. They really make a good job. My-- they took 3,000 people out of their homes. They broke up the-- the ice on the Danube River because the-- in the January, Danube River had the ice that thick. 

You can- they broke it up, they shoot the people, and they pushed them underneath the ice-- 3,000 people, Jews and Serbians. And my father was one of those. What they did, according to my neighbor across the street-- because the street's narrow-- and they was watching through the window. They saw that my father is coming out. Behind him two Hungarian gendarmes. They took him to cross the street. We have a-- an army camp. 

They told there's enemy planes coming, everybody down, and they shoot him from the back in the head. And then they throw them in the trucks, deliver them down to the Danube, and push them underneath the ice. Meanwhile-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: He didn't go with the family. 

SUBJECT: We was in Baja. He didn't went. He wanted to save his business, his restaurant. His business was everything. My father, he wouldn't leave, even [INAUDIBLE]. So he thought if we go away, nothing going to happen. OK. So the rest of the Jews-- this happened on Tuesday. They told the people, everybody stay in the house. Make sure to have enough water and food in the house for a couple of days. Pull down the shades on your windows. Don't you look through the windows. If you look through the windows, you're going to get a shot through the window. 

That was on Tuesday. On Wednesday, they took my father out, they took those people. This was all Serbian quarters where we live only. No Jews, only Serbian. We was probably the only Jewish family there. They took them, they killed them, they throwed him [INAUDIBLE] they took him, and they finished. And [INAUDIBLE] on Thursday and Friday, they took them down to the-- to the river standing in the line, taking off their clothing in general, kill them, push them underneath the ice. Now, opposite side of the Danube, it's a, uh, a wall-- how would you say that? When you-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: A castle? 

SUBJECT: Castle. And that's Croatia now. They was watching. They see something is going wrong here. People is coming-- kids, womans-- taking their clothes off, killing them and pushing them under the ice. You have kids with their families that was begging to go out before their-- they couldn't take the cold. They want to be killed before everybody else. They are send a message to Zagreb, this is the capital of Croatia, that something is not right. 

It's killing or massacring is going on on the other side of the Danube. Immediately from Zagreb, they send a message to Budapest. They want to know what's going on. Budapest send the message to Ujvidek. That was the name of-- they call Novi Sad Ujvidek. That is something wrong. That-- that was on Friday, already three days of massacre. They stop the massacre. OK? 

INTERVIEWER 2: So the Yugoslav [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: No, Croatian Serb. They didn't know the Jews. They would never send the message. The reason they send them is they-- they thought there was innocent people getting killed. They was innocent people, but Jews. That's the difference. So they stopped it. That was Friday when my father was already killed on Wednesday. So on the Friday, people who stayed in the life like my brother-in-law, because my sister was with us because deep in-- in Hungary, they have a-- they give them a speech, from this point on this was a misunderstanding and never going to happen again. 

You just be a good citizen of this country and everything going to be OK. They send them home, whoever, you know, survived that. Now we have a situation over here. We have to now return back to Novi Sad, what they call Ujvidek. We don't know what to do. My father is killed. We scared to death to go back, but we have to make a decision. We have to go back. We still have the business, we have the house there. So we have to go back. And my brother-in-law is-- is-- keep telling us, do not come back here because it's still we-- they don't know what's going to happen. 

So we decided we went back, all of us. So now we home and we find out that over 3,000 people is killed. And the interesting thing is that the Donau-- they called the Danube-- and Sava is another river in-- in Serbia-- in Belgrade. Those two rivers go to each other. They hit each other. And in-- in around March, the ice gets-- starts to give up and it starts to float the Danube again, hits the Sava River, and all those dead people have been thrown out on the-- on the-- on the shore. So what they decided in Serbia, they dig out a mass grave and they throw all those people in and they buried them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, did you see this when you-- 

SUBJECT: No. You couldn't see that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You would hear about it? 

SUBJECT: We would hear about it. We're still now in Hungary, but in March we find out that all those bodies who had been pushed underneath the ice, they have been thrown off the-- on the shore and they're buried in one big, uh, how we tell it, one big mass grave. And it's-- you-- if today you go down to Yugoslavia on the banks of the Danube is a big, uh, statue, man, woman, and little children holding their hand and a little baby in their hand. This tells you that the people who went underneath the ice, that represents that statue. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you would hear of this [INAUDIBLE] you were [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Word traveled back to the village? 

SUBJECT: Always because this is a border of-- this Danube divides the Hungary from Serbia. So people are constantly traveling back and forth over the Danube. You would hear all what's happening. Uh, and right after this massacre, the, uh, Hungarian government ordered a investigation because to show that, you know, to the people in the Hungary because was a big outcry. Jewish people, they-- lot of Jewish people were still in power in Hungary. 

And was a big outcry. They want to find out what really happened. So we have done the committee working. So my mother was called in to testify what we know about how my father was killed. And as she was testifying, a Serbian woman was there with a bottle. And that bottle contained a-- a brain of his kids. What she did, she had five kids from 15-year-old, I believe to 32-year-old, five kids. And they was living from the-- they have horse and carriages. They would live in-- they would go on the Danube in January or February and they would break up the ice. They would load up those carriages, sell that ice to the restaurants. That's how they lived. That's how-- in wintertime. 

In summertime, they had fields, they work in fields. And she testified that how they killed her five kids. When they took the-- the oldest kid out, they shot him in front of her. She went and begged the Hungarians not to kill nobody else. They shot the second kid. She begged. She threw herself down and-- and kissing day the foot of the soldier not to touch nobody no more. They killed the third, the fourth. When it comes to the [INAUDIBLE] kid, her 15-year-old, she was bragging to save that kid. They wouldn't dare. They killed that kid. 

Then the gun-- they was all gone and she picked the brains of the kids, put it in that jar. And that jar, she brought it up to the investigating committee. And he says, you tell me that's not true. Here is-- here is the proof. This is the brains of my kids. So they believed it. Then, they-- she-- her husband was either in the cemetery, in the Serbian cemetery. Only her husband [INAUDIBLE]. She made up a gravesite there. Her husband did a picture, her picture with her name that she born in this and this year and when she dies, they have to insert that. And then the picture of five kids killed picture. And underneath a picture would say Johan, all the names of what how old is the kid, what year he's born, what year he was killed. And underneath is a song, whoever pays this grave of my mother, let him remember the days when they was, uh, babies and my mother was dancing [INAUDIBLE]. 

Because we don't have our grave here. We've been all washed up with the water. It's a beautiful-- it still exists. I was eight years ago down and still exists that grave. It's beautiful. I took a picture I have at home. This is very, very, uh-- very, uh-- moving thing to everybody. Whoever face that and knows go read Yugoslavian, Serbian, reads that, this is-- this is exactly what happened. The water, uh, washed them away, all five kids. 

That's how my father was taken, the same way. Only the difference, those kids were killed in front of their own home like a lot of Serbians, in front of the-- the-- the-- the entrance of the home. My father was taken across the street and they killed people across the street in army camp. That was the massacre in 1942. I don't see too much publicity. It's a books about this. They read the names. My father's name is in that book. You could get that book in Yugoslavia, Massacre in Novi Sad. OK. 

That's-- that's what happened in those days till 1942. '43, people got panicky [INAUDIBLE] the Czechoslovakia. Hitler's is in Czechoslovakia, Hitler is in country by country. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where were you in '43? 

SUBJECT: Still in Novi Sad with my mother. My older brother, who was a prisoner at that time, he was taking in the-- uh, the Hungarian Army took him to the Russian Front as a slave laborer. Then I have another brother, he took him, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So they knew he was a Jew. 

SUBJECT: As a Jew. Munkaszolgalat They've been taken on the Eastern Front, both of them. OK. Then-- that's 1943. Then I start to [INAUDIBLE] the first [INAUDIBLE] they're going to whoever didn't born in Hungary, they're going to be automatically thrown out of the Hungary. So happened that they're going to go by the husband. If the husband is born in another country, the wife and children are going to have to return across the border to that country. 

So my sister's husband was born in Roma. That's not Croatian. That's cross the-- cross of the Danube. So they told my sister they're going to-- she's going to be turned over to Croatia. Now, we knew what happened in Croatia, that the Croatian people rounded up the Jews and they made a mass grave for them. They-- they tied them up with the wires each to other. They pushed the first one in that grave. That grave was loaded with the [INAUDIBLE]. [INAUDIBLE]. That's what they build the homes in Europe, sand and [INAUDIBLE]. They mix it and then that's-- that's how they build their homes. I don't know if-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cement? 

SUBJECT: They get out of [INAUDIBLE] after that. That's out-- it gets like cement. I don't know if you ever heard that before. [INAUDIBLE] and sand gets mixed. It's not like here, cement. That's how they build their homes in Europe, with that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: With one tied to each other. They would start to push and as the first falling in, he would pull that next one, next on in the [INAUDIBLE]. And you fall in that, you-- you die. That [INAUDIBLE] is you've got to die. It eats you up. That's what we heard was happening to the-- the Croatian Jews. So my sister was very panicked and she decided she rather going to kill herself. She's not going to allow herself to be returned and her two kids to Croatian. 

And same time, we heard it that they have camps in Zemun. That's next to Belgrade. They set up a-- a-- a camp where they took the Jews. And that-- from that point, they would deported them to Germany. We still didn't know too much about the Auschwitz, but they had been talking about that they're going to Germany. Then we find out from the Serbian people that they-- they start to kill them in that camp in Zemun. That's the outskirt of Belgrade. Every day they was beating the Jews and killing them-- and Serbian, too. 

Now this stuff is coming closer to us. We're getting closer and closer to the situation. My father says, don't worry. We didn't do anything, we're going to to be together, nothing could happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You don't mean your father. 

SUBJECT: I mean-- I'm sorry, my mother. Let's be together. Nothing could happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel at this moment [INAUDIBLE]? You mentioned him [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: It still lives with me. It's always going to live with me, my father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you still see him? 

SUBJECT: All the time. And my mother all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Talking to you, or-- 

SUBJECT: Not talking to me, but a part of me. I be raised-- we be raised that we are very close with the families. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe how you see him? 

SUBJECT: I see him that I could rely on him. He is very wise. If he would tell me something, I could depend that he's giving me the truth. He's not going to mislead me. For the simple reason when I was in Germany and we have a-- a-- a-- the Americans and British bombs start to fell down in Germany, my father told me, wherever you're going to fall in situation, any bombardment, make sure that you throw yourself down and cover your head. Because if you get injured in your head, you're through. 

If your head is good, no matter what part of your body is injured, you're going to survive. Because he was in the World War I and he was injured in his leg. So I have that always on my-- even in Auschwitz. I always recall him. Whatever he told me, I went after that this is a wise thing, whatever he told me. And that's exactly I did it, and it happened to me. I threw myself down in [INAUDIBLE] during the bombardment. And I put my head down. People lost their heads. They was running, they were trying to bomb. They were being killed. 

I throw myself down, I put my head in-- underneath to save my head in order to stay alive. So to me it make a lot of sense. I still-- still even now, I dream I'm going to be taking-- and I've been taking [INAUDIBLE] oh my God I have to go through again, strip-- they're going to strip me. They're going to probably now push me on the line. I'm going to be-- I'm not going to be able to survive. I have that. Constantly, I'm dreaming. And that next day, I'm-- I have a bad day next day. If I have a dream like that, the next day is shot. 

Always scared I'm going to go through those lines in Auschwitz and they're going to, you know- they're going to pick me and I going to be one of those that I'm not going to make it. It still exists. I guess they're going to always exist to me, even it's over 40 years gone. So we are now-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You're with your mother? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. In the '43. And now the thing is getting closer. We heard that the German troops now already-- I don't know what country they're in. They're taking the-- the Jews. Away. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now was your sister alive-- 

SUBJECT: Still alive with us. They didn't took her. But now we have an order from the Hungarian, uh, government that every Jew must wear a yellow star. But my mother didn't go for it and she said, I'm not going to wear the Jewish star. They could kill me, I'm not going to wear it. so she was invited in the police department and they told her that she must wear the Jewish star-- everybody must wear Jewish star. 

So we start to wear the Jewish star. This now, uh, it's getting now to the situation that we heard a lot of rumors. One of them, my friend Jewish girl, belonged to the Zionist organization. Her father was working in the restaurant as a-- a waitress. And they heard a story that is at Auschwitz, existing Auschwitz, and all kind of camps in Germany and they're taking the Jews and they're-- it's a terrible thing is happening to the Jews. Still, not believes. Nobody would believe. 

Ah, there is a rumor. You don't have to believe it. Now, this girl had a boyfriend. He was a Croatian. He was a guard in Auschwitz, a young fellow. He was on the vacation month of-- before Christmas in December. He showed up from Auschwitz to Novi Sad and he went to visit this Jewish girl because they was very close friends. It was a late night. He went in and he told the story about the Auschwitz that he a guard in Auschwitz-- that goes now back in 1943-- and they-- transports coming in and what is going on there, unbelievable things he saw as a guard in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what you heard, the conversation? 

SUBJECT: When he told that story, this Jewish man told his story to the Jews in the restaurant, tell everybody what he heard. So we got the story, too. Not believe. And ironic thing happened to me. We arrived to Auschwitz. Out of the wagons now in Auschwitz, we already been stripped and put in the-- in the stripe uniforms. Waiting by the trains and we don't know what's going on. 

One-- somebody tells that we're going to be put in the trains and train going to go right in the as chambers. Some of them said, no, don't worry about it. You're going to go to work. All kind of rumors. And all of a sudden, as a convertible car arrives there, and a young fellow in the German uniform jumps out and yells, who is from Yugoslavia, from the city of Novi Sad? And I stood up in the uniform and said, I am. He said, you know me? 

I said, yes, I do. His name was Galanic He was a Croatian. I say, sure I do know you. He did with his head like that. Is anybody else from this city? I said, no. I'm the only one here. He was looking for his girlfriend. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: That Galanic same one. He jumped back in the convertible and he was gone. He didn't-- he just did like this with his head. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said people didn't believe. What do you remember their responses where when the girl-- 

SUBJECT: Don't believe it. Don't believe it. That's only a rumor. It's only a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --told the story and-- 

SUBJECT: It's a rumor. Still rumor. The Jewish people living still. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But for example, [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: Ordinary Jewish people going to that restaurant. That's a cafe. They go together to eat and everything. They would be [INAUDIBLE] about this story. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were there? 

SUBJECT: No. I wasn't. I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you heard it from somebody-- 

SUBJECT: I-- because my father used to go in there. But now I heard from the other people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember who you heard it from? 

SUBJECT: Let me think for a minute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] remember a conversation that you had with someone or something you heard. 

SUBJECT: I can't recall. But I did heard that thing, that what's going on in Auschwitz, Auschwitz existing. My friends in the Zionist organization, that how I would recall, they all been talking about this, this Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did ? 

SUBJECT: Not to believe. Some of them do, some of them not. It's hard because young people would listen, they would go home, they would listen their parents. They would give them a different story, different approach to that situation. And you would blend with that, with your family. You would always believe. And you know, I don't know, but somehow you're close to your family. Again, I have to-- you know, you-- you've got to believe to your parents a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] you, what about your-- when you heard it? 

SUBJECT: I was very, very disturbed. I was ready to join Tito army in mountains. Matter of fact, I did have a connection with my rest of friends in the organization that we will join. We had the connection already. But in the back of my mind was my mother was a very sick woman. She was a very heavy woman and we have to be taking from place to place. I have to help her. 

And that was the one-- one big, uh, thing in my life. And I did help but until the point-- I help her to go on the train and take her off from the train. She couldn't even walk. She was a very sick woman. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] you really did know? 

SUBJECT: Only the Torah And only the book I read from that Rudolph Waldheim 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you believed. 

SUBJECT: I believed it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You believed it. 

SUBJECT: I believed it. I have a feeling that-- that it's a possibility. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your mother, did she believe? 

SUBJECT: Well, we have to now say that-- we have to now start to believe because my father is now already dead. 3,000 people dead. Now is nothing. You are in and you've just got to stick it out whatever happens. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So she believed. 

SUBJECT: She has to believe that we have a chance that we are not going to survive no more. We have no choice no more. But it's too late now. It's not too late for me. I was young. I could have joined the partisans. But it's too late for her, my sister with the kids, and everybody it's too late now. And then now we reaching, I've been talking about they're going to gather all the Jews and put them in the camps. 

That's the latest thing. Happened in Bulgaria. They took all the Jews and put them in-- in one came in Sofia, the city of Sofia. Plovdiv, that was the city. Put all the Jews in that camp. Now we know that in Zemun, the Jews are mostly dead. That's what the Serbian people are telling us. It's-- the camp is almost empty. Been taking-- whoever is left there, they've been taking in the trains. They don't know the destination, but they're gone. 

Now, we did have our relatives in the-- in, uh, Croatia, but we lost the contact now and we don't know what happened to them. We assume they're are all dead now by that time, by '43-44. No more contact with them. Because we heard this story what they did in Croatia with them. So now we've got to get ready because now they're talking about we're going to be taking. So my mother says, well, as long as we're together we probably are going to somehow survive. 

But she was always very optimistic, my mother. She always was make everybody feel good, even in the worst time. She always don't worry, things going to change. It's going to be OK. But in back of her mind, she know it's not going to change. Now we got an order that the-- all the Jews not to leave their homes, stay in the house today. Next, uh, to the government going to the next, uh, what to do. Just stay in there and don't leave the house. 

Don't try to talk to your neighbors, don't try to give out of your house anything to the neighbors. Stay where you are, afraid. Well, we have in our house a Hungarian woman, a family living with us. Her husband was Jewish. The kids wasn't Jewish, they was Christian. Her husband was a-- a Jew, blind. He was blind. And, uh, has a little baby, a grandchild. They took her son even so he wasn't a Jew, took him as a Jew with a white-- they have white or yellow. The white would be the-- the families who are between, the father was a Jew, mother was a Christian, so forth. 

He got a white, uh, band. They took him also in the slave camp on Eastern Front. So he had his sister, two sisters, and one little baby [INAUDIBLE] and the mother, who was-- she was Christian. Now we don't know what to do. I have some of my personal belongings. I have a harmonica, things I wanted to save. So I grab my harmonica. 

I'm running in my backyard to the apartment and throw the harmonica in her-- in-- underneath her bed. I figured if they come in, they're going to take us. At least that harmonica, I can maybe save it. I didn't look no more for anything because I know there's nothing you could save no more. 

We was waiting, waiting. All of a sudden, the Hungarian Army showed up, took us out of the house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew they were coming. 

SUBJECT: We was waiting. And they told us they're going to take us to the temple first. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was in April-- 

SUBJECT: That was now in the beginning April, before the Jewish holiday, before-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: April 1944. 

SUBJECT: 1944. Ironically, they took this woman, too-- the Christian-- with the baby and her daughter. We are now taking to the temple. And in the temple is a German officials in German uniforms. And then yelling, anybody has any values like, uh, watches or rings, money or anything like that, come forward. Because they-- they're going to instruct the search. They're going to search every one of them. They want to find out if anybody is hiding anything. 

Sure enough, people got scared, start to come forward by the Torah, putting down their money, their watches, their-- everything they had. They completely emptied themselves. We're standing in-- in the temple waiting what is the next thing? We didn't have too much. My parents, they was well doing, but we never have those kind of things. My father didn't believe in those thing. All of a sudden, the Hungarians come in. 

They're looking for this Hungarian woman who lives in our house. They took her out, they took the baby out. They let her out from the temple back to home. That was a good sign [INAUDIBLE]. We were relieved. He may going to change the things and might nothing going to happen. We been there for a few hours. They was constantly nagging the people for their watches. They're going to-- they're going to search us. They start pushing the people to the point that you can't even think no more, that if you tried to hide, you would come forward because you're going to get killed. 

So finally a lot of people to-- [INAUDIBLE], they give it up. They give this stuff. Now we empty. There are people that have no money nothing. We're just standing there with nothing. And by the way, I forget to tell you. They told us to pack up stuff up to 50 kilograms. They're going to let us with a 50 kilogram stove leave the house. So naturally, I have on myself-- I have two trousers, two shirts on me. I was everything double on me. So my sister, the children, my mother. 

She couldn't even walk, but she had all kind of things. And now with that stuff on our back, we have to walk from the temple to the railroad station. Now, this is something. My mother can't even walk. They make her to walk. And now we walking on the street. And the Hungarian people on both side of the sidewalk standing and yelling and-- and gladly, finally they got the Jews, they're going to clean up the city from the Jews. They were so happy. 

Now, I have to remind you that in this land now, we have again back the-- this Christian woman with her daughter and the baby. They got her again out of the house, bring her back. Now we walk-- they're walking us back to the railroad station. Reaching to the railroad station, they let her out, the old woman, because she was Christian, out of the line. When she-- she was out of the line, she run back to grab the baby to take the baby out of the line. So the Hungarians went there and grabbed the baby out of her hand and bring the baby back to the daughter again. 

Now we've been put in the trains with-- with the baby. We all went. She stayed. She never been taken to Auschwitz, that-- that Hungarian woman. But her daughter with the big, we were all put in the wagons. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Her daughter [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: She tried to save the last minute on the railroad station. The Hungarian grabbed the-- grabbed the baby out of her hands, put back to the hand of the daughter. OK. Now we got to go in the-- now we get in the wagons. My mother couldn't even go up. This is all those [INAUDIBLE] and everything. But a few people help us, finally we push her up in the wagon. She's smiling, my mother, happy-- tries to be happy, make jokes, nothing could happen. 

We're still together. Now we're leaving the-- the city. Train is going for another place, Subotica That's another place, another camp. And in Subotica that was-- that was the place that some of the people, they would be railroaded to Auschwitz from Subotica All-- they would be picked up first and sent to the different camps. So we slept the one night there, all everybody. Next morning, the Germans showed up and we have to-- they round us up in the lines and they want to find out how old we are, what is our background. 

Make believe there was, uh, somebody who was typing things. Make believe typing because I don't believe that was typing. And I said how old I am. My mother was there. And then start the separation in the Subotica My mother stayed with-- with my sister with two children. They took me out of that line, put me in the wagons, and they took us to Backa Topola That's another camp right nearby from Subotica 

Over here was an interesting thing when we arrived because over was all young people already. I didn't see children no more. I don't see, you know, older the people, most young people. So when we arrive in that camp, they took us upstairs and the first flight was wall to wall people. And then we slept there. And during the night, they was beating the people. The German-- now we are given to the Germans already. Hungarians was down by the doors by the camp, but inside in the camp was Germans only. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think about the separation? 

SUBJECT: That separation? I knew now I'm going through something that I am not going to make it myself no more. I wasn't saying enough. I was young, but not strong mentally. I'm going to make it. I didn't have support now It's not-- nobody would tell me, hey, don't worry, you're going to make it. I don't have nobody now. I'm on my own now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And exactly how old were you then? 

SUBJECT: I was 18 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know or did you think when you were leaving your mother that you would or wouldn't see her again? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Because when-- when I said goodbye to my mother and my sister, my sister's daughter was nine year old, big girl. And the other girl was six years. And they were standing by watching me and was dripping out of their eyes, uh-- I could see that this is it, we're never going to see each other. I knew. I was reading. The coming the-- the tears out of their eyes and the way that was dripping, it's not like a regular cry. It's something that that was me, that's it, we're through. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The girl. 

SUBJECT: The nine-year-old girl. Those tears, what she left out of her eyes, I know I never going to make it in my-- the way I was thinking at the time. Now we've been in Backa Topola to Poland. Towards night, they get-- start to beat the people. I said, my god. How am I going to make this? In the morning they was beating the people in the first flight with their sticks, the Germans. And the morning, I was waiting for morning. When the morning going to come? Finally, the morning. 

Everybody down in the yard, lined up everybody. Next to me was a-- 11 people, unknown people. I never saw them. Not from my city or any. And they didn't even speak Serbian. Those, I find that they are Polish, from Poland. There-- and I find out from them, I heard them talking about that they have the Christian papers and they been tracked done in Budapest and thrown in Backa Topola camp with the, uh, Christian papers. 

They all was not in my age of 18. I would say in 30s. A good-- in good physical condition, those Polish Jews. But they kept them a little bit separated for some reason, I don't know why. Maybe to miss-- not to think that they're going to go to Auschwitz. I think that was the reason. I tell you why. Because they started to call up by city. They call Novi Sad, we was in one group. They called the other city in one group. City by city in group. 

And then they says, Pole-- Poles. This is the first time I ever heard in my life that word, Pole. I never even know these are Poland exists in my life. I went to school, I learned you geography and Poland was-- now I heard the word Pole-- not Jews, Poles. This-- given the benefits that they still Poles, they're Christians, not Jews. After this, one woman from nowhere runs out of time and runs on the gate. She wants to escape. 

The Germans shoot her down. She lost her head, I guess. She was so scared that we're going to get now maybe killed. She run out of the line, she run, tried to escape. She was shot down. That made me real worried. I got now really scared. They really mean now the business. I know now they mean the business. But three or four hours later as we were standing there, that we got organized by the cities, we start to march out of the camp by the cities that we're going to be put in the wagons in the railroad station again. 

Now, those Poles, I don't know how that happened, but they was put in our group with our city in our same wagon. So we are-- the country was I believe 60 people, between 50 to 60 people in each wagon. And the minute-- OK, the German Army now took us down. The German Army was in the control of it now, so no more Hungarians. We been put in those wagons and the minute that we went in the wagons, they closed the door. 

Now, we've been talking to each other, what's going to happen now? I still get my 50 kilo of my thing. I'm sitting behind me. I'm watching for that that nobody could take away from me with two pants, with two shirts, with everything on me. Still, I don't know. Now, I have nobody. I'm on my own now. I'm talking to those people from the same city. But somehow, I have nothing to do with them no more. I'm on my own and I've got to think about myself. 

So I heard there's people was-- those Polish Jews was all together in one corner in the train and they're talking to each other. And they're asking us a question. They're asking us, do we know anything about Auschwitz? So naturally, those people said, no. They said, I-- I really hope we're not going to Auschwitz, they said the Jewish-- Polish Jews. Because if we go there. 

Now, I've got to remind you one thing. In our 50-kilogram, we have food, too. I have bread in it and all kinds of things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] people know is the Polish Jews asked about? 

SUBJECT: Ask us did we know if we have a possibility we're going to go for Auschwitz. No, nobody. No way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you did know. 

SUBJECT: But that this train going to go to Auschwitz, we didn't know. We did-- we didn't believe it this was going to Auschwitz now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just that you didn't know anything-- 

SUBJECT: Anything. We-- I heard a story about Auschwitz now. By this time, I heard a lot of things. I saw a woman be killed in front of my eyes. But yet, those 11 people asking us a question, do we know, and we says-- we all said, no. We all denying the truth that something is-- something that's going to happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any reason why you did not say no? What is that? 

SUBJECT: They still have a hope, the hope of surviving, that we're going to get out of this maybe easy way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It doesn't exist. 

SUBJECT: Doesn't exist, the period. But the train starts to go out and stops the next town. They opened the doors and the Jewish-- from the Jewish, uh, temple, they brought us food in. Each wagon get bread, lots of bread. They all had the Jewish stars and everything. Everybody-- everything got. So, uh, by that time, they went in to check the train. 

Meanwhile, one of them, this Polish Jew as we're getting that bread in, they got a big stone outside on the railroad. They push that stone inside in the train, inside in the compartment, and pushed it in the corner and they're all sitting covering that stone. They close the doors now. Now we are leaving, but we don't know where. It's nighttime. The train stops during our-- we are sleeping. 

And the doors open, the Germans jump in with the flashlights and they're grabbing every one of them by the hand, these Polish Jews, pushing them. And they don't want to stand up. They're sticking together by one certain corner. They push them away. But they tell the Germans, this is the-- this is the-- this is the border of Hungary and Slovakia. They made an inspection of each train to make sure that no Jews could escape, to make sure that they're going to take them over to Slovakia. 

They find that in our train is a hole, open hole on the train. So they jump in, they pull that-- that guy away. Was a hole on the train. They try to escape. During the transfer, they would jump out of-- one by one through that hole. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That the stone was covering. That's what they were doing? 

SUBJECT: With that stone they was slowly-- as we were sleeping, they were slowly breaking up the-- breaking up to open that they could escape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those are the Polish Jews. 

SUBJECT: Polish Jews. So what happens now-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE], the Germans? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Right away what they did to us, they stop the train. They nail it up from my outside with boards and everything and they throw the stone out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And who did they grab then? 

SUBJECT: They grab one guy. His name was Alex. He was like-- he was in charge of that. Each train had his who was in the charge. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Each wagon. 

SUBJECT: Each wagon. And he-- this was, uh, Alex. He says, who is in charge of this train? He says, I am. They grab him. He says, now, watch out. Everything-- they're going to count and everything is going to be shut down. Now, this is the first time in my life I know now I'm going to die because it may be [INAUDIBLE] they're going to shot me now in the train. They took the Alex out, they closed the doors, and was shots. 

So we got scared that they killed Alex. [INAUDIBLE] replace him with a-- with a new guard in the charge of the train, one of them from my city. So those-- now you have 10 Polish Jews there and they're claiming, don't worry, he wasn't killed. They just shot to scare us that they killed him. But we're still waiting now. The train's standing over an hour. They still have chance to come in and kill us because we're part of that. Nothing happens. 

All of a sudden, the trains starts to go, leaves. We're over the border. It's now morning already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Alex did not come back. 

SUBJECT: Never back. They didn't kill him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They didn't? 

SUBJECT: No. I'm going to-- I'm coming to that. Now we're coming to Slovakia. [INAUDIBLE]. Train stop. I don't know the name of that railroad station because I made up my mind every time I'm going go I'm going to keep watching, memorizing things. Maybe someday I could send a card to my city to somebody that they know that I'm still alive, that I could somehow communicate with my mother to get in contact they know I'm still living. That was always in my mind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you thought she was living. 

SUBJECT: Always that I'm going to help them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You at that time still thought she was living. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you kept this in your mind. 

SUBJECT: That's correct. Now, the train stops. That must be maybe nine o'clock in the morning. They open the doors and they let everybody out of it. And this is the first time I saw it-- that train was so long, maybe a mile long. I don't know. I never see a train like that. And all coming out same time and they all are going-- they had to go to the-- to do the-- how would I express myself-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Physical needs. 

SUBJECT: Physical needs. The women's and men's, everybody together doing it on the open field. And the Germans watching and laughing and the Slovakian people in their uniform watching and laughing with the Germans. I love the expression. I-- I-- that expression really put a big thing in my mind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did it say to you, the expression? 

SUBJECT: I have not too much to go for it. I have no chance, I always said that after that. Every time something happened, I said to myself, that's it, I'm not going to make it. And this was something again of-- I see the women's next to me, they're doing physical things with me that was now beyond what I could think. This is something I couldn't believe it I could see it. Now, that was maybe 15 minutes. 

And after 15 minutes, I hear some people yelling very big-- big in excitement. Alex was in the next-- they put Alex in the next train. Sure enough, they wanted to take him to Auschwitz. Why should they kill him? They're all going to Auschwitz. What is the reason to kill one guy on the-- on that trip? And they were so happy. They said, you see now? He wasn't killed, he was all right. But be smart. We didn't want to escape ourselves. 

When we opened that hole, we opened for everybody because that's your last chance to escape. Because you're not going to escape no more. That's it. And you make sure now because you have all of that stuff with you, right there when you [INAUDIBLE] even [INAUDIBLE] stuff because they're going to take everything away from you. And the train was going day and night, day and night. All of a sudden, stops. I'm looking through the little opening, through that little window. 

I see people in uniform, in stripe uniform. This was like a forest and cutting stuff. They also look through, those Polish Jews, and they said, my god. We are going to be in Auschwitz now, just about Auschwitz. They stand up, all of them, and they were singing, uh, a-- a Jewish, uh, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE]. And they was kissing and crying, all remaining, those 10 of them. We still didn't understand, the rest of us. We are in the one side, they are on another part. 