[TONES] [CHUCKLING] 

INTERVIEWER: Don't worry, it is not a monologue. OK. 

SUBJECT: Well, I was one of the lucky ones who escaped without ever having seen anything more horrible than some street clashes in Germany. And I was born in the town of Breslau, which was Southeast Germany. Silesia, now ceded to Poland, uh, in 1922. 

My family moved to Berlin in 1929, and though I was only seven years old, I got the sense of an extraordinarily powerful city, um, torn between wealthy and poor. But at the same time, a cosmopolitan and highly-varied place, with a lot of avant garde literature, film, and so on and so on. Um, we were very early on in our lives politicized, because some of us, at least, saw-- very vaguely, we felt, b-- seeing brownshirts tyrannizing small clumps of people, and clashing with small groups of communists on the streets, we saw something was coming. 

INTERVIEWER: You guys are fro-- why-- why did you leave Breslau, and what was your father's profession? 

SUBJECT: My father was a doctor. He was a professor in a medical school, and he was asked to join a-- the staff of a big hospital. In fact, to direct one of its departments in Berlin in the suburb of Spandau, uh, in 1920. 

Um, we were thoroughly middle-class. My mother was a doctor too, um, and so we were really protected. Um, we suffered under the worst of the chaos in Germany. For example, a kind of inflation in 1923, which makes present American inflation look like stability by contrast. Uh, but still, we had regular means of sustenance. 

My father had a regular salary, so that the oncoming American depression, which had such terrible effects on the German economy, was not really felt by us in any cutting of our standard of living. We were protected. And for just that reason, we couldn't imagine that in 1933 and thereafter, our lives would be completely turned about and just pushed into sheer chaos. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you an only child? 

SUBJECT: No, I was the youngest. Very much the youngest of three. Um, and that was very fortunate for me, because both my sister and my brother, who were respectively 10 and 6 years older than I, were finishing, or near finishing, the end of their high school career, which ends in Germany at 18 with the so-called abiturium And my sister was just starting in medical school, and that was simply out. You just didn't do that anymore. 

And my brother was closing-- near to closing his high school career, and he too found every avenue cut off. That was the first step, that you simply found yourself professionally no longer able to do a thing, and socially ostracized from the rest of the community. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Um, you were socially ostracized by laws that came in 1935. The so-called "Nuremberg Race Laws," which just really, in effect, prohibited-- uh, institutionalized the prohibition of genuine intercourse between the Germans, in general, and their Jewish neighbors. Um, and professionally, you were simply prohibited from taking any part in the bureaucracy, which was terribly important in Germany, in the legal, medical, and other professions. 

And business opportunities were simply nonexistent, because, uh, Jewish stores, first, were boycotted on one remarkable day on-- in-- in early 1933. Uh, and then thereafter, they were increasingly restricted. And finally, simply, in effect, expropriated. All this without any evidence of violence yet. It was a graduated program of pressure. 

INTERVIEWER: The history of your family in Germany. Was there a long history? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. We had been there for generations and generations. Uh, one of my ancestors was traced back to having been the first Jewish officer in the Prussian army fighting against Napoleon in the so-called Wars of Liberation in 1813, in which he was killed in one of the first battles of the reconstituted Prussian army against Napoleon. So on both sides we had a long history in Germany, and thought ourselves as utterly patriotic. 

Uh, politically, belonging to a centrist party somewhere. Uh, the equivalent of supporting either a Gerald Ford or a Jimmy Carter over against their left-wing liberal or their right-wing conservative opponents. And, um, my father had been wounded three times in the First World War. And my only uncle had been killed in the First World War. 

So we just thought ourselves as deeply indigenous in German culture. And for me, for example, my parents projected an academic career. And all of that was simply, suddenly shut off. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you, or your family, or immediate family, or perhaps your grandparents, anyone you knew of, ever experienced any anti-Semitism? 

SUBJECT: Yes. So-called "genteel anti-Semitism" is something that we lived with. But the difference was the difference between day and night when I think '33 came. 

All of a sudden, people who, uh, were friends with you either simply cut you off completely, or more likely they would, in an apologetic way, say to you, well, of course you're one of the good Jews. And surely neither Hitler has anything-- neither Hitler nor we have anything against you. It's just that-- 

And then you would go on to hear about the masses of the Jews. Jews in general were evil. A particular Jew, like yourself, the only Jew that they knew, were all right. 

It's very much the same syndrome that we find in America, especially in the South, in the-- well, when I first came over, nearer to the beginning of the 20th century and around 1938, when it was all right, the nigger was all right in his place, and blacks were OK in their place. Individual blacks one could be friends with, but, uh, the race as a whole had to be kept in its place. That was the beginning in 1933. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember conversations with your parents about what was happening? 

SUBJECT: Yes. There were some very pathetic things in my family, and it was paralleled by others. Uh, my grandmother lived with us. We didn't have the small-- tiny, small, nuclear family that we have in America. My grandmother kept repeating that, uh, if only the Nazis could have it impressed on them that the Jewish population suffered as keenly in the devastating losses of the First World War as any other sector of the population, surely they would change their policy. 

Uh, there were a lot of people, a surprising number of Jews, like that. But my parents realized it was different. They had the uneasy feeling that it was the beginning of the end of our citizenship in Germany. And I think, by and large, they were terrified. 

They-- their first-- their first aim was to get us kids out of Germany fast. And their second aim was that as long as we stayed there, as long as we didn't get out, don't make waves. Because if you make waves, you'll disappear. If you don't make waves, you're relatively safe. 

INTERVIEWER: Disappear? 

SUBJECT: You would disappear. Uh, the fear was-- by about 1935, you began to hear rumors about something called concentration camps. Uh, you beg-- eh-- there was even the rumor of a, um, children's concentration camp. I don't know-- 

I don't believe there was any such thing at that time, but I remember that, um, I was able to get out and go to school in England, beginning in 1935. Though I returned home to Berlin during vacations. And one time I missed a train and, uh, came one train late. 

And my parents were absolutely panicked when they arrived at the station for the scheduled arrival of the train that I wasn't there, because even though I was an experienced traveler, their immediate reaction was that I must've been grabbed at the frontier between Holland and Germany and stuck away into a concentration camp. So by that time, they were alert. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. What was your perception and what was their perception-- or, uh, or more germane. What was their perception of a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: Uh, vague. Vague. We knew it was brutal. 

We knew it was confined to, uh, Jews, on one hand, and radical political opponents. Left-wing Democrats and Communists of the regime on the other hand. We did not yet know that it was so brutal that it was moving towards the extermination, to the mass extermination of people. That we did not yet know. 

INTERVIEWER: The Nuremberg Laws. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, can you describe them, explain them? Exactly what that all entailed. 

SUBJECT: Um, the Nuremberg Laws were in part, at any rate, similar to the grandfather laws in this country, which forbade intermarriage among races. It just simply said, in effect, that from here on in, a German could not-- an Aryan Gentile German could not marry Jews. Um, it forbade Germans becoming household help in Jewish households, or the other way around. Though there wasn't much of that. 

It excluded the, um, Jews from participation in the professions, except on a tiny quantitative basis. And if they could prove themselves to have participated in the First World War. But those were really insignificant exceptions. And it simply then, as a whole, institutionalized the fact that Jews were no longer officially part of the German citizenry. 

INTERVIEWER: Who, uh, adopted these laws? 

SUBJECT: Um, these laws were, in effect, simply promulgated. The German Parliament, the so-called Reichstag became a rubber stamp after March 1933, which were the last, more or less, free elections. So it was, in effect, the Nazified governmental bureaucracy that promulgated these laws, with the help of the Nazi Party, because the distinction was no longer at all clear or fast, the distinction between the Nazi Party and the government. And then the thing was rubber-stamped by the Parliament, by the Reichstag. 

INTERVIEWER: The general population had no opportunity to vote on these laws? 

SUBJECT: The general population had no opportunity to vote on these laws. What you had in Germany was after the last free election, you had a series of rend-- referenda. But these referenda were always "yes" and "no" referenda on specific, uh, ideological issues. Was Hitler to succeed Hindenburg as both reich's chancellor and reich's president, combining the hitherto two offices into one. Yes or no? 

And the answer was yes for 90% of the population, because-- in part, because there really was a wave of extraordinary enthusiasm. And in part, because people were either unpolitically inclined, non-politically inclined, or they were utterly confused. But there is no doubt that the propaganda machine of the Nazis was extraordinarily powerful in rallying even those who-- many of those who had hitherto been their opponents. 

It took really tough fiber not to say to yourself, I was wrong in opposing them. They were that overwhelming in their political propaganda. And it took an awful lot as a Jew to be able to say to yourself, I'm not really what they're making me out to be. They were that remarkable in their propagandistic effective. 

Indeed, this is a, um-- this is a, um-- kind of some symptom which you find among oppressed peoples, that they tend to adopt the image which their oppressors impose on them, the image of themselves. And that happened to an awful lot of Jews. Especially because none of us in the liberal professional Jewish community held very tightly-- well, I won't say none of us. 

Not-- but an awful lot of us no longer held tightly to our Jewish heritage. And as a result, we had no cultural background to hang on to. We had no way, really, of reinforcing each other, except for a kind of gallows humor, which behind closed doors, we would whisper to each other. 

INTERVIEWER: There are several questions that come to mind apropos of what you said. You opened up the large area of assimilation. That subject. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: How was a Jew identified? Your father's name was Frei? F--- 

SUBJECT: Frei. 

INTERVIEWER: But how-- 

SUBJECT: F-R-E-I. It was the German word for "free." 

INTERVIEWER: All right. His first name? 

SUBJECT: It was Wilhelm, which was the last two-- or last three Kaiser's name. So it-- he could not be identified as a Jew at all. However, there was a whole range of names that one would identify as German-Jewish. 

For example, you could begin with the name Meyer, which was usually, if not always, Jewish. And you would go over on the side to such names as Rosenburg, which usually meant German-Jewish. These were often names that had been adopted by Jews during the emancipation period, um, which began in the late 18th century, and then went on for a hundred years, when it was made easier for Jews to become regular German citizens. 

Uh, frequently, Jews adopted simply the names of the cities from which they came. For example, my maternal grandparents came from Frankfurt and were called Frankfurther. Um-- um, but Jews-- then the Nazis had a kind of a pseudo-scientific race theory which claimed that Jews were biologically different from the Aryan race. 

And with that went a whole lot of further pseudo-scientific paraphernalia, such as, for example, claiming that people looked Jewish. Other people did not. And so an awful lot of people who were beaten up in the streets, incidentally, were not Jews, because they were thought to look Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see any of that? Did you see any-- 

SUBJECT: I saw some of that, but it's amazing how little I saw. Uh, I saw some of it with a little Jewish newspaper vendor across the street from us, who on the day of the boycott of Jewish businesses in-- on April 1, 1933, was beaten up by a crowd of brown-shirted ruffians. 

When you see an innocent man being beaten up, and you know that he's not being beaten up because the law is powerless, but because the ones who are beating him up really represent the law, then you begin to experience real terror. And that-- it-- it-- it is what blacks must, uh, feel when they experience police terror in South Africa, and sometimes in this country. Um, then we experienced the terror in more indirect ways. 

For example, there was a day in June of 1934 when Nazis suddenly turned-- the Nazis, Hitler, suddenly turned on some of his own followers. It was a power struggle within the party, and he eliminated, in effect, one wing of it. The so-called "SA," the Sturmabteilung, um, killing its head. But in the process, also wiping out a whole echelon of conservative leaders who were in retirement, but about whom he was still fearful. Including some leaders of the Nationalist Party, and some leaders of the so-called Reichswehr, the army. 

We didn't know it was happening until it was announced on the radio in a rambling and fierce speech that Hitler made the next day. And so when a very highly-respectable-looking man tried to take refuge with us in our apartment, my parents weren't there, only my grandmother and I, we felt the whole thing was weird, strange. Perhaps he was there as an provocative agent of the party. 

And anyway, we asked-- in any case, we asked him to leave. And then I saw him being led away by the police when he went downstairs. And I looked out of the window. And the next day, I realized that he was probably an opponent of the Nazi regime. It was a-- for me and for my conscience, it was a terrible occasion. 

INTERVIEWER: When he asked for refuge, what-- what did he req-- request? 

SUBJECT: He-- he did a very typical thing in those days. He claimed to be a regimental comrade of my father's from first World War days. The First World War was-- had not ended more than 15, 16 years earlier, and was very, very vividly in the mind of all Germans. It was under that pretext that he asked for refuge. 

And I realized very soon that, uh, first of all, he was not a fellow Jew. And secondly, that he did not know what my father's regiment was, because I knew that off by heart. We were all patriotic, and therefore knew what regiments our fathers had belonged to. And we became terribly uneasy. 

INTERVIEWER: You were 12 years old. You were-- 

SUBJECT: I was 12 years old, yes, and we-- and my grandmother was in her 70s and somewhat doddery. And, uh, I didn't realize. Had I known, had I had the radio on-- no, not that. I think that's incorrect. 

But as I-- as soon as we turned on the radio next day, I realized what had happened. And my parents said, you must stay indoors, uh, because, uh, the streets-- the street corners were occupied by police with heavy weapons, as I soon found out. Because as soon as my parents said, you must stay indoors, of course, I found ways of seeking out and saw the excitement for myself. 

INTERVIEWER: You were prisoners. Therefore, the family was a prisoner in its own apartment? 

SUBJECT: Uh, not yet. Not yet. You see, that didn't happen until about in-- about 1939. The Nazis were extraordinarily smart in putting the squeeze on gradually. About 1939 it began to happen that then you had to put on the yellow Star of David. 

We didn't have to do that yet. We were the lucky ones. We hadn't le-- we left before that happened. 

It was then that people began, in effect, first to not want to go out anymore except to the stores. And then after that, shortly before deportation, they were actually forbidden to leave their apartment. But that we will-- as I say, we were not yet under that stress. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your parents discuss with you your reaction to this man that had come to the door requesting refuge? 

SUBJECT: We discussed it. And my parents were very ordinary people in this respect. They were both the highly educated people, but they were scared. And they said that it was a terrible thing, but that I had probably done the right thing. 

INTERVIEWER: The propaganda. You mentioned the propaganda as being so effective. In that day and age, radio was the prime vehicle. How did you experience propaganda subverting the society, the culture you knew? 

SUBJECT: It wasn't only the radio. The Nazis were extraordinarily skillful, extremist parties usually are, in organizing mass meetings. And once or twice, even though Jewish, I attended at the edges of a mass meeting just to look for myself. 

That was still possible, because not everybody, not every youngster, was in one of those typical Hitler Youth uniforms. Black short black pants, a brown shirt, and leather strap across the shoulders. Uh, not everybody had it on yet. So I attended one or two. 

And it was the-- the-- the organization of blocks, whole city areas, and transporting for free everybody in that area of a certain age group to a specifically designated mass meeting, so that you would have crowds of tens of thousands. And what would be done there would be, first of all, uh, speeches that would invariably do two things. 

On the surface, they would appeal to idealism, but the undercurrent. The strong, and really much stronger and more forceful undercurrent was always the hate of those who were not part of us. You want to watch out when political-- politicians appeal to the instinct of hate in you. And that's the biggest political lesson I learned in-- in Germany. 

Uh, and then after those speeches were over, then the entertainment would start. And the entertainment would always involve that highly effective, uh, mass use of martial music. A kind of martial music which had the same effect on the youth participating there that loud rock and roll has on our kids today. It is a kind of a mesmerizing effect. You felt yourself just pulled in. 

Martial music is obviously not as good music, but-- as rock and roll, but it just simply had the same effect. And then the group would be organized in ord-- into a speech chorus. Uh, and if there's anything that scares the daylights out of me today even, it is a huge group of people organized to repeat slogans in rhythm. Because that was an immensely effective way of just robbing them of their own mindset, sweeping them into the current. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they get them to do this? And how many people are you talking about? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I am talking about, uh, groups from 2,000 up to hundreds of thousands in-- in the party-- um, the Congresses. The annual party Congresses, which were so frighteningly memorialized by one of the great propaganda films of that generation, Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will. 

Look at that film and you will know what I'm talking about. And you'll see that even though it had, I don't know how many, at least 100,000 participants, that you can do the same thing with 2,000 partici-- participants. As long as you have a massive expression. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw the organization of these gatherings, if you will. 

SUBJECT: Yes, mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe in detail what you saw as the way in which these people were convinced, and brought, and gotten to this place of congregation? 

SUBJECT: It-- they were organized almost in cell-like fashion. There was a leader, and a Nazi leader for women's organizations, young-- youngsters' organizations, and, uh, male youth, female youth in every small area of town. And you would be called up to-- it would be expected that you would go, because everybody, pretty much, found it at least expedient to join. Because, well-- at least "expedient." Some joined very happily. 

But if you didn't join, you pretty soon learned that there were ways of ostracizing you that were not only socially painful. But, mind you, they could be socially painful. And social ostracism isn't, for adolescents, especially, a painful business. But it could also mean that you found yourself with fewer opportunities to advance into work that you wanted. 

INTERVIEWER: I think it's-- 

SUBJECT: If, for example, you wanted join the bureaucracy later on. 

INTERVIEWER: I think what is perplexing is, in the early days, how is this social ostracism affected? How were they able to insinuate their, uh, pers-- their manner of behavior into every aspect of German life? 

SUBJECT: It was-- all I can tell you is that it was done with remarkable efficiency and remarkable speed, and that is because the Nazi Party itself was superbly organized. It was organized everywhere, you see. And even if it was a minority, a beautifully organized apparatus, even when it is a minority, once it comes into power, it can spread directly like a cancer, because it's omnipresent. And if in a certain school, for instance-- let's say by '33, when the Nazi Party was, after all, the biggest individual party in Germany, let's say that 100-- out of 100 kids in a school, 30 belonged to the Hitler Youth in 1933. The rest would be gravy once the party was in power. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you-- 

SUBJECT: And it was like that everywhere. It was not-- it was simply a matter of organization. Nothing else. That's how they could insinuate themselves. 

And something else has to be said there, I think. And that is, you see, that except for people very much on the left wing, the mystique of nationalism was very strong in Germany. And the Nazis appealed to an enormous number of people who didn't count themselves strictly Nazis at all, by appealing to a renewal of the German tradition that was so utterly defeated and crushed in 1918. 

And therefore, they could sweep an awful lot of people who were not strictly-speaking Nazis into their ideology. They appealed to a "national renewal," they called it. They didn't say, become Nazis, they said, Germany, reawaken. Renew yourselves. We are the instrument of the national renewal. 

And boy, did it have appeal. So the ideology very shrewdly worded on the one hand, and beautifully organized in the party structure, down to the last detail, on the other hand. That's what did it. 

INTERVIEWER: What has your experience with the Hitler Youth, or the brownshirts? 

SUBJECT: Uh, that it took an active and independent mind, which is not easy for a person of 12-- 10 to 12 to have. And I only had it because my parents and my friends supported me in this, as we supported each other in this individually. It took an active and independent mind to say, I don't want to be in that. It's not only that I'm excluded, I know I can't be part of that. But it took an active and independent mind not to be jealous. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't express this in any way? It was just an inner feeling? 

SUBJECT: Uh, as I recall, I never had the guts to confess that I was jealous, because I knew it was wrong, utterly wrong. With the top part of my mind, the rational, independent part of my mind, I knew very well that even-- that in a certain sense, I was lucky not to be able to join, because I might have been sucked in otherwise into something that, uh, I knew even though had a powerful emotional appeal, was utterly wrong. 

INTERVIEWER: You mentioned in a class, or a group of 100 young people, there might have been 30 brownshirts. Was that your circumstance? 

SUBJECT: Uh, yeah. I am not-- again, I can't really remember that too well. Because before the Nazis actually came to power, in my little, or not-so-little gymnasium in my little high school-- and by the way, German youngsters began high school in-- at age 10. 

Um, we were a polyglot group. Mainly middle-class, and many of us from academic and professional groups. Uh, it was a bit vulgar to belong to a group that had a reputation for being rowdy. 

And so nobody was really altogether sure who belonged to the Hitler Youth. I couldn't tell you how many did and how many didn't. But we knew some did. 

And also there were a lot of other youth groups, you see? Germany was full of youth groups, uh, that were organized into romantic wandering parties. We strummed our guitars in adolescence, as we marched along the green paths of the German woods days on end, you see? 

Now, again, the Hitler Youth took advantage of that general pervasive romantic adolescent atmosphere. And so there were a lot of groups, you see, in our school that could easily become sucked into the Hitler Youth Group, even though they weren't yet. And they were abolished and were indeed absorbed within the first two years of the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER: But the fact is that the Hitler Youth wore uniforms. Did these other groups wear uniforms? 

SUBJECT: Uh, some did, some didn't. And those other uniforms sometimes bore a striking resemblance. Very short pants of one color, and, uh, um, shirts of a different color, but uniform color. Let's say one color only in the shirt. You had a lot of those. 

I remember some grays and greens, uh, just as I remember the blacks and browns of the Nazis. It didn't take much. The whole visual and sensible atmosphere was such that the Nazis could absorb those groups very simply and very easily. The only ones that held out were the church groups. Everybody else was quietly absorbed. 

INTERVIEWER: In other words, the vision of uniformed children marching or walking in step was not unusual. 

SUBJECT: No, it was not unusual at all. 

INTERVIEWER: You came from, uh, a very intellectually-oriented family, educated family. Hitler had, uh, published Mein Kampf. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: People wonder today, because of the fact that his plans were spelled out, why more Jewish, uh, intellectuals and others didn't take warning from that. 

SUBJECT: Because we were like everybody else. We feared the worst, but were never quite prepared to believe it. Uh, you often find people saying that when a fanatic comes to power, he'll change. And what we are always hard put to believe is that there's less there than meets the eye. 

We always think there's more. That there are hidden depths, hidden qualifications to what he's saying, possibilities for change. Very few of us believed that he really would do-- that he really would do all he wanted. 

We didn't believe that he believed it all the way. He knew he was an anti-Semite fanatic. But none of us believed that he would go to the full length of his beliefs. We thought, at least, practicalities would keep him from doing so. 

INTERVIEWER: You were sent to England in 1935. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: You must have had a different exposure when you were in England, then-- and then coming back into Germany. 

SUBJECT: Yes. It's a very simple thing. It's a very, very simple thing. As soon as one crossed the frontier, the atmosphere was one of fear. That's all. Just plain fear. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Across the frontier back into Germany? 

SUBJECT: Back into Germany. Whereas, as soon as I traveled back across, first into Holland, and then into England. That's usually the way I went, because people were relaxed. You didn't fear your neighbor. As soon as you came back to Germany, you feared your neighbor. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk, discuss in any way, tell people in England or in Holland as you were going through what was going on? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. In England, of course. It is difficult for a population that has known freedom under law-- that is to say, where most people, at least, most members of the majority group, the majority ethnic group, at any rate, where they've known-- never known legal terror and police terror, it is very difficult for them to imagine that. The fact that every court hearing would be rigged. The fact that the police were there not to administer justice, but to administer the nightstick to those who were persecuted was something that was-- it was impossible for Britishers to understand. That was what I experienced. 

They thought you were exaggerating, at the least. It's not that they liked what was going on over there, but they though that you were wildly exaggerating. And you must remember that in-- that the biggest single experience that foreigners had in Germany under the Nazis was in 1936 at the Olympic Games. And he put on a superb show, and all the ugliness was hidden. 

And remember, there was a kind of a reverence for foreigners. Foreigners were sacrosanct until the war started. You-- you hid what you were doing from the eyes of foreigners. 

Most of it took place behind the scenes, except for those increasingly strong, but still subtle, social and economic pressure-- pressures. But those weren't visible. We experienced those. 

But an Englishman visiting a Jewish home would not see any physical threat exercised against us. We were not prevented from going out. You see, it was after 1939. That's why I can give you firsthand experience. It was only after that that it really began to be physical persecution. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you were in England-- 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: --and you-- do you remember any discussions with either your classmates or your teachers in-- in which-- that you can describe? Or a response you can-- that you can re-- reveal? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. But what I remember most of all, you see, is that I had discussions with them, that I talked with them. That they were all sympathetic to a person. By the way, I went to a Quaker school, and the Quakers could always be relied upon to be in-- on the side of those who were persecuted. 

But, um, though they were sympathetic, it was very hard to catch their imagination. In one way, it is absolutely impossible to imagine what Auschwitz was like. But in another way, it is graphic. And once that is described, people know-- they know that it is beyond their imagination, and that it is terror raised to the absolute level. 

But I was unable to do that, because we did not experience terror raised to the absolute level. We experienced only subtle terror. And as a result, I found that my English friends nodded, sympathized, but their imagination was not caught by what I said. I could not even impress on them that given this man's psyche, given Hitler's psyche, it was almost bound to result in a war. They couldn't realize that. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents sent you to a Quaker school. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Yet, a moment ago you said that it was partially because the Jewish population of Germany was not entrenched in its own tradition that led to, perhaps, a miscalculation. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Uh, now, what I said was that the-- the fact that the German-Jewish population was no longer deeply set within its own tradition, that therefore, they had no psychological-- inner psychological support against the image that the Nazis created of themselves as Jews, you see? Uh, but because all of us were politically either centrist or slightly left, and very few were really extreme right, for that reason, we knew what was coming when it came. 

But we thought that the economic realities would drive Hitler from power. Why? I can't even remember. We thought he could not last economically, because re-arming would be so expensive, for one thing. We didn't realize that re-arming would employ a huge hitherto unemployed German population. 

But increasingly after 1934, Jewish middle-class people realized that even if they were not going to be killed, they were never going to belong to the population of the country again, as long as this man was in power. And after about a year, you began to realize that he was maintaining himself in power very nicely. 

INTERVIEWER: I-- I have to persist in the question of why they sent you to a Quaker school rather than a Jewish school. 

SUBJECT: In England? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Because, like so many other Jewish families, my family was totally secularized. That is to say they had given up their-- they-- we were-- we knew we were Jews, you see? But that meant simply German citizens of Jewish religion until the Nazis came. 

That was what assimilation meant. We were totally assimilated, and as a result, my parents had us baptized, you see? My parents had all of us children baptized. 

INTERVIEWER: Before? 

SUBJECT: Before that Naz-- long before the Nazis came. It was only when the Nazis came that my father, out of a sense of shame, canceled, if there is such a thing, he canceled his baptism and became-- declared himself officially Jewish again. And there were quite a few of us that way. There was a whole population amounting, I think, to about 15,000 German Jews who had become officially Christian. 

But even those who hadn't, you see, were so utterly assimilated that, for example, Jewish festivals were not kept. Uh, they did not go to special Jewish schools until they were forced, were forced to. And, uh, the ideal of assimilation was one that my parents stayed with. 

So first of all, it was the Quakers who were one of the few groups that made us-- made it possible for me to come over. For currency regulations reasons, it was very difficult to go to another country. Uh, but the Quakers made that possible. 

But secondly, I should explain that I personally had participated in a Quaker youth group as a youngster, and that my parents had become acquainted with the Quakers through me, and liked them immensely. But they would not have sent me to a Jewish school in any case. If they had found a school in England where I could become an assimilated Englishman, that's the school they would have sent me to, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go to church services? Christian ser-- 

SUBJECT: Quaker? Quaker services? As a-- before? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. You were baptized into something. I-- 

SUBJECT: Um, yeah, once in a while. My parents didn't. I did. I went to a-- a, uh-- a church school. 

And remember that in Germany, at that time, there was religious instruction in the schools. In fact, that was one of the bitterest fights between Nazis and the churches, about religious-- release time, religious instruction in the public schools. And, um, I attended the Christian, uh, release time, instruction, rather than the Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: What did that do in terms of your family life? Your grandmother, who was Jewish, and obviously a very-- aware of her Jewishness, was living with you. 

SUBJECT: One would ordinarily expect, wouldn't one, that it would involve a deep rift between the generations. Those who still remember their Jewish heritage deeply, and those who did not. Not so in our family. 

We had been so deeply assimilated, you see? So deeply assimilated that, on the one hand, we were proud of the fact that we were Jewish, in a curious, undefinable way. We felt that we were Jewish, and that was that. Jews were good people. 

Uh, but on the other hand, we felt that it was simply a kind of cultural religious distinctness, but not anything that interfered with our, first of all, being German citizens. You see, our whole world-- for just that reason, our whole world was turned far more upside down in 1933. We were robbed of our primary support. Namely, our national identity, which was much more our identity than our Jewish identity. 

INTERVIEWER: This is a complex story-- 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: --because you were converted. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: You claim you felt Jewish, or you felt an identification with your Jewish heritage ancestry, yet you were practicing Christians in an assimilated German society. It's, uh-- 

SUBJECT: Heinrich Heine, the German poet who was himself Jewish, and rather cynically converted, once said that the-- that bap-- the baptismal certificate is the admission ticket to European culture. And a lot of Jewish people in the middle of the 19th century, especially in Germany, began to feel some sympathy for that. So that even when they did not do it themselves, as my parents did, they downplayed any part of their heritage, except one of a strictly limited religious cultural sort. 

That was-- you see, that was not true of the Jews of the East, who, under the tyranny of Russian governments, had always known that they were a people apart. That they had to stay together, and for whom that was a profound culture. Even though some of them broke out of it in the 1890s and became secularized socialists. But even then, they still stayed Jewish, even if not religiously. 

But for those of us in Germany, and that is a population of about 500-some-thousand, the matter was very different. Very different. We, increasingly over those 100 years from about 1790 to 1900, had become a group that was assimilated and not nearly so far apart. 

Remember that it was easier and easier for German middle-class Jews, and German Jews were by and large middle-class, to go increasingly into the professions. Medical profession, business. They could get into the highly esteemed universities more and more easily. 

That was totally different from the experience of the Jews of the East. Totally different. We became assimilated. 

INTERVIEWER: Some of the Jews of the East, uh, became part of the German-Jewish scene at a period in the early '30s. I wondered if you viewed this, and what your reaction and parents' reaction-- 

SUBJECT: It's a shameful reaction. It's a deeply shameful reaction. One that became very well-known in this country. 

The German Jews had the utmost contempt for the Eastern Jews. It was almost like a form of Jewish anti-Semitism. It is one of the most painful phenomena that one can ever see or experience. 

It often happens to minorities, that they divide among themselves, and one elite group will look down on another group. It is the "divide and conquer" policy that you find takes place in an atmosphere of oppression. And one of the greatest ironies of history was the fact that it was largely, not wholly, but largely a group of American Jews, well, in part of German, but often of Eastern heritage, that undertook the rescue of the German Jews. At least that element of the German Jew-- of German Judaism that was rescued is one of the great ironies of modern history. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there other groups that you experienced which were also oppressed during this early period? 

SUBJECT: Uh, there were other groups, but we did not-- we did not meet. Oppressed groups-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who were they? 

SUBJECT: Uh, well, first of all, of course those who were singled out from the left-wing parties. The social Democrats, for example. Say nothing of the Communists. 

Um, but whoever could stayed hidden. You didn't, even in semi-public, associate with people who were also under danger. To stay quiet, or to stay to your own self, and to your own family, and to your own group was the safest thing to do. You didn't meet with other groups. 

Then there were the curious un-political groups that were usually of the charismatic religious type. Seventh Day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses. People like that were persecuted. 

We didn't know about people like that. We wouldn't associate with-- the good middle-class folk that we were, we wouldn't associate with people like that. And then there was a whole [INAUDIBLE] population that those were the mentally retarded. Who, under those racial laws, or at least under that racial policy, let's say, the Nazi government tried to wipe out. 

INTERVIEWER: They weren't a different race, so that term is obscure. I don't-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-- well, right. But, uh, the-- the racial policy that-- that-- the racial philosophy meant that, first of all, that there were superior races and inferior races, on the one hand. But also on the other hand, there were the superior healthy people and the inferior unhealthy people. And, uh, to preserve the purity of the race, you were allowed to get rid of those who-- of the inferior stock, even within that race, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: Who else? 

SUBJECT: And that meant the mentally retarded. Chiefly the mentally retarded. Which was a policy, again, that brought the-- the only people who really effectively opposed that policy were the Lutheran churches, uh, which-- which ran many of the homes for and hospitals for the retarded. Uh, that was a grim story all in its own right. 

INTERVIEWER: What about the emotionally impaired? 

SUBJECT: You've got to remember that the whole outlook that's so strong in America on emotional illness was not that developed. If you were emotionally ill, you're toeing the line, on one hand. Or if you couldn't, you were counted among the mentally retarded. 

WOMAN: Excuse me. Annie, could you [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, I wanted to ask you when your parents decided that they must leave, that they no longer could tolerate or could sustain themselves in their circumstances. And what you thought, felt, and-- 

SUBJECT: I never doubted it for a moment that they should leave and that we should leave. Remember, I was politicized. By age eight I read the equivalent, the Berlin equivalent of The New York Times, the Vossische Zeitung, when I was eight years old. Because I knew-- I just felt it in my bones. 

Uh, I knew by '34 that we ought to get out. My parents knew it too, and gradually began to get themselves into action. But it took time. It's an enormous and frightening thing to uproot yourself from a place where you've lived for 200 years. 

We are so mobile in this country that we can't realize how frightening that was for us. We lived in Germany for at least 200 years, if you didn't leave there that easily. But they began to gear themselves up for it in '34 or '35. I can't remember which. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any problem in getting, uh, entry, gaining entry into any other-- 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. Oh, indeed there was. Um, it's obvi-- of course been revealed how hard-hearted Europe was towards, uh-- 

[DOOR KNOCKING] 

INTERVIEWER: Oh dear. 

SUBJECT: --the persecution of the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: We're out of tape. I-- this-- Professor Frei, I mean, this is, uh-- I know you-- 