ROBERT SHULKIN: [AUDIO OUT] through Tehran. 

INTERVIEWER: Through Tehran. I never heard. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Yeah. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm ready. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Ah, that was a fun place. 

INTERVIEWER: Pardon? 

CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: You're rolling. Just give your name, sir, where you were born, and your family life-- something about it. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Let's see. My name is Robert Shulkin. I was born in 1935 in Vilna-- sometimes known as Poland, sometimes known as Lithuania, sometimes known as Russia. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your family like then? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, my father was originally a shoemaker. In the United States, he naturally became a tailor, but also a librarian-- for many years, worked in the Vilna Jewish library. My mother was non-working at the time. I had a-- a younger sister, who perished on the journey from Vilna to here, and a younger brother who died right after birth, not related to the problems that we experienced. 

My father was a-- was and is a secularist. A Yiddishist, Jewish, but not a practicing Jew who practices Judaism. Much more attuned to what he defines as Jewish culture in secular terms. So the family life was good in that it was a large and extended family. He was one of many brothers and sisters, and my mother was one of many brothers and sisters. They were born in a small town outside of Vilna, Haydutsetshik or Adutiskis, sometimes known as the insane asylum of Eastern Europe, but I think every small town claims that title. And it was a town of about 5,000 Jews, who, with the exception of approximately 80 or so, got wiped out once the Nazis came into Lithuania. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember about the Nazis coming in? You were only four years old. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I don't remember the Nazis, because I had already left. What I remember is leaving and the circumstances of the leaving I do not-- did not understand, of course, until much later-- how it is we came, but to leave Lithuania, Poland. But it turns out that part of the Stalin-Hitler pact-- when Stalin and Hitler divided that part of Lithuania-Poland between them, our town, Vilna, and the regions around it, the small towns, stadtle, wound up on the Russian side of the division. 

So I remember Soviet troops marching in. This is '39. Vague memories, but soldiers-- little boys remember soldiers probably better than anything else. So they marched in. 

Somehow or other-- I now understand why-- we wound up on the Russian side, and we were packed off and sent to Siberia. Why? Because my father refused to accept Soviet citizenship. 

INTERVIEWER: Not because he was Jewish? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Not because he was Jewish. He refused to accept Soviet citizenship under any circumstances, and he, with many others, were simply rounded up. This is before the war broke out-- before World War II broke out. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he such a loyal Lithuanian, or? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No, I don't think he was a loyal Lithuanian. I think he was a loyal anti-communist at the time. Uh, he somehow felt and understood from his assessment of the situation and in his study that he did not want to lose-- the citizenship I think he held that the time was Polish, because in '39, Vilna was Poland, and so he had Polish citizenship. He somehow was reluctant to surrender Polish citizenship. 

So they shipped us off. It was a lengthy journey. I remember a great deal about that journey, but again, they're vignettes, small, et cetera. 

INTERVIEWER: That's what we-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: We were put into cattle cars by the Soviet troops. Each cattle car had-- I couldn't estimate the numbers of people, but it was tightly packed. There were shelves, and people sort of stayed on the shelves-- the-- the kind of shells, I think, you must be familiar from seeing photographs of the Nazi transport trains. It was a similar kind of train. 

We were never told where we were going. We were simply taken. It took approximately two and a half weeks of travel with lots of stops, and breakdowns, and that sort of stuff. Bored is is kind of memory. Thirst is a memory. Strangely, it was the fall when we took off, but we did not always have adequate water. 

I don't remember being hungry. I will then assume that my parents somehow always managed to get a piece of bread or a piece of something for somebody to chew. Noise, wailing, screaming. 

I remember one stop, which was memorable because it had to be explained to me later what happened. We had stopped in a fairly large population center somewhere in central Russia, I would say-- south central. And there was a great hullabaloo-- soldiers running around. I remember bayonets more than guns somehow. Maybe I was such a little kid I remember the glistening bayonets, people running, and chasing, and-- and finally after some time things got straightened out. And it turned out two Jews from the train had escaped while we had stopped. With this train, they had somehow managed to get out of one of the cars and took off for parts unknown. 

INTERVIEWER: So the transport was filled with Jews that-- I mean the discrimination was against Jews, not just people who-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, two Jews escaped. There were non-Jews on the train. This particular incident with the escape increased the non-Jewish population by two, because the Soviet guards of the train immediately grabbed two Soviet citizens and threw them into the car. Well, it's simply because the head of the train-- the person in charge had a certain number of people he had to deliver to the port of debarkation. Let's say it was 2,000. Well, you certainly cannot deliver 1,900 and two short, you know? So he threw these two people. They both-- 

INTERVIEWER: We have to raise your mic, sir. I'm sorry. We're having audio problems. No, just-- it's OK. There's-- 

CREW: something. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. You're-- he's talking off-mic. That's-- 

CREW: let's just you can't really clip it here, I don't think. 

INTERVIEWER: Will you just continue talking-- the tape is rolling-- so that we know if it's all right? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, so he had to deliver two extra people. He took two people-- random. These people wound up in the train. One of them I remember vividly, because he was a very lively sort of fellow. He was a Ukrainian, and he was always into something-- always either complaining or praising the Soviet government. When he got food, he praised it. When he didn't get any food that day, he ranted, and raved, and cursed Stalin to hell and tarnation. 

And he spent the entire time after we got to Siberia-- he and the other fellow spent the entire time of internment with us until 1941 when the general amnesty, uh, freed Polish citizens. The amnesty, of course, came about as a result of Germany attacking Russia. 

Well, the train went along in its journey. We arrived at a city that I, again, remember fondly, because those-- those things stick. Others don't. The city is called Kotlas. It is a port on the Northern Dvina River, and it was, for many years, a central point of disbursement of people to the various camps and the-- what has now come to be known as the gulag system, as the Soviet camp system. It's a giant city. 

We were then taken off the cars from the train and put aboard a river boat is the best way I can explain it. And again, memorable because I remember the river boat somehow for some strange reason was not at any dock, but we had to walk-- literally walk a plank from the river boat-- from the shore to the river boat. And I remember someone falling in and a great deal of screaming. 

And this river boat then took us-- I think after a day's journey or a day plus-- to the permanent camp. The camp was called [INAUDIBLE]. It was about 200 kilometers north of Archangel. And in that camp, we spent, uh, two years. The camp was organized in barrack fashion-- long wooden barracks. I now know-- again, through my own desire to know, and remember, and to refresh whatever I didn't remember, or didn't know it from my parents and other inmates with whom we still keep in touch from that camp-- there were 28 families in that barrack that we stayed in. 

By and large, the families in our barracks tended to be from the same region. That is from the Vilna and Haydutsetshik region. We all stayed together. There were cots along either side of some makeshift tables and one kind of stove-- a wood burning kind of stove. 

The arrival in camp was, uh-- was mixed with humor, as well as, uh, resignation. The humor was, well, if they were sending us to jail, why the hell didn't they tell us originally? Why to keep it a mystery from us for better than two weeks of travel? 

The resignation was the futility of not knowing how to go about, what to go about, why we were there. No one really knew what was the real reason why we were there. My father even wrote letters at that time to the president of the Soviet Union. The nominal head of the Soviet Union at that time was Kalinin, and he even got a response, which was extraordinary-- that he had a lot of explanation, so to speak. Until recently, we had this document-- disappeared about five or six years ago. The letter simply stated that the government knows what it is doing. 

And so we stayed there. What does one do in a camp like this? It was primarily a lumbering camp. The men, and the women, and the young people who were able were all engaged in some form of lumbering-- cutting trees, stacking trees, cleaning limbs, hauling trees, pushing them into the river when the time came for the tree flows downriver for the logs. Everything ran around this particular economy. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Strangely enough, it was the time for exploration within the camp, running around, seeing things. It was in the wild. My first memory is absolutely scary, because I had seen a bear-- a gigantic Siberian bear. I didn't know it was dead, but it sure enough scared me. I-- it was apparently killed by the guards. 

Bear-- bear meat was used for eating purposes. Most of the time, it was cubs that were eaten because the flesh is tender and not unlike veal, actually. So if you want to go catch yourself cub-- but this bear was apparently killed because it was either wild or disturbed someone. And it was set up on a raft with its paws against its jaw in this manner-- set up with some sticks, so it looked quite live. And he was floated down the river. This camp was under Northern Dvina river, and I remember with a bunch of other little boys and girls being by the shore of the river, and this raft came into view with this gigantic bear sitting on top of it. Well, you never saw fellows run so fast. 

It was really very scary at the time, but bears in general have a lot to do with my memories of the place. The first winter there I remember-- again, we went exploring-- the children within the camp. The camp is in the woods-- very, very wild. The whole place is surrounded by what the Russians called the impenetrable forest. People who escaped never got out. They just simply died in the forest. 

But in the winter, the snow tends to get very, very hard and crusty, so you can walk on top of the snow. And several of the boys went walking along the snow, and unbeknownst to us, we fell into a gigantic hole, which was a trap for bears and animals, again, which were devoured. And it was very deep. We were little-- little guys, and it must've been a good six feet deep, because the bears tend to be huge. And we-- no, we spent better than the entire day screaming at the top of our lungs before somebody came about-- came around and pulled us out of the hole. So again, bears connect to my memories. 

My father was put in charge of a group of men because he was said to be an intellectual because he wore glasses. And they mockingly put him in charge of a group which actually did not fell the trees, but cleaned-- cleaned the trees of limbs, and then they were supposed to haul the trees by one meager horse and some makeshift cart, usually a sled type contraption. 

Being put in charge of the men was fairly important, but really not as important as being put in charge of the horse. Being in charge of the horse, you-- you had to answer pretty much with your life. My father was lucky that the horse, which got fed even less than the humans in the camp, did not drop dead on him. 

A friend of ours, who is currently in Israel, was in charge of another group, a brigade doing the same kind of work, and his horse indeed sort of dropped on him and died. The man being a Lithuanian and-- and Lithuanians are known as comedians-- somehow the situation of the dead horse struck him as humorous. And he looked at it, and he says, oh, come on, Stalin. Get up. And he called the horse Stalin. He got an additional 15 year sentence for calling the horse Stalin. He was taken out of our camp into a much more strict regime camp. 

This camp I think is unusual. I don't think even Solzhenitsyn has written about these camps in this entire study of the gulag system-- in that they were family camps. The families stayed-- we stayed together. And now I will answer your question about the Jewishness. These were Jewish camps, and Solzhenitsyn, again, I don't believe writes about the specifically exclusively Jewish camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the Russians collect Jews in special camps because of the German pattern? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No, I don't think so, in all honesty. I think when they came in and took those villages-- into Lithuania and Poland that they wanted a Yiddish-- the Jewish shtetl and collected those people of the-- those Jews who refused to accept citizenship. There was not that overt conscious effort to segregate, although I would guess, at this point, since it's a question that is now being, I believe, opened-- I recently read something on it which tried to defend the Soviets, saying that they did not exclusively isolate the Jews. I would guess although there may not have been a direct government policy issued saying round up the Jews of this region, but when it came time to round up, it got to be pretty exclusively Jews. 

And the fact that the word Jewish camps is testimony to that-- exclusively Jewish. I recently spoke to people who come from the Soviet Union, and even they were not aware that there were exclusively Jewish camps in the period we're talking between just before the beginning of World War II, and the out-- the outbreak-- those two years. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any contact after the war began with Germans? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: We did not have contact with Germans until much towards the end of the war after we were amnestied from the camps, after we had moved, and kept moving closer and closer to the front. My father's decision was get out as quickly as you can, and that meant following the front. 

So it was not till the end of the war that we ran into the first Germans, but that's later in the-- so this was the work. The work was hard. It was typically Soviet-- inefficient. If you stacked up all your logs in half a day, you were told to knock them down and stack them again. Keep doing that until the day was over. That's that kind of economy. 

The food situation in the wintertime was horrible. We did receive some packages-- would you believe-- that they gave us. These work packages-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: --that were sent, I think, by the United States as some sort of aid to Russians. In general, they consisted of some spoiled fish-- spoiled cod-- dried cod, spoiled. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they know you were there? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I don't think it came ex-- directly to us. Somehow the Americans-- the United States sent all kinds of food relief to the Soviets in general, and we got some of that at one time. There was-- the daily diet was simply a kind of very thin gruel or soup made out of some flour. There was supposed to be-- I understand now, again-- some minimum caloric and protein content, but that's-- that's a fiction. It was simply flour and water-- and some bread. There was an allowance of bread, black bread. 

The, uh, summers and-- the spring and summers were somewhat better in that being as you are in a forest environment, and if you're willing to try things, and you have some access to the forest since you're working in a forest, you could find things-- mushrooms, for example. There's nothing like Russian mushrooms. Some animal life, if you were willing and were not hesitant about dietary laws. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you getting any education? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No. 

INTERVIEWER: None? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents didn't try to teach you your Jewish heritage, something? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Oh, I thought you meant formal education. No, not formal, but my parents did indeed teach me the alphabet, although there was very little material to use, but they made do with what they could org-- organized-- somewhat organized fashion. Not as organized as perhaps it was in other environments, because everybody was forced to work. The kids were forced then to run around. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, when you left this camp after two years, where did you go? Just to follow the front? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, that's the interesting part. You see, they-- once Hitler attacked Russia, we were amnesties. We were told to go back home. Well, the irony of that is Hitler was already home. By then, Hitler had overrun the entire area, so there was no going home. So we became refugees. Some people went to the Asian-- Central Asian Russia, Uzbekistan, Tashkent being the major center of refugees. Some, as I said, wound up all the way in Tehran. Some went out in Harbin in China. 

We just kept moving, jumping trains, jumping freights, buying your way, bartering your way. But first, we were taken from the camps and delivered back to that city of Kotlas, where you had to receive tickets to move out of Kotlas. You had to stay in line for tickets. We stayed in line for two weeks for the exit tickets. That means living in line. At the railway station in Kotlas, you stayed, you lived, you did whatever else people do in the line and made sure you kept the place until you got those tickets out. 

INTERVIEWER: Couldn't somebody stand in line-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: --while you left? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, but people went foraging for food, bartering for food, yes, but no one gave up places in line. And so we got-- in any train, leaving was acceptable. One did not ask, does this train go to Moscow, Kharkiv, or Kiev, or Paris? You merely took whatever train was available and left. 

After two years in the camps, people were sickly, weakened. The health situation-- the hygienic situation was not great for two weeks staying in line. We finally got tickets, and we got some sort of train, which started moving out of Kotlas, heading south. And my young sister became ill. 

We now know that she probably had typhus. She cut typhus-- typhoid fever. And after a few days on the train, she died. She died in my mother's arms. 

Well, the Russians had a habit of taking children who died on the train and merely throwing them out the window on the side of the road. So my mother-- her blessed memory-- made pretend that her child was not dead. She kept her for two days at her breast pretending that her child was not dead, but finally it became clear to the guards-- and there were-- there were always guards, although this was not an officially guarded train, I don't believe. I can't even remember. 

It was found out, but my father somehow bartered, bribed something, gave a piece of clothing, a shoe, anything, whoever was in charge, and we were permitted to leave. It turned out to be at a fairly-- at a stop at a fairly large city. The city's called Kirov in north central Russia. And we got off the train because my mother wanted her daughter to have some kind of burial instead of being thrown from the train like a dead puppy. So that's where my sister is buried. 

So we stayed for a while in that city. My father foraged around. His sister and family also stayed with us. They also got off. We decided to stay together as two families. They are now in Israel. 

And after a few days of survival, of bartering, of borrowing, and stealing-- it was not uncommon-- the-- all the people of the family decided to remain in this area. It was not a bad area. We moved away from the city itself-- from Kirov into a small village called Pachar. The village was largely populated by Russian sectarians, or what they call the old believers, a group that traces back to a split in the Russian Orthodox Church dating back to the 17th century. 

But they were very kind and decent people. Some of their beliefs and at least their practices are not unlike American Quakers. And we stayed in the village with these people until the very end, as it was becoming clear that the war was going the way of the Allies. And we then started moving out from there. 

INTERVIEWER: To where? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Moving again towards-- the first intention was to get back to Poland, not necessarily to Vilna. And so we headed that way. We stay in the village from '41 until late '44. It wasn't that unpleasant. I went one grade of school-- not quite one grade. Didn't finish it. To a-- to a Russian first grade school, where I stayed with the Russian boys and girls. I was pretty-- pretty klug; I even won a prize once of a package of tea for good spelling. 

My father worked as a shoemaker this time in this little village. My mother worked. Everybody worked, and the people were very kind. They were by and large farmers, and thanks to their good efforts at farming, food was probably better than for many other people in Russia during the war-- with one exception, the year '41, which was a great famine year throughout, but these people gave us food. 

For example, they would not eat flesh-- animal flesh-- if that animal was killed by another animal, and since the area was filled with bears and wolves-- at one point wolves attacked and killed a cow on a-- that belonged to the village. And the villagers would not eat that cow. Well, we had enough meat for an entire winter. It was good meat. 

So they were very kind and decent people. I remember them. I remember everything that particular-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did they know you were Jewish? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Yes. We were the only Jews. There were-- early on in our stay there, there were some transient Jews-- refugees walking. We did a lot of walking in these-- these five, six years. Uh, pass-- passed through us, and we-- stayed with us for a while, but they went on. They didn't remain with us. But the Russians-- they all believed us, knew we were Jews. They knew what Jews were. There was never any man-- outward manifestation of hostility on their part to us. Quite the contrary. 

So by the end of-- by '44, we began to move slowly, walking, jumping trains. I'm still pretty good at hopping a trolley car and getting off a trolley car while it's moving, having learned to do it from moving trains. No trains stopped in that village. It was a-- it was a semi stop. Trains slowed down in that village. And we made our way out of Russia into Poland. I remember various cities in Poland, moving with the front as cities were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the reception to you when you got back to Poland? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I don't see as there was a reception in any-- in any normal sense of using that word. 

INTERVIEWER: Were people-- were people-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: There were people-- 

INTERVIEWER: --pleasant? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Yes, but there was so much confusion of movement, you see? The front was moving. 

INTERVIEWER: Antisemitism? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I think there must have been-- I know there was some antisemitism. Again, I judge this on my father's comments. He's fairly-- much reluctant to speak about these experiences, but his decision-- for example, one of the first cities we stayed for any length of time was Reichenbach in-- in-- in Silesia-- Polish Silesia, or Reichenbach in German it's known as. And after some couple of weeks of staying after it was liberated, he said, no. No, no, no. This is no place for Jews, and we moved on to another city. We went through Breslau. 

Breslau was a-- a major-- a large city. It was very extensively damaged by the Allied bombings because it happened to be in a peculiar location of a triangle that was used by the Allied bombers. 

INTERVIEWER: But it was German, wasn't it? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: It was German occupied, and they-- they wiped it out. I remember going through the rubble of that city. I found a postage stamp album there, which I kept until I was in college in the United States. 

We were in Poznan-- went from a city there, where I remember getting lost. That must have caused no end of trouble to my parents, because I was lost for more than a day wandering the rubble in the streets of a bombed out city-- of Poznan. But my father's decision was firm, and I think it was, uh, based on experience that, uh, the thing to do was not to remain in-- certainly not in Russia, and certainly not in Poland. 

And so we stole the border. Uh, it was fairly easy at the time-- from Silesia, the border-- we got into Czechoslovakia. I remember being-- I must be good at this, because I got lost in Prague again. I remember being lost for over a day in Prague, because in Prague the streetcars-- the trolley cars were working. And it was such a thrill I just kept going on trolley cars for about a day and a half in Prague 

INTERVIEWER: Was Prague under German rule or under-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: This was, uh-- Prague was already under Soviet rule From-- from Czechoslovakia, again, my father decided not to stay, I think, again, because of presence not only of-- it must have been the Soviets. We wound up in, uh-- somehow in West Germany, that border. And it's at that point that we were picked up by American military personnel, who took everyone, I believe, to a central disbursement camp, which was outside of Munich. 

It was called Foehrenwald. It was the largest of the displaced persons camps, but I was-- or a dispersal camp, rather than permanent residence camp. We moved there for some time until arrangements were made by the American military personnel. And we were sent to a town in Bavaria, uh, with a displaced persons camp called Ulm. Ulm was the name of the town. It happens to be the birthplace of Albert Einstein. It's in Bavaria. It's right under one of the main defense lines of Nazi Germany that was broken through-- the Siegfried Line, I think it was called. And there we stayed from '45-- from 1945 in that camp until 1949. 

INTERVIEWER: Four years? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that, uh, experience? Four years in a displaced persons camp. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Oh, yes. That was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were young. You were not a child? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I was, uh-- I was-- when I got to the camp, I was 10 years old. And so the-- the memory is much fresher, and details are-- are clearer. Life in camp was pretty much all right. It was run by the American military authorities, MPs, in the beginning until things got organized. And there was even an internal sort of police system by the camp inmates-- guards at the gates. 

It was a camp that was, um-- how do you call it? Blocked off. There were-- there was barbed wire, it was not a prison camp, so you could go in and out if you worked in the city, but you stayed in this camp. There were barracks. The barracks were former German military barracks. 

The Americans provided immense amounts of food-- everything you ever wanted to have. And the Jews-- this was a camp, again, exclusively Jewish in the-- in the town. There were other non-Jewish camps-- DP camps. Ukrainian camp, for example. The Jews provided the rest of the life and schooling, formal organized education, where I went to study math and arithmetic, reading, writing, and the traditional study of the Chumash. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there efforts to get out? To go someplace? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: There were always efforts to get out, and the efforts were-- were primarily dual-- those who had made decisions, families who talked, and decided, and wanted to emigrate to the United States, and those who, by the end of their stay in that camp, were making plans to stay-- to go to Palestine and Israel. Many went from the camps, for example, to Cyprus. They went up to Cyprus, and from Cyprus eventually with the establishment of the state of Israel to Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the atmosphere in the camps of people who-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Interesting. There were probably more political parties within the camp-- at least our camp, than there are in, uh, Israel now. Every known denomination of-- of-- and political persuasion-- persuasion-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were these people who-- who had been-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: All survivors. 

INTERVIEWER: All survivors. Not-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Both of the Russian and the Nazi camps. Not only-- exclusively. We had Russian survivors of the Russian labor camps, but survivors of the concentration camps-- by mostly survivors of the concentration camps who were already in Germany as the camps were being liberated, I imagine, by the Americans and British 

So it was lively. Even newspapers were printed. Uh, journals were run. People worked at all kinds of things. Some speculated on the black market. Many speculated on the black market. It was the-- probably the major activity. I don't know that-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: People were free to leave. Good. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: People were free to come and go in the camps. Although there was some check, but it was not at all rigid. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they stay? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: First, the, uh-- it took time to get papers to find-- the first year-- the first months were for establishing contacts. If you had family in the United States, finding them, finding addresses, getting papers. Uh, those who had not intended to go to the United States, but were waiting for Pales-- for Palestine and Israel, it was a different-- it was difficult to get to Palestine. And there was the-- they were facing and already beginning to hear what life was like in the other displacement camps. For example, the tent camps of Cyprus were worse than these camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you remember the Peel Commission, or any of those commissions? Anglo American Committee? The Morrison-Grady Commission people coming to-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I remember visits. Commissions-- uh, I don't know there which exact commissions. I remember visits, uh, very distinctly. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: I guess Peel was long before 

ROBERT SHULKIN: A boy-- a boy's life, uh, and young-- young people's life was-- was busy in those camps. You were-- you were going to school. You were exploring. Uh, you were disobeying your parents and sneaking out of camp to go to quote unquote, "town," Ulm. It's an interesting town to explore. 

Uh, you also engaged in-- in your own brand of politics. All boys and girls immediately aligned themselves with various groups. I was in a group called Betar, which, uh, I think is not big in government version of sorts. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any cultural activities, such as group-- a group coming from America to entertain or anything? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No, I remember groups coming to entertain. I remember seeing theater, but the theater came-- I-- I know the theater, as a matter of fact, simply because it was-- friends of ours were connected. It was called MIT, not to be confused with the place across the river, but the Munchener Yiddischer Theater, the Munich Yiddish Stage Theater, which est-- got established very early in the-- after the war in Munich. And they had traveling groups putting on primarily Yiddish plays. There were also-- they also made films-- feature length films, and I saw those. 

I know, too, that I remember seeing-- one was about the, uh, survivors. I don't know if anybody in this country knows of the existence of such films. It was called The Long Journey. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the atmosphere-- not just the organization of the camp, but what was the atmosphere of the people, who-- after all, they had survived the Holocaust, and now they're still in a camp for four years? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: The atmosphere? It was-- it was good, strangely enough. It was we're getting back to health. We're going to get out of here. We're searching, those who were intending. Many simply intended to stay. They thought they were going to stay. You'd be surprised how resilient the human personality is-- to stay in Germany and, uh, make lives, or, uh, many went to South America. 

But the plans that-- the feeling was that this is really transient. So they'll take one year-- one-- didn't expect it to be four years. It's nothing one knew about. It all depended how quickly you were able to arrange exits. You had to have first-- as I remember-- I may be wrong on this-- but I remember that you had to have proof that you were in Germany in 1945 in order to get-- to then apply for papers with relatives in the United States to get out of there. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't remember people being angry or bitter? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I think I remember being-- people being angry and bitter over that issue. There was a ruling. I think it was the high commissioner or somebody's ruling that you had to be in Germany in '45, which would mean that only those people who were in German territory concentration camps would be able to leave. Those people, let's say, who got out of Russia-- and some people got out of Russia in '46 and '47-- could not get permission to leave these camps. So I remember a great deal of frustration and anger over of the-- over the red tape. 

And there was always red tape. There was also American red tape. I know, for example, our family was held up at one point because of my stupidity. I was interviewed after we had gotten approval to leave. We had gotten testimony that we were there in '45. We had gotten assurances from our relatives in the States that there was a job and a-- an apartment waiting for us if we got here-- that, in other words, there was support. 

There were a series of interviews which one had to experience, and I remember being interviewed-- I was already 14 at the time-- by an American Army or mil-- some kind of military personnel. I'm guessing there was a division called CID of the Army-- criminal investigation division. And I know one question that I answered held us back for-- and we missed one boat-- one ship. And the question was, did I know Stalin? 

This was-- I'm now talking 1949, so you can imagine. And my answer to that was yes. My English was not great. Yes, meaning I knew who he was-- and got held back because I had to be investigated. So you see, it was tough. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, the-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: But eventually we made it out through Bremen and a US Navy transport. 

INTERVIEWER: The, um, issue of going to Palestine when, after all, there was British being obstacles in that process-- what was the talk about that? What was the-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Well, it was-- it was the vision, really. The camps were-- were divided. At least, this-- this camp that I can testify is. 

INTERVIEWER: And the name of the camp? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Those-- 

INTERVIEWER: The name of it was? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: It was Ulm-- Neu-Ulm, actually. 

INTERVIEWER: The name. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Neu-Ulm-- DP Neu-Ulm. Um, those Zionists and pro-Zionists who believed in-- in the dream of the establishment of a Zionist and Jewish state, felt that it did not matter that there were obstacles. They knew they would have to fight physically. 

I can tell you now, as a matter of fact, that there was military training of young kids in this camp clandestinely under the eyes-- but probably under the winking eyes of the American MPs. I was trained to-- to fire a rifle-- American military rifle. I was even trained to fire a machine gun. And I was trained in hand-to-hand combat. I was 14. I was Zionist. My father was for a long time very Zionist. 

On the other hand, there were those who felt that the war was enough, that they now wanted some kind of a haven where there never would have to be a need to fight, a need to struggle, and there would be a chance. There was America, South America, Europe. Many went to France, Belgium. Some stayed in Germany. Some-- I know as late as mid '50s-- stayed in German, but finally got out, or left voluntarily. 

Many people made fortunes there during this time, I hasten to add. I know it's a subject that's probably taboo, but the black market made instant millionaires. There was a great deal of black marketeering I consciously saw between the American military and DP people, displaced persons. People made fortunes and brought those fortunes with them, but not everybody. 

My father came with $14 to East Boston and a-- and a toothache. The $14 went on the extraction immediately. So-- but many made a great deal of money and saw brilliant chances. The speculation went on in everything, not only the standard joke of chocolates and American nylons, but whole-- sort of almost rustler type op-- operation that you see in cowboys and Indian films where whole-- what do you call? Whole flocks of cows, whole bunches of beef were rustled and sold. That's were money was. 

There was a great deal of speculation in gold, and silver, and jewelry. And but the most ready item of speculation was the dollar itself. It was the object of trade and speculation. So life was-- was-- was varied. It was mixed. It was-- it was lively. Those were great cultural activities. 

I-- because my father always stressed reading, and literature, and history was an avid read-- reader, and there was-- there were new journals in-- in Yiddish. I wrote primarily in Yiddish-- only in Yiddish, as a matter of fact. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you living in barracks? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Yes. They were-- they were-- they were stone-like barracks. There were five floors in each of these barracks. Usually the barracks were two families to a room-- a large room, but the-- our room was two families. There were four people in-- in my family. My mother had given birth to a sister-- my sister, 1944, while still in the Russian village. And I saw her being born. That's one of-- one of my earliest memories. Uh, so two families in this room fairly comfortably. A curtain dividing us. 

And, uh, so there was a great deal of printing, and publishing, and plays, and movies, and sports organizations. And life after the establishment in '48 of the state of Israel was particularly exciting, especially for youngsters, teenagers, who saw this-- this brilliant bright hope. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you not want to go there then? 

ROBERT SHULKIN: It's not I. 

INTERVIEWER: Or your parents. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I think my parents' decision was-- I think my father at that point decided this was it. He had seen enough wars. He had traveled enough. He had walked enough through Europe, and he didn't want to do it again. And he simply-- it was a late decision. As late as '48, our intention was still to go to Israel. And then somehow I think-- and even my mother more so. She was already very sickly. She was to die fairly soon after her arrival in the United States at the age of 51. 

So it was a conscious decision, but a very late one. I was all set. I was ready to go. I had learned a great deal of Hebrew. I would-- as I said, learned all kinds of things in preparation for the new adventure, but I was 14. The disappointment was there, I'm sure, but at that age, disappointments go away as soon as you got on board a Navy transport and explored the exciting world therein. 

INTERVIEWER: We only have about a minute or two. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: OK, sure. 

INTERVIEWER: And I was just wondering what this whole experience has-- how it has shaped you. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: I-- I think there can be no doubt that it-- it has shaped me. It has shaped in my-- shaped me in my commitment to-- in a sense, to be the same Jew my father is-- essentially a secularist, but very much concerned with what to me means being Jewish, being knowledgeable about the totality of what it is to be Jewish, and what Jewish culture and history has taught us, to bring up my children the same way. It has, uh, I think, uh, probably directly influenced my-- for example, my stay in Russia. Influenced directly my choice of profession. There was no doubt about that connection. It was rather easy because I learned Russian when I was very young, and it came very easily. 

INTERVIEWER: And you don't-- apparently you don't house bitterness for Russian culture, because your Russian language-- 

ROBERT SHULKIN: Quite the contrary. Not Russian culture. Not at all. They-- I-- I hold nothing against Tolstoy. I hold everything against Stalin. It was not Tolstoy or Chekhov who imprisoned me. 

INTERVIEWER: Czarist Russia wasn't so great for Jews either. 

ROBERT SHULKIN: No, I was born, uh, uh-- not only not great, it was-- it was horrible. I have no love for the authority, but I cannot not love the culture. I cannot hate the people in the village of Pakistan, who, for all those years, cared for us and tended us, but I am not a lover of Russia-- Russian government. Again, that has shaped me in my concern with-- for Soviet emigres. Most recently in my concern with helping them in a very direct way-- in helping the children go to the universities here, in which I am actively engaged. 

I don't ever want to forget this experience, nor do I-- nor do I divorce the exp-- my experience, which was relatively smooth and survivable, nor do I divorce it from the experience of the Nazi concentration camps, and the Holocaust survivors, and my own concern for the need for the memory of that thing to exist forever. So I am-- at least when it comes to that issue-- not terribly sophisticated, for example. I do not believe that it is impossible to write about the Holocaust because it was so terrible, and one cannot talk about it it was so horrific. 

I feel very strongly that we must talk. We must remember. We must write. There was a-- I think a sixth book of the Pentateuch that must be added. It is the experience for what we call the Holocaust. I'm sure that is whatever I am, for better or for worse. The totality of the experience has made me so. Um, that is it. 

