[TEST PATTERN BEEPING] CREW: Hold it, please. 

CREW: Um-hm. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. You were in the middle of a story. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. I was telling you about Kristallnacht or the day after, right. Um, well, anyway, this-- that's right. Uh, my father was not there. As I say, he was in hiding. What he essentially was doing and did-- would continue to do for a week was to stay under wraps in that man's apartment, sleeping on the living room couch. And we'd be in touch by phone. 

Um, this-- this employee, this friend, ?Damian Busser?, who was then-- how old would he have been-- probably just under 30, I would say. Somebody who would, as I say, got himself into a lot of trouble off and on. Uh, is an interesting mixture of, uh, being defiant and shrewd. So he was not simply foolhardy. Anyway, simply as a matter of course did this. 

Now I don't remember now whether he came to get him or whether my father met him, uh, on how that detail, I do not know. But anyway, when it became quite clear after about a week that there would be no further-- or what seemed to have-- anyway, seemed clear that there would be no further raids, my father came back home. 

Now on that day, November 9-- I always say November 9, although it may have been November 10, actually, because it was at night. Well, either one of them, anyway. I think it was the 9th. 

Um, on that day in the afternoon we had a kind of family, a very shrunk family, council again. My uncle and aunt lived, let's say, two blocks from where we lived. And their store was another block from where they lived. And present were my younger cousin, my mother, and I, my aunt, and my uncle. My uncle was always the less energetic and driving of-- in that family, which was just completely shattered by what had happened. He was standing there-- sitting there crying, just unable to handle anything at all. 

Um, and, uh, one thing I remember doing was to walk over to look at their store, look at the damage. It was rather curious to think that one would want to do that, you know, or that one wouldn't be too scared to do that. But I was either too brave or too numb, and I would think I was really rather numb at that-- but anyway, I wanted to see it. 

So I went over there, and it was a really-- you know, a shambles, that remains very hard to describe. Um, they had the store, which was essentially ladies', um, stockings, underwear, buttons, threads. And people would come in-- notions. You know, people would come in for various purchases. And I remember sort of, you know, matching silk to a-- going out in the daylight and looking and all that. 

And what had happened was that, not only had the window been smashed, but everything had been simply turned over. And you can imagine, if you can, a whole, you know, sort of shelf full, wall full of buttons all being turned over. Uh, it was really quite something. It was a piece of, you know, vandalism that was really quite exemplary. 

Uh, and, um, I suppose what else we did was to listen to the radio. One would tend to do that. We would listen to [GERMAN], which had German news, and there was a certain amount. And-- and beyond that, I suppose, there was nothing more than a kind of attempt to, um, to get out, to get clear. 

Um, and then, of course, came the sequence of events, the, uh, imposition of the fines. The-- well, first, the death of von Rath in Paris, uh, on-- on which all this hinged. And then came the imposition of these huge fines and, uh, uh, the withdrawal of all the passports and so forth and so on. 

Um, so this meant that, if you wanted to leave now, you had to fulfill certain requirements. Uh, you had to turn in your family silver, precious jewelry, gold. Uh, you had to show-- give evidence that you had paid your part of that whatever that 2-billion-mark fine or whatever it was, uh, and so forth. So that eventually when the time came for us to-- to leave-- and for that one needed one's passport back, uh, one would have to go to about 20 different little counters. All this was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What billion-mark fine? What are you talking about? 

SUBJECT: I don't-- I don't think that's even the right amount. I think it was more. Uh, the-- the Kristallnacht was ostensibly triggered, as you know, by the attack on the counselor at the-- at the Paris Embassy, a man named von Rath, by a Polish emigre named Grynszpan. And this was supposed to be kind of a popular outburst of indignation. And when he died, uh, von Rath died week or 10 days later, the government simply imposed some enormous penalties, which were collective. 

And there was this-- I forget how many billion marks-- a fine, which was to be pro-rated. Uh, there was to be the turning in, as I said, of your silver and your precious jewelry, your gold, family, uh, jewelry, wedding rings, so forth, uh, and so forth. 

And-- and there was no way out un-- to get a passport. And you could get a passport only after you had, um, your, um, uh, all these things taken care of. And, uh, it was at that point that we-- you know, by December we discovered we couldn't get to England-- that, uh, our family in this country then began to look very seriously to-- for other places. Um, this very nice banker, someone who I mentioned earlier, came back about-- after so many of them did, after four or five weeks in a camp, um, rather shattered, um, by it. We almost-- of senile. 

And I remember meeting them. And they said they were going to go to Shanghai. That was one place to go. Uh, and meanwhile they were exploring here, where to-- you know, what we might get in. And, uh, we then in the spring got-- bought, essentially, quasi legally or illegally, maybe, the permission to, you know, go to Cuba. 

And, uh, the rest of the time, between November and April, was essentially spent, you know, trying to wait it out, uh, trying to if possible get out earlier and so on. And, uh, at this point my father, who had been slow about making these arrangements, decided to become very daring. Uh, I never discussed it with him. I never, uh, questioned what he did. I never wondered why and so on. 

But he did something that might have cost him his life, as a matter of fact. Um, you know, you've heard-- must have heard lots of such stories. Um, the-- the way in which this was done was this. Um, the regime insisted that, first, all the requirements had to be met. And one of the requirements was, for example, that all your silver and so forth had to be handed in. 

Now through some incredible slip-up in the German postal system-- and what happened, also, there was a tremendous crush, as you can imagine, as thousands of people tried, since they were trying to get out, tried to do this. And these delivery places were overwhelmed. 

So they said you can send it in, and a postal receipt will be enough. But these postal receipts were, for some stupid way, not clued to what was in the package. So my father, along with his friend [? Damian? [? Busser, ?] was in all these things, every one-- I mean, he, through the winter, played all these games for us. Uh, went to the post office, having packed a package full of junk-- I don't remember, cardboard, some heavy things, you know, so it would weigh like something-- and sent it to the right place and insured it for a very high value. And they had the-- the receipt, and walked out. And the jewelry and the silverware [? Damian?] [? Busser ?] took. 

And as a matter of fact, the jewelry did not survive the war, but the, uh, um, the silver did. And after the war was over, he found my father or my father found him. I forget who-- how that worked. I don't know. But anyway, the silver is now in our house. And, um, so that was very typical. And that wasn't so dangerous. The dangerous thing came later. 

Um, one thing the Nazis specified was this. That the-- before you could come to the, uh, or go to that place where all your receipts were-- were to be acknowledged, you know, so that in the end upstairs you would collect your passport, you had to have passage, guaranteed passage. And that passage was arranged, um, by-- by one of the surviving Jewish organizations, which the Nazis were already beginning to use to do administrative detail. 

And so my father-- and-- and the way in which this was done was that you went there and you got a sort of piece of paper, sort of looked like a guarantee or like buying a bond, you know, where you write things in with dates and so forth. And, uh, there was a date and that would say, let's say, you know, April 15, 1939. This meant that by that time you had passage guaranteed. And then you could, a month before then, go to this Nazi office and get all your stuff done. 

So my father got passage through this friend of his in Hamburg who was a sports journalist through whom we'd gotten these tickets before and who was helping out my father. We got passage, he got passage for several people, on the Saint Louis to go to Havana. And, uh, this was, of course, scheduled to sail on May 16, 17, or about that. Maybe a-- no, a little bit later. So it was a faster ship, more like May 20. 

And my father decided that this wasn't good enough. Don't ask me why [CHUCKLES] because I don't know. Uh, maybe decided that the thing-- only thing to do was to get out. And so he gambled in the following way. He gambled, first, that his friend in Hamburg would be able to find him earlier passage, which was by no means a sure thing. Although this man, being a very prominent sports journalist, had a lot of connections and-- with [? [GERMAN]. ?] 

And the other thing was he forged the document by erasing-- I still remember using his eraser, you know, for that-- "May" and writing in "April" and hoping that nobody would notice. And, uh, you know, this-- this was a very risky affair. Well, nobody did notice. And the result was that in March we went to this place, the, uh, it was in the Fasanenstrasse. It was a former Jewish, uh, community center or something, which they'd taken over. 

And there we were treated in the usual way, yelled at and so forth and so on. And we sort of made our progress from, if you like, if you could imagine sort of a huge ballroom with desk after desk after desk after desk, receipts showing that your jewelry was gone, receipts showing that your silverware was in the government's hands, receipts showing that you'd paid your part of the fine, that you had your passage. All these things. 

Now to make things even more remarkable, my father, who had suffered for some years, uh, rather severely of kidney stones, which was a very painful disease, uh, and with on-- the only medicine that would help was morphine-- had gotten himself an attack that day, right in the middle of it all. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you with him? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, my mother, my father, and I, three of us. And, uh, fortunately it came sort of at the end of the morning, and the passport was going to be ready for us in the afternoon. So we grabbed him and put him in a cab. And I mean, we all went in the cab. Went home, where my mother, who fortunately had learned to do this, gave him a couple of shots of morphine, which had on my father always the same effect. He was-- fortunately he was never-- never became addicted because he was hostile. He disliked morphine. 

He became slightly sick to his stomach and very sleepy. [CHUCKLES] And there's nothing very funny about this, but I-- I still remember it was comical. Sitting in the passport office with the-- the guy sitting there, you know, filling out details, my father between us and going to sleep all the time. We kept poking him. 

Anyway, we got our passport and went home. Uh, this was in March. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- can you describe that scene in the ballroom? I mean, you're a young boy. I would imagine the terror of-- of seeing these uniformed people, uh, accepting your papers or not accepting your papers. Or being gruff, or maybe they weren't. I-- I-- this is-- 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, the only thing I remember of somebody really sort of, uh, giving a kind of, um, imitation of the Great Dictator, as it were, was the man who sat in an anteroom before we were all let in. What's happened-- because lots of people there. 

And there was a kind of-- what you call-- a hall, let's say. And the hall was actually jammed with people. And then there was one wide door. And behind that door-- opened-- behind that door there was a single, solitary man at a desk. And his job was to funnel people through past him to these various counters. 

And when, because of the tremendous crush, a couple people would intrude on what he considered to be his space, he would get up and yell. Um, I hate to tell you this, but I cannot tell you how I felt. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it orderly? 

SUBJECT: It was pretty orderly. It was very crowded. Um, I don't think there was a great deal of, um, uh, of the same kind of activity, of yelling, and so on. I think it was very distant and derisive, that kind of thing. 

Um, I think that the thing that-- that was probably at work would be a kind of, you know, first of all, being so underground emotionally. I mean, sort of just-- you learned, of course, especially by '37, '38 this became very important to be not very, you know, expressive, obviously, you know. You, um, you know, uh, it was best not to-- not to do too much, uh, not to expose yourself too much. 

And I think in a certain sense it helped. The point there was, after all, just to get through this goddamn thing, you know, and get your passport, and-- and go. And the people who went there, after all, also, you have to remember, felt rather privileged because they were there only because everything was more or less in order. I mean, I don't know whether people were sent away because this or that didn't work. 

But, uh, essentially, I think people went there because they had a place to go. You had to be accepted somewhere. That was very important. You had to have passage. And you had to have all your chores done, all this paying out, all these receipts for everything. 

So the people who were there were really within, you know, a very short time of freedom. And, um, that was very important, I think, in making one feel that one wasn't going to slip at that point, you know. And I think-- I don't remember any particular-- it's about what I'll tell you. My one memory of that day-- and it must have been important to me because I remember it-- it was how well I slept that night. 

I remember waking up the next morning, sort of vaguely wondering. I hadn't even dreamt about anything. I mean, I really had seen the-- you know, I'm describing this rather coolly to you, but I was really pretty fearful mess there. That-- that city was really incredible. Because a lot of the stores were still owned by Jews in late '38. 

My father, incidentally, was already unemployed by November '38. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Peltz had to dismiss him or relinquish his partnership? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he was let go. He was thrown out without a penny, which was very, very-- what had happened, what then happened was that-- that my father began to, uh, live off what little savings we had. And we had a lot of good stamps. My father was a great stamp collector. And in his prosperity, the previous five or six years had bought a lot of valuable stamps, some of which he sold. And the furniture, I remember was sold-- well, that was sold-- sold before, shortly before he went, I guess. 

But anyway, the, um, that was just essentially getting through. And then waiting for news whether we could go somewhere and when we could go. And then the Havana thing must have been worked out. I forget all the details. Must have been worked out, say, by January or so. At that point my father could then make, uh, efforts to get passage, because afterward we had to go to some particular place. 

Uh, and this ship called the, uh, what was it called? The Iberia, I guess. Was a Hamburg America Line. Thing went to Havana. It was a German ship. Incidentally, of course, is another thing. For something like 17 days or something, we were still on German soil before we got to Havana. It was still rather, uh, an odd feeling. 

And again, although it was not, you know, anything. I mean, I-- I make no comparisons with people who have been through much, much more. This was nothing. People-- I remember as being perfectly polite and perfectly all right. There was no-- 

INTERVIEWER: German sailors and German personnel-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --on board? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah, I-- I-- it was not a cattle car. It was not a-- I mean-- I mean, it was a ship, just going. I think people were very quiet. We certainly were very quiet. And we didn't-- there were no political jokes and you kept your mouth shut in that way, you know. And you didn't really, until you landed and got off the gangplank, uh, know that something had happened that was very different. 

INTERVIEWER: How were you received in Havana? 

SUBJECT: Oh, you know, there were-- there were some people, you know, at the boat, actually. And some people had already gotten there. There-- we had a rather extended family, and some people were already there. And, uh, I even forget, uh. 

But I do remember that there was a, you know, the difference of-- one was not out of Germany when one left Hamburg because it was a German ship. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in Havana when the Saint Louis came? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. I saw it. We went to the harbor. Needless to say, I mean, you know, we thought about that we were almost on it. Well, we-- we had passage on that goddamn ship, we really did. And, uh, we saw it sitting there. Um, that was pretty horrible. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you on the, uh, little ferries that were going out to greet the ship or-- 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. We walked out, looked at-- you know, weigh it, weight it, weighing things out. Um, uh, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in Havana? 

SUBJECT: Um, well, under two years, because in this sort of-- in its marvelous, bureaucratic way that, uh, the Americans had, they did allocate, you know, unused numbers to, um, um, consulates that had people. It was the fact that we were nine years out before our number was up. No longer counted because Europe, of course, was closed down by the war very, very soon. Uh, we were there in middle of May. Uh, by September, Europe was at war. Most European consulates were closing. The Americans didn't go to war, to be sure, till '41. 

But in any case, there was a, you know-- most of the world was closed down. And so what, uh, they did was to ship around numbers, blocks of numbers, 200, 300 at a time to Lima. You know, Lima was a favorite place. There were a number of people went to Peru. Uh, Havana must have had, I forget, when we were there maybe 6,000, maybe more. 

And they also all got over fairly rapidly because of that closing of-- of the European, uh, you know, European side. So our number was up, uh, on one of those big lists in, uh, January '41. 

And my mother, who was suffering very badly from TB and was in a sanitarium, didn't go immediately. But she went four months later. Actually, my fa-- my father-- my father waited for her, and I went by myself and joined relatives who had already been there, uh, a year before. These were my uncle and my aunt from Berlin. They-- they were already in Atlanta, actually, and-- where they had been set up in a little store, tiny little store. 

And, uh, so I got there. That, in a sense, is the end of the German side of it. 

INTERVIEWER: [SIGHS] 

SUBJECT: Uh, I mean, obviously, there are lots of other things to tell you, but, I mean, essentially, this is the-- the sequence. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. What happened, uh, in terms of your, uh, integration into the United States? Was-- were there any significant, uh, happenings, or was it reasonably smooth? Um-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. Well, um, the key point about that was the accident of my mother's tuberculosis. Uh, in the first place she was-- she was let through by the consular doctor in Havana, who either was deaf [CHUCKLES] or nice, you know. We never asked, you can imagine. But I am-- understand that TB you can hear, you know, practically without a stethoscope. 

And she was just as active as could be. I mean, she was just as, you know, sick as you could imagine. She was just-- they just pumped her up full of, uh, whatever they had in those days, vitamins or something. And, uh, and, you know, sent her to the consul. The consul-- the consular doctor said she was all right. She was not all right. I mean, under all regulations she shouldn't have been allowed in, even though she had family and all that. But anyway, so. 

On the other hand, she was really, really sick. So she went directly to a sanitarium, the National Jewish hospital in Denver. And since our relatives were in, uh, this little Florida town or in Atlanta, and we'd-- well, it would have been nice to live with them. But on the other hand there she was, so we decided we'd go to Denver with her. And I got started there. 

I worked in more jobs than I can care to remember, very menial tasks. I began at $12 a week after all. Uh, 16 only because the minimum wage went up to $0.40 an hour, so I got for $16 a week. I was a shipping clerk. I did all-- worked in an office. All kinds of things. 

And, uh, but the fact that I went to Denver gave me a-- a rather different slant on the United States than many overwhelming bulk of the refugees who either landed in San Francisco, I guess, or would go directly to Los Angeles. Went to these major centers like Cleveland or Chicago. And, of course, the ones who came to New York where after so many remain. 

You know how much the immigration-- I mean, the-- the Jewish organizations wanted Jews to move out of New York, to scatter across the country. And they had some success with that. But we simply went directly to Denver, where I spent five years. Worked for two years and went to college for three years. Uh, living very, you know, poorly at home. 

And that was very good, Denver, very good for me. Uh, I felt at home in the place very, very soon. And, um, have ever since. I mean, its-- 

INTERVIEWER: Looking back at things from your perspective now as a-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-huh. 

INTERVIEWER: --esteemed professor of history, um, how would you assess what happened to you and what happened to others in-- in Germany? 

SUBJECT: Uh, that question's too big. 

INTERVIEWER: The question alway-- all right. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, break it down. 

INTERVIEWER: The question always comes up that it-- it's impossible to believe that it happened, even to those that it happened to. They say-- 

SUBJECT: Mm. 

INTERVIEWER: --it-- they cannot to this day accept that the German society, uh, was subverted to that degree. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. Well, I would give-- that would be a first point. Well, I think, um, I think that's fair enough, you know. Uh, and I think, incidentally, that this fantastic side of it, the, uh, the, um, of which, incidentally, the Nuremberg Laws was no way a-- a part. I mean, there's something really bizarre about this legislation, you know. Rather different from the purely punitive legislation you got in '38, uh, because it seemed almost funny, and it was taken as such by some-- some people. 

Was the, uh-- it's the fantastic nature of it all, uh, even before the, uh, extermination camps, they, of course, more than-- than everything else. But even before then, uh, the carrying out of a, uh, uh, say, from '41 of-- the rounding up of people and so on. I mean, or even before. This kind of mass, organized, very rather well-planned, sort of barbaric business of Kristallnacht itself, you see, which-- which was, uh, uh, very carefully worked out, um. 

So I think it's true that-- that it seems, um, you know, one thing one has to say about it is that, even though it happened, it's a very improbable set of events to have happened. Um, and the preoccupation with it is, you know, very understandable because of that reason. 

But it's one-- it is also a reason why I, for example, have never thought it is right to argue with people about-- I'm going to tell people what I think or how I come to think what I think-- but to argue in any great length about, uh, what would be the correct policy about Germany or-- or whatever. 

One can argue about matters of fact-- who was involved, who was not, who played ball, who did not-- these are matters of fact which-- about which one can give-- give information. But if somebody were to say, uh, as some people do, I wouldn't ride a German car or I wouldn't, uh, visit Germany or whatever else, uh, I would say, well, I can understand why and this is your position. Happens not to be my position, but it's yours and, uh, I-- I would not say it's dead wrong or something like that. 

I think the idea of a single right policy towards or response to, is I guess the right word, uh, strikes me as, for that reason, quite ungettable act. I-- I do not believe in being dogmatic about it. Um, and that-- that's one thing I would say, uh, um, precisely because the event is so, uh, you know, largely incredible although real, or set of events real enough. Um, that how people wrestle with it and what-- what they do about it, you know, with themselves, um, is, um, very varied. 

I mean, I, um, [CHUCKLES] I remember my first response was one of sheer total rejection. I wouldn't read German. I would not do papers when I went to college that had to do with German scholarship. Uh, and so forth. I mean, very, very simple. Um, and I remember in the early 1950s-- I guess it was even bef-- must have been around 1950. 

My teacher at, uh, Columbia, Franz Neumann, who was a-- one of the refugees who had left early because as a lawyer he'd been thrown out very early. And he was politically very much in trouble. Uh, he was one of the people who founded the Free University in Berlin. Then in what is now East Berlin, Humboldt University. 

And I remember once having lunch with him. I was beginning-- just beginning to teach and he was, uh-- and we got to a very curious standoff. I said to him, how can you be so sentimental to do this? Go back, help them set this up? And he said, well, it's not that I want to call names, but I don't think I'm the one who's sentimental. I think you are sentimental, you know. And I-- I respected him a great deal. 

And that rather short conversation left kind of a mark because I wondered, well, maybe what I was thinking was not-- maybe not wrong but maybe not the only position to take about how to deal with Germany, you know. And, uh, so Franz Neumann wanted to go back and, uh, start a free democratic university in that country, maybe he should do that. 

And that attitude, I think-- and then I changed very considerably over the-- over the years myself. And, uh, so that I now no longer think one has a-- the right attitude that can be peeled out and say, there it is. Everybody ought to believe this. I don't believe that. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you changed your name when you came here. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: But you never explained why. 

SUBJECT: Well, actually the name was changed by my cousin, the one who came over first. And he had two very simple reasons. One was kind of attempt to distance himself entirely from all German, uh, names, you know, background, memories of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Is it a translation, your current name? 

SUBJECT: Froehliche Gay, yeah. Froehliche is hard to pronounce, impossible to spell. That's the way our name was spelled was with an umlaut and with an H. The umlaut isn't on the typewriter. Nobody can do it. So it was practically not very sensible. And secondly, you know, I could have said "Fro-lick" or whatever else, something like that, as a lot of Germans did, we discovered later. It's not a Jewish name. It's a very neutral name. It's, uh, fair-- it's not a fairly widespread name in Germany, actually. 

And, um, so one was the kind of anti-German feeling that he had. And the other was the feeling of the practical feeling that he could-- nobody could ever remember his name was spelled or pronounce it, and he thought he wanted... So he picked that name. 

And when we came over in '41, we understood that you can do this legally and free when you become a citizen. And we put in for our citizenship as soon as we came in '41, so it would have been '46. But my father, got very char-- characteristic of him that sometimes he would feel certain things should be done now. He decided he would go to court and do it leg-- which was legal. Cost a little bit of money. Just do it that way so we could legally change our name in '43, and which what-- which is what we did for the same reasons. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you, uh, have any concerns, uh, that, uh, what happened in Germany, bizarre as it may seem in retrospect, unanticipated, uh, could become precedent? I mean, you're a historian. Now something has been done. And therefore, that kind of-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --atrocity. 

SUBJECT: Um, well, look. Um, to that I can only give you a very undogmatic answer too, which is, uh, of course it can. It happened once. It therefore could happen again. But I think that, uh, the likelihood of it is extremely small. And, uh, I think that, um, one has to-- although this is something that a lot of Jews in America don't think or like to think. And, uh, I've been present, you've been present at such debates. 

Um, I think that what happened was a collection of things, all of which went in one way, as it were. That is to say, how should I put it? It's like, you know, trying to run through a maze where there are various ways in. And everything has to work right before you can get there. And it seems to me that everything happened there in the same way. 

So, for example, individual elements were, after all, available in other countries. Anti-Semitism, nothing new. Uh, available elsewhere as an ingredient. Racism of a very peculiar pseudobiological kind. Familiar notion all over the place. Uh, desperate, uh, flight from middle class parties at a time of depression exists elsewhere. And so forth, you know. 

Uh, the-- it seems to me, as a matter of fact, although this is, you know-- if you talk to a German historian, which I'm really not, uh, and I do make the distinction I've worked on German materials and so on. But if you talk to German historians, the historians of Germany who try to think about this, uh, I don't-- they will not agree on this subject. 

There is, in fact, a very large debate in Germany that's been going on for 30 years or more now, which might be put somewhat as follows. There-- there are at least three groups in this. One, the old timers, people who-- the apologists who say, well, of course we don't like Nazism and so on. But it was not a typical German thing at all. Uh, it was part of modernization, the modern world, and just happened to hit us. But, uh, it could as well easily have happened elsewhere. 

The second school would be the one to argue-- and that's really the one that's now most powerful in German academic world-- is that Nazism was a kind of more or less logical outgrowth of the way in which Germany ran all the way from Bismarck. I mean, people are no longer maybe so keen on saying from Luther to Hitler or that's a title of a book once published in this country from now 30 years ago, I guess. Not by a German, by an American political scientist, who argued that certain attitudes which led to Hitler were already, uh, sort of being popularized by Luther, passivity and so forth and so on. 

That, I think, has pretty well lost ground, but there is the second school, which will say, well, um, the way in which Bismarck set things up and Wilhelm II set things up, Nazism is kind of like a-- more as a logical fifth act of a drama, which this was acts 1, 2, and 3 or something like that. 

And the third school would argue that the elements were, of course, there and the ingredients were there, but that at the same time it was not really until almost the day of the taking over of power, the 30th of January, '33-- '33 that a Hitler regime was inevitable. Now when you-- if you ask the third group, which I find most congenial which I think is correct to the extent that I can see this, all right, when do you think the Weimar Republic was mortally wounded so that something other would have to come, something authoritarian at least? 

Then the answers diverge. People give different answers. '32, the actions of 1930, whatever. They're there. One could go back maybe to the September elections of 1930, where the Nazis did extremely well and when Brüning began to govern sort of by decree. Or you can say, well, it was none of the machinations of the fall of '32, when people got to Hindenburg and-- and, uh, Hitler stood pat on what he wanted. Then he-- then he eventually got it. It-- it doesn't matter perhaps too much. 

But in any case, um, my feeling is that, um, the-- it would be fatuous to say, impossible, you know, because obviously nothing is impossible in the first place. And this is shown to be not impossible in the second place. But I do not believe that it-- the likelihood is, uh, uh, very, very great. I don't know what-- what percentage to put on it, but I-- it is not something that I think is, um, either a clear and present danger or even a cloud on the horizon or anything-- anything of that sort. 

It seems to me that it was a-- a joining together of a great many things all working in one direction, which, um, which made this happen. You know, one other-- uh, it's a long answer. Let me offer you one other point. 

On April 1, 1933, the Nazis ran a boycott of Jewish stores. I vaguely remember that now. I was about, you know, not-- not yet 10. I think I remember some Brown Shirts standing in front of Jewish stores with signs saying don't buy here, something like that. I think it was a bad failure all across the country, essentially. 

Berlin, and we heard later that it didn't work. People didn't want to be bothered. They went into their stores and bought what they bought things the day before. And I myself would argue that the-- the way in which the Nazi policy towards the Jews went, while it wasn't wholly improvised was by no means a very clear timetable, and that that timetable was set later, and that Germans, many Germans in a way were bludgeoned into compliance. Or many just simply waited out until by '38. 

I mean, what-- I mean, I don't know what would somebody have done who had said I, you know, don't want to participate in Kristallnacht or something. What would you have done? Um, I mean, by that time, you know, since-- certainly since the end of June '34, after the great purge of his own party, the-- the terror machine was completely in place. There was no, uh, resistance at that point and very sporadic specific things like the famous attempt to kill Hitler and-- and the-- in Munich and the, uh, Bierstube there. 

Uh, so, uh, it is not the case, you know, that-- that Germany was turned around, Hitler was elected. Uh, uh, the March elections gave Hitler-- although at that point there was already a fair amount of intimidation. Um, his party was already outlawed. Even that election didn't do very well for him. So I-- I don't-- I would say one has to have a whole lot of things happening, and they have to all go in, as I say, one like a vector pushing all kinds of forces in one direction. And so I would say that's what I would answer that. 

INTERVIEWER: One, uh, thing that's very often been offered as a reason for it having happened in Germany, whereas this soil was receptive many other places, is that the German, uh, disposition-- orderliness, a willingness to take orders, willingness to work hard, perform, do as one is told-- was a special circumstance. Do you think so? Adding to this mix that you-- 

SUBJECT: A special circumstance. [EXHALES] Um, I, uh, I don't know. Um, I don't know. Uh, it-- it doesn't-- it doesn't seem to me to-- to help to explain very much at all, if anything. I'd have to think about this. Uh, one could after all argue that the, uh, uh-- you could-- you would say, all right. You could-- you could say that-- say that the army, uh, once it was forced to take a personal oath of loyalty to Hitler then found it very difficult or very, very few people in the army felt it possible to-- to resist, to reject this, uh. 

Um, I would-- no, I don't-- I don't see it. The thing I think is-- is that one has to keep in mind, I think, that it was not a free country. That I think is crucial. The vote for Hitler, um, in the-- well, the big vote for Hitler came in September 1930. This was the enormous influx of votes he got. 

He got, uh, a wide array of votes. This is rather curious. Uh, most of the middle class, middle of the road parties lost. The Catholics didn't lose. The communists didn't lose. The socialists didn't lose. But it was first voters who came in from school to unemployment who were excited by the rallies, possibly, or actuated by despair. Uh, it was very grim after all. Uh, this is no excuse, but it anyway seems to me to be possible to say, all right, there was the great influx of votes. 

But, um, I don't know. The orderliness part-- I think that if I were to feel particularly critical of any segment of German society, I would think of the intellectuals and the professoriate in particular, you know, was particularly weak. And, uh, if you ever talk to Geoffrey Hartman, ask him about his friend Heidegger sometime for me. 

You know, they-- they were-- they-- a lot of them were quite willing either to put themselves into the service immediately or for a while or for the whole time. Heidegger's really not for the whole time. Um, they, uh, they were extremely unimpressive. But, uh, no I don't see that. 

I mean, after all, one could also argue that, um, um, uh-- no, I don't know. Uh, what would a-- what would a commitment to the opposite-- independence, political jokes, or whatever else-- what good would it have done? Uh, I could tell you stories about our friend [? Damian?] [? Busser ?] and how he resisted, one-man little resistance there, which helped us enormously at the time and our friend, uh, Walter [INAUDIBLE] in Hamburg. 

Uh, but, uh, those were casual things or individual things. You know, when-- when, really, when my wife did a piece on the survivors in Berlin, uh, she did a very interesting study, which was unfortunately butchered by Horizon magazine, which published very, very badly. She talked, read a good deal, and talked to a number of the survivors. 

Now the story is roughly-- um, I'm subject to some slight correction, but it's roughly like this. That there were 5,000 Jews who surv-- who were hidden, not survived, who were hidden in Berlin after the deportation orders of late '41. Of these, something like between 1,100 and 1,400 survived. Some died of natural causes. Some committed suicide. Some were killed by the bombs. Um, and, you know, and the rest made it. 

Now for every-- every Jew hidden, you have to count on a support force of, what, five people, 10 people? People who keep their mouth shut and bring them food in the cellar or whatever. And, um, now you may say, well, that's only 50,000. It's not a lot. Whatever. 

But the point is, I think, that-- that the way in which this regime operated was to make it very tough to do anything. By 1943, the death penalty was in force, for example, and was carried out, as we know. And return, I've looked at this, and there's newspaper items about this for picking up Allied propaganda. You know, they-- they-- they-- spread millions and millions of leaflets. Also called white bombs, these canisters, they dropped them over Germany, saying-- saying surrender and what are you doing? The Nazis are killing you and so on. 

The death penalty was in force for people who were seen picking this stuff up. And so on. Uh, to harbor a Jew meant to be shot on sight. There was no-- there's no problem about this. So I think that you are dealing with a terroristic regime, which would seem to me to be capable of overcoming any set of habits. So I don't know where orderliness comes in. 

Um, although I may miss-- may have missed the point. But I don't know-- I don't see where it would come in, as I say. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, I won't persist in that. I did want to ask you, however, about the, uh, the, uh, expression that's been, uh, said so often that people didn't know. They-- the crematorium were burning. The smell was horrendous. People living on the outskirts didn't know, yet one has been told that the smell of burning flesh is unmistakable. 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, I really can't give you a very good answer on that. Um, some people knew. Um, [? Damian ?] [? Busser ?] says, for example, he found out. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw him later. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah, we are in very close touch. We-- we-- we are-- we see a great deal of each other. 

INTERVIEWER: He stayed in Berlin the whole time? 

SUBJECT: Uh, he stayed in Berlin the whole time. He managed to outwit the draft. Uh, he never served in the army. That's a long, interesting story. He just decided not to. He, uh, uh, he became an-- a mock invalid and did it very brilliantly. Uh, he was responsible for hiding somebody in Berlin. Um, and, um, yeah, and he stayed. 

And, um, we happened to-- what happened was my father and he were in touch. And my father died in '55. And my mother, not being a terribly good correspondent, simply let the thing lapse. In 1975, when my wife and I were in Berlin, I thought, wouldn't it be nice if I could run into him? I've not seen him, probably wouldn't recognize him. I didn't even know him terribly well. 

INTERVIEWER: How long-- 

SUBJECT: Which is very important. How long not seen him? He took us to the train, I guess, in April 1939. That's the last time I saw him. I don't remember, didn't remember. So, uh, I looked him up in the phone book and there was somebody by that name. So I wrote him a letter saying, are you by any chance the [? Damian ?] [? Busser? ?] turned out to be the [? Damian ?] [? Busser. ?] So we got together. 

And we have been-- we've been to their house-- they now have moved to-- they've retired. He's about 71 now. And he and his wife have retired. They now live near Hamburg. And we've visited them there. We've seen him in Berlin. They came to see us in Connecticut. The great American travelers, the two of them. They come over a great deal. 

And, um, you know, to listen to him, uh, as we have done. He's a very good storyteller, and he's a remarkable fellow. Um, he's one example of a very, you know, totally insignificant. Politically he was a kind of-- he played with communism when he was very young, and then he ended up simply saying he hated the regime. He would just do as little for it as he could and survive. He wanted to survive at the same time. 

And not serving was-- he said he didn't want to fire a shot in anger nor did he want to get killed on the Russian front. I mean, he had a, you know, very practical things. Uh, it's quite marvelous. I've learned a lot about my father from him, listening to him talk about how the two of them would, uh, go out on the town together. 

Well, anyway, um, I'm losing my-- the-- the point that you were-- that you're trying to make. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- I asked you whether people knew. 

SUBJECT: Yes. He said he knew in this way, that he was told-- he was in the police. That was the first-- his first refuge. Um, he never saw anything except the transportation. Of course, people disappearing. Um, but he, um, said that he ran into somebody who had been, as it were, in a kind of outer circle of one of these death camps. 

Now essentially, the death camps, of course, were not in Germany but elsewhere. Um, a camp like Dachau, where people were also killed in large numbers, uh, was much more accessible. And that they were-- that people-- and thousands of people knew about those camps seems to be very, very clear. Um, on the extermination camps the story is somewhat different. Uh, again, I cannot say how many knew, how many did not know. My guess would be that far many more did than didn't. Or than then said. 

Although, um, the-- the question, uh, has to be asked again, where? Are you talking about Germany? If you're talking about Germany, the statistics happened to be far better than they are in any other country of survival. There were something like, what, 550,000 people called Jews in Germany, uh, in '33. Add to that maybe 20,000, 30,000 more people like my parents who weren't officially counted but, uh, you had that. 

Of that, probably half, at least half, were saved. Uh, about 150,000 to this country, roughly, may take a few thousand. I think that's right. And 100,000 scattered, England, wherever, Latin America and so on. Uh, some were saved in Germany. Not a lot, of course. The figures are very small, a few thousand. Some even survived the camps. Of course, you know better than anybody. 

Um, but the German population-- it was-- how shall I put it-- it was very easy for a German to explain to himself without having any idea where the Jews had gone to. If you lived in a-- any sized town-- let's, uh, leave aside now Berlin, Hamburg, Cologne, but any other-- other towns-- they were emigrating wholesale. Um, they were going-- one didn't know where they were going. 

Um, Ruthie interviewed somebody, a Jewish woman who survived in Berlin, whose sister had gotten a call to report to be transported to the east, to Lublin, the famous labor camp. And it was known that this was likely to be or thought it was likely to be an extremely arduous kind of slave labor that awaited people. Not everybody would survive. But that was the official word. This was October or November '41. 

And since she was very close to her sister, she went to the Jewish agency still at work in Berlin and said, my sister's had this notification and I want to go with her. And the man at the Jewish agency said to her, do me a favor and go away. Just-- just-- just don't-- just go away. 

So he knew something. She didn't, right? This was October or November '41. She knew something. She knew things were awful. Things were gonna get worse. 

Uh, Ruthie discovered a pamphlet written by a German Jewish woman in 1943 who had managed to get to Palestine. Some very-- you know, there were some of these crazy deals. People were going south via, you know, Italy, making it. And her description, a very vivid little pamphlet, which is in the Jewish library in Berlin, the community center, tells you about how things were. You know, star, and awful treatment, insecurity. But, uh, she didn't know. 

So what you really have is, you can say, a number of people, probably a very considerable number of people, had a pretty good inkling. A lot of other people did not. I mean, those are just two Jewish examples I know of. Um, and in a place like Poland, the situation would be different because there the stuff was wholesale, slaughter was wholesale and so on. 

Um, it, um, so that, yes, I do think that, you know, a number of people said, no, of course I had no idea when they did. But I think a lot of people did not. 

INTERVIEWER: In your, uh-- from your vantage point as a historian, is this the first time or is it one of the few examples where extermination was carried out remotely? In other words, the-- the-- the comment is made that corporate executives sitting in Frankfurt were making decisions about thousands of people in death camps in Auschwitz and Sobibór and so forth. 

SUBJECT: I guess so, you know. I-- I would imagine so. I mean, I think the Armenian massacres were different, and these other-- even the more recent examples of Cambodia of what we know is-- is much more immediate and direct, yeah. I guess that's true. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you, uh, delineate the difference? You just said it was different. 

SUBJECT: Well, the difference is the difference you mentioned. Just simply the, uh, uh, the sort of organization of it, uh, with-- with people in remote places. Uh, again, I can't give you the details, but I would-- I would imagine that would be the-- that would be the difference. I mean, I've not, you know, studied the Armenian massacres to know. But that would strike me as a, uh, as a kind of frantic mixture of frenzy and organization at the same time, which is somewhat different from, I think, this kind of sheer frenzy that seems to have been the case in these more recent, say, in Cambodia, let's say. But I don't-- you know, beyond that I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you relate that in any way to the German way of doing things, way of thinking? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: You said-- 

SUBJECT: I don't see that. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that the, uh, professors, the academic community-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --was perhaps remiss in-- in certain circumstances. In-- I don't know what. Not standing up, not doing whatever. Uh, when you came to this country and you entered Columbia, you met many people who had been as mature adults and in academia now at Columbia, and you were interacting with those people, what-- 

SUBJECT: Um, yeah? Sorry, go ahead. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What was their explanation? What was their, uh, discussion with you? Um, is there really-- are we the beneficiary here in this country of, uh, discrimination? 

SUBJECT: The beneficiary? It was so maybe in the sense that people landed here. Well, sure. I mean, on the second-- the second, I know-- I know much more than about the first. Uh, there's by now a fair literature on this. Um, it's very clear that this, uh, the intellectual life in this country was turned around by refugees, not all of whom were Jews, by the way. I mean, Hajo Holborn did a lot of good for Yale, although Yale was a little snotty to him for-- for quite some time, I guess. 

Uh, but, um, I think that you can show that, uh, in field after field how vast the impact was. And that's been, you know, that's all very well documented because, uh, if you look at that little book, The Intellectual-- or The Cultural Migration, which Franz Neumann and Tillich and Panofsky-- who else-- Henri Peyre and one other person talk about. What's happened to their professions. What happened to them. 

Um, or if you look at the-- that big book edited by Donald Fleming and, uh, Bernard Bailyn, uh, that certainly is, um, um, you know, plentiful evidence. I mean, you take a field like, uh, sociology, you know. People like Paul Lazarsfeld and theoreticians of-- of his staff who made a great deal of difference. Um, you take, uh, art history with men like Panofsky and Krautheimer and so on, you know, were vastly influential. 

And for the most part, fairly soon landed in influential places. German refugee architects, uh, whether it's Mies van der Rohe or-- or Gropius and so on brought the international store, certain kinds of international style to this country. Um, psychoanalysis is important in this country, as it is in no other country because of this influx of refugees. And there's nothing more pathetic, in a way, than to compare German psychoanalysis now with American psychoanalysis. Practically all the creative work is being done here, not over there. I mean, there are, of course-- England too had its share of refugees. 

And you can keep on going. Franz Neumann, whom I mentioned, was a very important figure to Columbia. Columbia didn't have exactly that many, but it had some very influential people. 

INTERVIEWER: Any comment on the first part of my question about-- 

SUBJECT: About that? Well, that's a very complicated question, um. There is a, um, uh-- I don't know, as a matter of fact, how many professors could be said to have just turned Nazi, for example. I think the failure, as I see it, of a lot of the academic, uh, profession in Germany goes back. Uh, there's a very interesting book by a man named Fritz Ringer, himself a refugee, by the way, now in this country, on that, uh, called The Decline of the German Mandarins. 

And what he does is, which I-- I think is fairly good-- think itself is a good word. He is quite, um, ready to see, uh, the German professor's brother isolated, protected, small group of people who mostly talk to each other. High prestige, you know. Uh, dropping their titles gives-- gives them privileges. There weren't very many of them. Uh, very keen on setting their own standards and running their own affairs. Although they were also public servants at the same time. Rather curious kind of combination. 

Their failure, I think, is very important. Al-- al-- already in the Weimar Republic, where I think not nearly enough of them were-- became partisans of-- of the republic. But, uh, were very skeptical and very unaccepting of the new-- of the new order. Um, I-- I think that, um, there was not nearly enough protest for-- for my money on their part. 

Now I single them out because they are more articulate than street car conductors or grocery store owners or whatever. Uh, because some of them even had a place to go. And, you know, very, very, uh, very few went. 

Uh, there's a famous story about-- who was it who tells the story? About a friend of Einstein's going to see him. He's on his way to Germany and talks to Einstein about this. And Einstein says, well, if you want to go, go ahead. And he says well, any regards to anybody? You know, and Einstein says, well, give my regards to von Laue. And-- and I've forgotten the details of who the friend was or what he said. Anybody else, he said? No, just him. 

I mean, Einstein's judgment was there was one, you know, German physicist who had behaved simply beautifully all the way through. Um, and I think that, you know, I don't feel that way about, uh, a lot of others. I mean, Heidegger to come back, uh, is one of my few points of conflict with my friend Geoffrey Hartman. With somebody who was not only playing ball with the Nazis, certainly for one year, there's a notorious speech he gave as rector of the University of Freiburg in May 1933, where he hails the new leadership and so forth. 

But also in my judgment because of his philosophy, which is very antirationalist and very bored with this muddling through, sort of middle of the road stuff of the Weimar Republic. Uh, also a man who was willing enough to leave the name of his teacher, [INAUDIBLE], off the second edition dedication page because it was a Jew. So, you know, that's the kind of ball playing I don't much enjoy. 

And I, uh, I have my own little boycotts that-- that-- that-- that have survived my-- my going back to Germany. I still won't buy any records of Karl Bohm. That's my private, uh, boycott because I think he's a son of a bitch and he stayed and prospered and did very well, you know. 

Which is not exactly true of someone like Richard Strauss, who was already elderly and rather disoriented and so on who was not an anti-Semite who would have done better if he, you know, had the guts to leave the country. Uh, for that he was, I guess, too old and too rigid. But who at the same time, you know, did, interestingly enough, have a rather interesting episode with, uh, brush with-- with, in fact, with Goebbels as late as 1935 over using [? Stefan ?] [? Schweige's ?] librettist. 

So, you know, it's a very mixed record in that sense. But I-- I feel, you know, um, that my feeling is I'm unforgiving about the Germans I see walking along the street who are 30 years old, even 40 years old. And who-- I don't believe in collective guilt nor genetic guilt, and, uh, I used to when I was, you know, ha, just fresh out of the country. But not now. 

And I do have enough good experiences, you know, with, uh, older Germans who, uh-- mind you, I don't-- you know, lots of the-- many of the stories are poor. Much of the background is-- is sad. And many compromises were made. But, uh, you know, it was, uh, interestingly enough, my father who actually always maintained that, because there were people like those two I've mentioned to you, that one couldn't just condemn everybody. 

You know, and so the Burkean view, you can't indict a whole nation, just such. As I said, was so-- my father-- I had never heard of Burke, but that's what he thought. I thought that he was wrong. That changed my mind. 

But I still think that there are certain people who behave badly, people who-- who had opportunities and didn't need much heroism to get out of the country and so on. And I think they, um, like Bohm, for example, strike me as people who, you know, whom I despise. But, uh, um, that's, as I say, my own special, uh, little war. 

INTERVIEWER: Academia doesn't come off very well in your-- from your view. What about the Church? 

SUBJECT: [EXHALES] No. It's, again, a terribly mixed record. Um, it so happens that among our closest German friends are a couple called the [? Bruchers. ?] He's a-- 