[SIDE CONVERSATIONS] CREW: We'll start in five minutes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

CREW: You're all set. Level one-- who is the first person? 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, first person is Rose. Perhaps it would be a good idea for us to start by your telling me about-- telling us about your hometown, where you were born. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We'll begin with give your name. 

SUBJECT: My middle name? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, any you prefer. Your date of, the date of your birth and the place of your birth, and then ask and get thoughts and questions out of the way. 

SUBJECT: All right, I was born in 1916, August the 26th, in a small village in the Carpathian. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your name? 

SUBJECT: My name is Rose Normastein Auerhahn. My father was a businessman, quite well off, owned a lot of property and different businesses. We were a large family, 11 living children. I was the seventh, the youngest daughter. 

My two older brothers were married. Each of them had two children. And two sisters were married. One had six children. And the other had three children. From all of those children, two nieces survived, who wouldn't be here today. 

And of my brothers, survived six and one sister, who lives now in Israel. And two brothers were here. And I lost last year my older brother. And two are in Israel with their families. My sister, who lives in Israel, she lost her three children, her husband. She remarried and lost her husband again. She lives alone. 

I came to this-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like in your home town? Did you all live in the same area? And in the same house? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, neither of the children-- matter of fact, even a family would-- as I said, we were born in a small village. And when the children started growing up, it was hard to education, because that village had a very primitive one-room schoolhouse. So you all were sent to the city. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And to which city were you sent? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was sent to Berehove. And not all of us went to the same school. Then my father purchased a flour mill in a provincial town. But it was 100 kilometers from the place where I worked. And moved out the family there because across the street was the railroad station. Even there we didn't go there to school, to that. We were going back-- going to the big city. And the boys went to a Yeshiva. 

So but the business... Then the farm was not sold. We kept it for an all year-round home. Whoever, the children or grandchildren used it. It was a very beautiful up in the mountain place with brook. And the house was like in a half island. It was a very badly built house. But it was built with some-- what shall I say? --from stone. The walls were very thick. And it wasn't a healthy house. If we remained there, then we would had to build another house. 

But just to be there in the summer-- and the brook was around the end of a river. And all the convenience, we didn't have. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it like a castle? 

SUBJECT: No it wasn't a castle. It was an old rambling, maybe a hunting lodge or some of those things. But we had a lot of, acreage of land. And there we had a stone quarry. It was a business, very profitable. We dealt mostly with the government. 

And matter of fact, when the Czech government left, they remained us owing about a half a million crown. They paid only once a year. In November they were out. When we came after the war, the government-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's sort of move along in a sort of more historical way, so that that way we don't lose-- 

SUBJECT: All right 

INTERVIEWER 1: --very important things. So how old were you when the Nazis first came? 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the family, what place did you have, in the order? Seventh? 

SUBJECT: I was the seventh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Out of-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I was the fourth girl. And there were two older brothers. And those two didn't come back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A little more about the home life, customs, all of that? 

SUBJECT: We were strictly orthodox, observing and very busy. Each of us had their duties. We were not spoiled rich children. Father was very strict. And if he said that you would do that, there was no saying no, because you know that you have to and you will be able to do it. 

And my brother Joe was in the mill. And the other one was-- we had a glass factory. One burned, eventually, down. So my older brother, the oldest, he was in Munkacs. He left, and he had a store. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember birthdays, holidays? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, for the holidays, Pesach was the biggest holidays because then the mill was closed. And all the children and grandchildren used to come home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So altogether, how big was the family in that-- as such moments? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [SIGH] 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many? 

SUBJECT: They used to come home with five, six, seven grandchildren and three maids, and a husband and wife. My mother couldn't wait they should leave. I couldn't understand it, because I enjoyed every minute, even sleeping on a mattress on the floor. To me it was fun, but not to my mother, because it's not like here that you go out. And everything had to be prepared. But it was a very close-knit family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have maids too in your family? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we had a cook, and we had a maid. And then we had a man who worked in the fields. But like I said, they all ate in our kitchen. And even if there was a maid-- during the war we didn't have any. We just had one woman who helped clean. 

Toward the end, she couldn't even sleep in our house. She came in the morning and went home because it wasn't permitted. And when the Hungarian Army in '38 came in-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which was what year? And how old were you? 

SUBJECT: I was 21. And I was caught in the farm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And that was what year? 19-- 

SUBJECT: '38 and '39, in March. Then finally they had took the whole Carpathian. Between [INAUDIBLE], where we lived, and Szikzo was the name of the village, was-- Szikszo wasn't taken. They still had it for six months, the Czech army. 

And I was caught. I was on the farm. So I couldn't go home to my parents. I would have to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were cut off? Is that it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah. It was cut off by Munkacs. And [INAUDIBLE] was taken already. It was taken in two parts. And by March '39, the whole thing was taken. The Germans didn't come into till '44-- '43. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK, you're a girl of 21. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you planning with your life at that time? How did it strike you that the war began? And what were your thoughts? 

SUBJECT: My thoughts were to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Go back-- 

SUBJECT: Get away, to get away. And I got-- I had here an American uncle. I wrote him a letter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When was that? 

SUBJECT: That was in '38. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In '38. So before that, had you thought of leaving? Or-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, I had my life. So I planned out like all the girls. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you-- what was it going to be? Did you have-- 

SUBJECT: No, I was helping in the business, in with the bookkeeping, and whatever. If I had to go, we had vineyards. And let's see, I would go out for two, three weeks and stay there. Was also-- there was a house, nothing really-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were sort of working in the family business? Is that right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's right. That's right. And I was hoping to get married. But when it came to late, I didn't like the situation. So I wrote to him, for my uncle. And he did send me papers. But by that time, the whole thing was taken over. I mean, the part where I was too in Szikszo. And there was no way to get out. 

My brother did get out. And he found himself in Palestine. And then he joined the army. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember when he left? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like? 

SUBJECT: It was in March. I don't know the date exactly, but it was March. It was still the dividing line, and he came over. And from there he went out. We didn't know about him for years, where he is or what happened. 

But I couldn't make it anymore for different reasons. You know, there were organizations who were taking people across the border. But because my father was a wealthy man, they wanted too much money, like 100,000. What do I know? And we really did not have cash. 

That was the-- we had no cash. Everything was invested because my father felt that he has a large family. And in Europe, if you didn't give dowry for a girl, she could be the prettiest little girl-- and the boys had to have a business to make a living. 

I had four younger brothers. They were young, and they were still away in school. So then this is whereby my father was getting older. And being a Jew with a beard, he couldn't move between the businesses. And then slowly they were taking it away. They took away the mill. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He had trouble moving from one place to the other before '38? 

SUBJECT: No, after '38. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After '38. 

SUBJECT: More by the '40. He had-- he couldn't go. They pulled his beard. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who's they? 

SUBJECT: Anybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Anybody. 

SUBJECT: It wasn't that the authorities did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it people you knew? 

SUBJECT: Yes and no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It it's possible for you to speak in your own memories and images-- you know, because it's one way to say something that's historical and the other is to say I remember this day and that day. We would like more to become acquainted with you. 

SUBJECT: All right. I could say like the dates is very hard to remember. But like my two younger brothers went to the winery to bring home wine. And it was before Shavu'ot. And it was about 27 kilometers between Munkacs and [INAUDIBLE] 

So the train-- they had a ticket like anybody else. But I think two or three stations before [INAUDIBLE] they threw him-- some drunken or not drunken, I don't know who he was-- just threw them off the train. And the train arrived, and we-- they weren't there. So we were very worried. Finally they came limping home after walking for about 20 kilometers. The wine as taken away from them. Then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel? What was it for you? 

SUBJECT: We were feeling that it's closing in. We started talking about doing something about it. As I said, we had no cash. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever imagine what was going to happen, or no? 

SUBJECT: We designed that they will take away the property, because when they took away the mill, and there was rationing, you know, and they wouldn't give us the ration cards because we were the owner of the mill. But meanwhile, the guy didn't want to give us flour. 

And he insulted my father terribly. And I went in. And he says, you shut up. I will show it to you. I said, look, you could tell that to my father. He's an old man. But I'm not. I don't have a heart condition. I'm not afraid of you. But he did show me. He did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? What did he show you? 

SUBJECT: In 1941, I was again on the farm in June. The [INAUDIBLE]-- I don't know if you know-- that's like police. They came. And they said you have to come to the-- like I said, it's a very small village. It was-- we belonged to another village. I should come to the-- their office. 

And there was nobody who I should let know that I've went there. And there were other people, whom they started taking us to the train. And I said, where are you taking us? What is it? 

So one of the men who worked for us, and I said go, take the train and go home, and tell my parents what happened. But meanwhile, we were already in the cattle cars and going. We were passing the town where I lived. And I saw the mill was working, because we lived just across the street from there. 

And there was just no way. They wouldn't let me out of the cattle car where I was. And they took us-- about 100, I wasn't the only one-- to the border of the Polish. That was when the Germans invaded Poland, and they were pushing. I realized we were sitting. 

It was night, and I saw that the guard was going up and down. And I said to him, do you have children? He was a middle-aged man. He says, yes. I says, how would you feel if they would do this to your daughter and you don't even know what happened to her. He was a Hungarian, no a German. 

So he says, I would feel very bad. And he made believe that he feels sorry for us. So I said, would you do me a favor? He says, what? I said, if I will write a postcard, will you drop it in the mail? 

I had a book I took. And in the book was an empty postcard. So I wrote to one of my brothers that our destiny as I see it is Poland. And do anything you can fast, because my life is in danger. It was very clear to me. 

But later, he mailed the postcard. My brother got it. But when he arrived to that place, I was gone. And they threw us out. We came to a Polish small town on Saturday. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know that going to Poland was dangerous? Had you heard something? 

SUBJECT: Because it was the war. There was the fighting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were afraid of fighting? 

SUBJECT: I was already afraid. I saw what lawlessness was going on. They body-searched you. They took out my earrings. I had a little, not a very big valuable, mine watch they took away. So I mean, it showed very clearly and came that town was bombed just a couple of days earlier. Half of it was in ruins. 

So they dropped us off. And he says this is your home. And if anybody would try cross back the border, we will shot them. And they took the trucks, and we remained there, sitting. But it didn't take a couple of minutes, the Jews from that town got out of their cellars and came. And every family took somebody. 

There was a young woman who was pregnant, whom I knew from home. And she and I were taken to a family. We stayed there 10 weeks. They always said, the only way you will go, because they were chasing us, threatening the people who are harboring those people. But they said, one way you'll go. You'll go backwards home. Otherwise, you're not. 

They used to hide me in the cellar. And sometimes nothing happened and you could have a heart attack. I was laying down on the couch where the table was pulled there. And they came to look for the people. And they didn't realize that I am one, because there was a family of a couple of girls and boys. But one of the sisters-- there was a pitcher of water on the table, and he wanted a drink. And she thought that he was going for me. She fainted. 

But from June came September, I realized, if I am not going to do something, I can not cross the Carpathian in the winter. It was already September. 

But meanwhile, to survive, you deal. I had some money, just by accident, in my pocketbook. And I just to buy-- stand on the corner and watch the soldier, the Hungarian, and buy cigarettes. And the people, who harbored me, they used to sell it to the-- it was hard. One day I'm standing there, and a military going by us to. And a man, the chauffeur, looks out. And I couldn't believe it. It was a boy from the next town. They also had a mill. A Jewish boy, very friendly, in business together-- 

I started-- he says, what is you doing? Well, he was coming from the front. He didn't know what was going on. And I started screaming, take me home. Take me [INAUDIBLE] home. 

He got out. He was crying. I was crying. And there was a general in the car, whom he was to yell out. He says, if you don't come back here, I shot you both. So he had no choice but he went home. And he told my parents that he saw me alive in [INAUDIBLE]. And they should try to do something. But there was no way of getting. There was no railroad. There was no communication, no post office. 

INTERVIEWER 2: how far was it from your hometown? 

SUBJECT: Oh, a couple hundred kilometers-- couple a Hundred kilometers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the war was already on? 

SUBJECT: Ah, yes, is '41. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: This was '41. The front war was on. But we got together, about 10 of us. And people by whom I was, they had some relatives in another town going back Dniester. We had to cross the Dniester. We crossed it in the middle of the day in a little boat. And we made it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was in September. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We walked. We got sometimes a ride. We paid for it. And there was times that the people-- I know other soldiers killed a lot of Jews wandering like this. One night we were caught, but if-- we knew that if we stayed there overnight, we would be all killed. So we decided, because the Jews-- first of all, we had-- you had to wear your band. And then the Jewish community was giving you out passes that you go from this down to that. It wasn't very legal, but it was a piece of paper. 

But they decided that this is not good. So another girl and myself decided we will walk back to the Jewish committee's office and ask. We knew we wouldn't get. 

But meanwhile, another convoy of soldiers were coming and getting it. They saw two young girls. They started flirting. So we told them that here are these people are bothering us. And one of the soldiers says, come on back. Took us in the truck. We came back, and they let us out. I mean the rest of them, the packages were already taken away from the people, the rest. 

I should make a long story short. I came to the border. And that night, about 20 people were killed crossing the border to the other side. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From Poland to Czechoslovakia. 

SUBJECT: From Poland to Czechoslovakia, yeah. And some of the people, whom I was going were also, were always asking from one town to another, a Jew, because you shouldn't be on the street. When you arrived to that little village or town, you should just disappear. So there was always Jews who helped. 

So I stopped asking for this and this. And meanwhile, the other people were caught. So four of us crossed the border already. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Out of-- 

SUBJECT: --of 10. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of 10, four made it. 

SUBJECT: Four made it, yes. There was a lady and her son, who her older son made arrangement. So two peasants came to this house, and they started asking questions. Finally came to me, how many hangers in the mill? And you know, things in the-- this mill name and that mill name-- made sure that it's us. 

And they dressed us in peasant clothes. Yeah, Saturday afternoon, we crossed the border. They were telling a rig, because there was-- they were cutting the hay, so that we-- and I was getting some food in there. So we came to also to a Jewish family. And we stayed during the night. And the morning, we boarded a train, and we came down to Khust, where I had a sister living. And from then on, I was hearing there tell my father paid a lot of money for the authorities and that I shall be on house arrest. 

And I had to go every week to the city hall to sign that I am alive and I am here. And that was going on till '44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So, you made it home? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And at that time, most of the family were still-- 

SUBJECT: Still intact. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Intact. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And life between '42, 44, what was it like? 

SUBJECT: It was, like I said, they took away the mill. And they took the other business. And we were struggling, not that we were hungry. Like I said, we had no money. So finally my father borrowed money. You should have what to live on. 

The boys were still in the schools. But my sister and I were home. And then the Germans came in in '44. So then everybody, every Jew, was like house arrest. We had-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the entrance? The day? 

SUBJECT: Of the Germans? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember, how you express it? 

SUBJECT: We had trouble with the German soldiers for the simple reason, like I said, that we lived next to the railroad station. And one of the smaller buildings was taken over, like a military station, the doctors of some. And there was constantly coming and going. One good thing was from it, that by 5:00, because the mill was so important, so it was like a military. After 5:00, nobody could come up from the street today to the yard. And nobody could go out. 

So at least we had peace. My father used to sit there. And we were not to show his face, because there was always trouble for some reason of other. And the people put away jewelry, put away things valuable. We couldn't put it-- because the night, you couldn't move out. And during the day, you're not going to start digging. And besides, they expected even more that we had them than we had. Because when they came to take us, they wouldn't believe that don't have. 

My father did not believe in gold and jewelry. He says if you need a bracelet for your enjoyment, fine. But just to buy gold he says, where will you put it? Matter of fact, well, I never went back, but my brother said the whole parquet floor was broken up in our house. They were looking. There wasn't, because we just didn't have the money. 

So father used to say, let them take it. We will survive it. And we will have money again. It was hard, because everything we had to-- like for instance, in the village, we had plenty of wood, because that was part of the business too, but in [INAUDIBLE] you didn't have with what to heat the house. 

So we took, in a wagon, and brought it here. But we're caught. They took it away. So you had to buy it on the black market. It was very, very hard. 

But father always said, don't worry, children, money is not everything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Everybody lived together in this house? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, it was-- 

SUBJECT: No, one brother lived in Munkacs. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was in '42, '43, '44. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who lived in that house? 

SUBJECT: In that house? My father and my mother, my sister, and myself, because the boys were away in school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So four of you lived in that house? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like? What was living day-to-day like? Your father was in the room. He couldn't get out. 

SUBJECT: That's right. So whatever it could be done, it was done by us two girls. We were so alike. Waiting-- that the war would get over. We did not plan that they will-- first of all, the Jews-- I don't know. They just didn't believe that it could happen. 

It could happen to the Polish Jews. It could happen to this and that, but not to us, right. Till the-- well, they took the fields. They took the cows. You know. My father didn't make a big deal out of it. It's just we just pushed the time after the war. And then we will see what comes there. 

But by '44, he wouldn't have mind to go. One of the bank presidents said to him, get out of here. So he says, I have a big family. How can I go? I have no money. 

He says, just tell me the day when you want to go. So then we started, but we never finished. It was too complicated to move out. My father was an old man. He was 74. My mother was 15 years younger, but not in the best of health. And I got involved with somebody. He didn't want to go. It was just a time of waiting. 

They would-- it's not allowed. They took the smaller building. They rolled up our Persian rugs, and they used them. And oh, he was beside himself. you see, not father. He says, don't worry. I'll buy you another rug. 

Mother was very upset. And then they started taking one bedroom, another bedroom. And then they had to walk through our living room. Life was not-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were they? 

SUBJECT: Like for instance, the doctor-- the military, it's all the military. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is Czech military, or the German military? 

SUBJECT: No this is German. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Germans there? 

SUBJECT: This is-- uh huh. Czech military went out in '39. No, this was German. I, I wouldn't say that they were, you bruised or injured anybody, no. But it wasn't a pleasant situation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did '44, the change, begin for you, the entrance of the Germans? How did you personally become aware of it, see it, hear it? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we were in the thick of it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Pardon? 

SUBJECT: We were in it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, no, but of course, but I want to hear your personal account of one morning, for what it was. How did it begin? What do you recollect, personally? If you opened an album book and looked at it, what would you see? , 

SUBJECT: It, it was a very big struggle, because I was not used to not have things. So if I get up in the morning, and I have to go to buy bread on the black market, and not have even enough money-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So, in the spring of 1944, you were under Hungarian occupation. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the spring of 1944, the Germans took over Hungary. And then it all began. The deportations began. What I'm asking you is how was it for you? In what way did, did you experience it. One morning, what happened, to you personally? 

SUBJECT: I really was on the farm again. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was in the spring of 1944. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and one of my brothers was there with me. And we were walking just a Saturday afternoon. The half of the village was German and half was Ukraine. And those, the Germans, there was a count. He had there a castle. And he brought them years ago. And they-- was about 80 families, very hard working. The maids and the boys used to work for us. And we saw them , felt that they are people from our town. So that Saturday afternoon, walking with my brother, and a bunch of them, they volunteered for the German army. And they passed us by three, four, or five. I don't know. 

They don't say hello. And we don't say. They turned around and says, verfluchte Jude. Why didn't you say hello? So I asked, says to him in his-- on his name-- I don't even remember now his name. I said, why didn't you say hello to me? So he grabbed me. 

And I said, randas. Randas this means, he always-- his pants would be torn, or his shoes. So we used to call him in school randas. Well, I though he is going to kill me. But another of them, he says come on, friends. And they walked away. We walked-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is the translation of that word? 

SUBJECT: Randas? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: That's torn. You know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sloppy. 

SUBJECT: Sloppy. So that was the worst thing I could say here. He felt that he is in the German uniform, with the long coat and the britches. You know, how dare you? 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you felt a lot of chutzpah that time? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I still felt the chutzpah. But by the time I walked home, my feet were shaking. And I said to my brother, let's get out of here. I gave over the keys to the maid. And I said-- took that evening, the train, and I went home. Go there, I went. We went home, both of us, because we would have never made it. You know, they-- was a shpere, they closed up. 

Well, I think, and I never went back. I never saw the village. One of my brothers went home, and he brought the maid, gave him a few things. But I have like pictures, little point of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did the deportation begin for you? 

SUBJECT: The deportation began in April 15th or 16th. I don't know the exact date. It was a day after Pesach. And in an early morning, they started going from house to house. And you couldn't go out of your house, so you didn't know what's going on. 

They came in, and they said-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: In the house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were hiding? 

SUBJECT: No, no, there was no hiding. We were in the house. My father was sitting by the window and praying. It was early morning. And they say, all your money and all your jewelry, put out. If not, we will harm your father. 

But like I said, we had very little. By that time, what we had, we sold. We needed it. And so whatever, my father still had his watch. I had a little ring on my finger, took out my earrings. And that's all. There wasn't any. Mother had something. 

And they took us to the railroad station. Out. Out. There wasn't a time. My father left his prayer book, and he wanted to go back for it. They wouldn't let him back in the house. We didn't have a piece of bread. It was after Pesach. And I was sitting there in the railroad, said really not in, but outside the whole day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was really in front of your house. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I mean, that was a very big station. This was a junction. That was the last that-- wherever, you went, you had to get out there. So it was a big railroad crossing and like I said, we didn't have much to eat. So finally, during the night, they took us to Berehove, Beregszasz. And that made a ghetto. And in the brick factory, in the bricks, when they burned, they are put out to dry so they made such as shacks. 

And everybody had a place for a warm body. And yet we're still cold. There was-- and there was no food. So, you know, the Jews, they start organizing a kitchen. Because whoever, whatever had, so it wasn't so very kosher. So my father would not eat it. So a few of us got together and organized the kosher kitchen. It lasted two weeks, three weeks. 