[EXTENDED BEEP] CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So if you'll begin by giving your name and et cetera, vital statistics. 

FRANK LOGUE: My name is Frank Logue. And I live in New Haven where I was a mayor for four years until recently. And I grew up in Philadelphia in the Second World War. I was a soldier, an infantry soldier. And I had my own experience dealing with the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was that? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I enlisted in the service as a young man to fight the war in the Air Corps. And it's a lengthy story, but after 18 months, I ended up in the infantry. And I became an infantry soldier fighting in France and in the SAR against the Germans. 

And I experienced the German army at that time. And I had seen these movies called, Why We Fight. And I was sufficiently motivated. 

And I remember an experience I had as a young man. My mother always told me I should read books. But instead of doing that, I often went out and played ball. 

And one day after playing ball, we went into the local corner grocery store, a little mom and pop store owned by a Jewish family named Berkowitz. And a kid who played ball with us that day said in the grocery store, well, one thing you've got to say about Hitler. He's doing a good job on the Jews. 

And I was startled. And I saw Mrs. Berkowitz, the proprietor, her reaction to that. And I don't think I'd ever seen anything prior to that time that confronted me with anti-Semitism in a personal direct way and saw how it affected somebody. And that's a memory that goes back about 40 years and one that hasn't left me. 

In any event, I had a pretty good idea when I was an infantry soldier fighting in Europe of what I was doing there and who the enemy was and why it was important to defeat that enemy in the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever encounter any concentration camp survivors, victims, anything of that nature? 

FRANK LOGUE: During my military service, I didn't run across the concentration camps. Because I got slightly injured myself before the end of the war, and I didn't get to that part of Germany. I became acquainted with survivors of concentration camps after my own service ended, when I got back to this country. 

And I became close to a man who was an editor of a satirical newspaper in Germany who had fled the Nazis. And in fact, was aided in coming to this country by a woman who later turned out to be my mother-in-law. And he told me what it was like in the early days, in 1933. And his magazine was very promptly shut down by the Nazis. 

And I also met people who were refugees. And as recently as the summer of 1979 in an election campaign in New Haven, I was ringing doorbells on Davenport Avenue. And a woman came down and I talked to her. 

And she had her right arm over her left forearm when we started the conversation. After a while she removed her hand, and I saw the numbers tattooed on her arm 35 years ago. So I've had, in the course of my life, some knowledge of the survivors directly. And for reasons which have to do with my own involvement in Holocaust activities, I've come to know a good bit about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is your perception of what people misunderstand, what they need to know, why we should keep this memory alive, shall we say? Your thoughts about remembering and re-invoking those images? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I think there are two very important reasons to remember the Holocaust. One is that those 6 million people who died were individuals. And very often, the people who would have mourned them and remembered them and preserved their graves, and otherwise kept their existence alive in some way, were killed at the same time they were. So in the sense of any people could be forgotten, there's a danger that those people could be forgotten. And I think it's very important to preserve that. 

Second, the Holocaust happened because of something within human beings. My judgment is that civilization is a thin veneer. And Nazi Germany was a country, a very literate country where music and the arts were greatly respected. It had a wonderful cultural tradition. 

It was one of the leading industrial nations in the world, one of the most literate nations in the world. What that tells me is not very good news for any human being anywhere. And that is savagery and violence lurks within all of us. 

And I don't say all of them. I say it lurks within all of us. And the veneer of civilization is a thin one. 

And when an outrage like that happens and a whole nation participates in it, it says, you better not forget that that happened, because it can happen again. It can happen in 1980. It can happen in 1990. 

And so if you care about the liberty that we have today, you ought to remember that. Because alas, I'd like to think that was an episode in history that was so horrible that it couldn't be repeated. But I don't believe that about human nature, I'm sorry to say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were over there fighting the Germans. You were in the country, perhaps you've been there since then in Germany. You allude to the rich cultural heritage of the German people. Do you have any thoughts, based on your own experience as an infantry soldier fighting them, and since that time, as to how this really happened? How the veneer got scraped away so the savagery could take over, take over a whole people? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I think they-- they felt that they'd been unfairly treated after the First World War. But God knows, losing countries in wars have been treated a lot worse than they. And they had something of a tradition of an appeal to a centralized leadership and an authoritarian tradition. 

But I can't say to you that-- that what the Germans responded to in 1933 was a characteristic or a trait that they had that other people don't have. I'd like to-- I'd like to feel that. That there wasn't a risk, or there is not a risk today. That French people or English people or American people are immune from reacting to that way. 

So I think they did have a tradition which encouraged authoritarianism. They did have a sense of deprivation after the First World War. But I don't think either one of those things is unique enough so that we can say, well, that isolates them. That differentiates them from all the rest of us. I think it's a present danger. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How much time did you personally spend fighting in Germany and France? 

FRANK LOGUE: From the fall of 1944 to the spring of 1945. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you capture any prisoners at any point, to have access to German prisoners of war? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I had two kinds of access to prisoners of war. When I was training to be an infantry soldier, one of the things that helped to motivate us against the Germans is that we were marching 25 miles and carrying rifles. And the earliest German war prisoners were at the same camp out in the middle of Kansas. And they were playing volleyball in their shorts and having a wonderful time while we were preparing to fight other Germans. And that-- that helped to enrage us against them. 

I got over to Europe later in the war, in 1944. And the prisoners that we took in those days tended to be not the muscular people in their mid-20s, but boys of 15 and 16, and what I then thought were older men of 40. I'm not so sure that they're that old anymore. 

But the prime of the German army wasn't left by late 1944 and early 1945. Occasionally, we would capture somebody from the SS. And they were younger, and they were much more the vigorous types. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were your feelings about those SS officers as an American soldier? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, we, of course, had the code that you, uh, take prisoners, and you capture them, and you treat them fairly. But yes, these people had these two lightning emblems on their tunics. And I felt kind of a special rage against them. 

Because they-- the military-- the soldier does a job that he does as a soldier. And we were doing that job. The SS is somebody who is whose life is committed to depriving people of their rights, whether-- usually not in the military, but usually in either his own population or the captured population. So my own feeling was a feeling of rage about people like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were in firefights, in actual battles-- 

FRANK LOGUE: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --a number of times. And you were shot at, that you shot. Did you-- you know that you killed German soldiers, or you feel-- 

FRANK LOGUE: I don't-- no, I couldn't say that I shot and killed German soldiers. What I can say is that machine guns' bullets were fired at me, and mortar shells were fired at me, and artillery shells and aircraft strafed me. I have a vivid memory of my earliest days reaching the front lines. 

Somebody said, hot dog. Here's some of our planes. We wondered where the planes were. 

As they came closer, we dove for the ground. They were silver planes with black crosses on the bottom, and they shot machine gun bullets at us. So as I say, my experience of the Nazis-- I have my own reason for resenting them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you feel as you fired back at the Nazis? You couldn't really see them. You knew where about where they were because the bullets were coming at you. 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I-- as I say, I grew up with a sense of what the war was about and what the Germans were about. And I knew why I was there. And I must say that soldiers in later American conflicts didn't have that absolute certainty that we had in the Second World War. 

That this was the right war, and this was an enemy that had to be fought and had to be defeated. And none of us had any-- had any doubts about that. It's a better time to be a soldier than a war when you don't know whether it's-- the country should even be in the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you feel that you obviously must have killed some Nazis at some point if your aim was reasonably on target, even though you didn't see them? Is that your-- 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I don't-- it's funny. I don't make that claim. It's enough to have been an infantry soldier and to know that your presence there was helping to drive the Germans back through France to their homeland. 

So whether one killed-- and I've never-- and my children have often asked me that question. But it's never been my claim that I killed any Germans. It's never been an important thing to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I guess the point that I'm thinking about or trying to explore with you is that there were many Germans who, for whatever reason, were caught up in the tide. And I think that we would all accept that. There were people-- 

FRANK LOGUE: Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --that went along with it who had no particular hard feelings towards the Jews or the Poles or anybody else, but got swept up in it and went along with it, and ultimately, became the murders of the innocent, Jews and non-Jews alike. And my question pertains to what you think might have happened to those Germans who had no particular problems with Jews or Gentiles of other nationalities, but who ended up as murderers. How they must have felt or thought, what allowed them with this fine culture, the heritage, a basically civilized people, to become murderers as they became? 

And I was wondering if, as we, as Americans, as we were fighting back-- you were obviously not a violent person who roamed the streets of Philadelphia with a gun shooting at people. And yet, here you were, a young man finding yourself in a foreign country being strafed, being bombed, being shot at, and holding a weapon in your hand and fighting back-- 

FRANK LOGUE: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --trying to kill somebody whether you did or not. 

FRANK LOGUE: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And there's no-- uh, the infantry soldier is certainly somebody who's-- who's willing to shoot and kill-- kill the enemy. I would make a very fundamental distinction between soldiers. I mean, soldiering is as an old profession that goes way back, and I-- and I respect it. 

And there are people in the armed forces of this country today, and I'm glad that there are. And they're ready to kill people, if necessary. And that-- that's-- that's a part of life with a nation state and it's been around a long time. 

But there are other Germans who were middle class German people, nonviolent people, who engaged in violence against their own people, often Jews, often people from other countries. And they became murderers of a different kind. I'm reluctant to call soldiers murderers. Maybe that's because I was one. 

But that-- there's a kind of justification. That your country gives you something, and in return for what your country gives you, you have to offer your life on the line for your country. And I believed that then and I believe it now. 

But I don't think you are obliged to-- to persecute the minorities or persecute other people within the country. And as you know, the six million people who were Jews who were killed and the six million others-- were not, in very few exceptions were not armed, were not menacing. They were just wiped out. 

And I make a total moral distinction between those two. And what made-- what made cultured, ordinary people willing to do that, alas, I don't know what made them able to do that. I wish you did or I did or somebody did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Part of the-- of our understanding of that event, new enlightenment, new insights have revealed that it was the very organization that the Germans had, the very sophistication that they had which enabled them to carry out this horrendous plan. That, in fact decisions about gas were made in corporate offices, not in concentration camp settings. That Auschwitz was built to last. It was built of brick. 

That it was built in such a way that when they got rid of one population of people, namely, the Jews, then they would get rid of other populations that were uncomfortable for them to deal with. Now that's a very sobering thought. And I wondered if you knew about it, and if you did, what your reaction to it is. 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, one of the many things that the Holocaust Memorial at Yad Vashem in Jerusalem conveys to you is that the plot against the Jews was not a random thing. It was not a sudden thing. It was not an impulsive thing. 

That it was very carefully and thoughtfully planned and laid out and implemented over a long, long period of time. So that you can't say, well, you know, one gets angry, and once-- one lashes out. It was anything but that. 

And I think the awareness that that it was that carefully thought out and that carefully planned and implemented over that long a period of time with great detail and transport and constructing buildings-- that's-- that says that maybe in part there's some truth to the notion that that the individual person feels very much removed from the decision making. In other words, they made killing bureaucratic. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But the way they could do that-- and I used the wrong term in terms of murders. I spent five years in the military myself. And a soldier is a soldier and has a job to do on one-- on one level. 

But at the same time, as a human being who becomes a soldier is still a human being. And in your life, you're not taught to kill. But in the military you must for the protection, for the good of the state, if you will. 

But in order for the bureaucratic decision to have been made, and then carried out, the German government, the people had to dehumanize their enemies, both the Jews and non-Jews who they wished to annihilate. Which is essentially the same process which you must have been trained as a soldier. As a soldier, we were trained that we were not fighting human beings. We were fighting, quote, "the enemy." 

And whether we call the enemy krauts or gooks or whatever it is, we dehumanize them. Because as a human being, I could not shoot at another human being. You could not shoot at another human being. But the enemy was less than human. 

All of the things that we've learned that they did to the Jews and the Gentiles who became their enemies were aimed at dehumanizing them, marching them through the streets, making them wear yellow patches, not allowing them to participate in the commerce. It was to dehumanize them, to make them animalistic in the eyes of the other people, so that they could then start to kill them, which is essentially what happened to you as a soldier, or to me as a soldier. We were not fighting human beings. We were fighting somebody who was less than human, a subhuman person, so that we could do this. And I wondered what your experience was in thinking and feeling that the Germans who were on the other side, the Nazis, they were not human beings any longer, as you saw the blond haired fellows in the shorts in Kansas. 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, we-- I think that that is necessary. And happily, it is necessary. Most people don't have a nature as such that they can just readily pick up a gun and shoot somebody. 

And you have to-- you have to work on them. And you have to motivate them, and you have to give them a picture of the people they're shooting as the adversary. And that's done in a lot of ways. 

One was a very good series of films made called, Why We Fight. And that-- that included documentaries of the Nazi rallies and stadiums in Berlin and elsewhere. And it showed Hitler haranguing the German people. It showed some of the cruelties of the storm troopers, of the SS. 

It also, in addition to that, when-- when you get closer to where the fighting is and you begin to see some of the devastation and you begin to see some of the wounded people, and then you see American soldiers who have been killed by the Germans, that also stirs your emotions and makes you ready. And then, as I say, being shot at yourself is another way to increase your motivation to shoot whoever is shooting at you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: If you think back to your experience in Germany in late 1944, 1945, did you now, thinking back, did you really understand the enormous nature of the atrocities at that point? Or you knew something was going on? Or did you find out that it was worse after the war than you even imagined it to be while you were fighting, because you knew something terrible was there? 

FRANK LOGUE: Oh, I think we did not realize the extent of the persecution and the annihilation of the Jews and other things. It was enough to know that this was a regime that was dangerous and bent on conquering the world and was discriminating against Jews and maybe killing some of them. But I certainly didn't know in 1944 that the Germans were on their way to killing six million Jews and had, as their objective, the elimination of the total Jewish population of Europe and ultimately the world. So I think I learned more about that afterwards. But I think I was, for a variety of reasons, sufficiently motivated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said that the-- the killing was bureaucratized. And I'm interested in your perception of bureaucracy and its ability to perhaps unleash horrors that are best left checked. You are the head. You were the head of a large bureaucracy. 

A city is a large bureaucracy. Therefore, you know the power of leadership. And I was wondering about your thoughts about that in terms of the German experiment and experience. 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, the nature of a bureaucracy is such, of course, that the more levels it has, the further removed the people who deal with the public generally are from the decision making. And that's a problem that you have in any large organization. 

I mean, you pass a-- you adopt a policy at the board of directors' level, at the mayor's level. And you say that we will treat people equally, that we will treat people courteously, that we will respect people, and so on. And then, at the level where the contact takes place, that sometimes doesn't happen. 

I think it was the Germans were knowledgeable enough about psychology, the Nazis were, to know that if they could make it efficient and organize it and sanction it so that nobody felt a lot of individual responsibility, that's the way, not only Germany was moving, but that part of their lesson is that's the way that history is moving. The whole history of the world is moving in the direction of this wonderful, superior Aryan people being recognized as the leaders. And as a necessity, as a historical necessity, you have to eliminate the inferior people. It's your patriotic duty to do that. 

And it's not so much that you have to go up and shoot some Jew personally, but this is a historical necessity. And so there is a round up. And if you know where a Jewish family is, you have to tell where that is. And you're serving the fatherland, and you're serving history. 

And happily, there were occasions, and it's nice when we find out about some of them, where somebody held on to his humanity or her humanity, and said, wait a minute. I don't have to do that. I won't do that. Not usually in a defiant way, but in a covert way, they didn't cooperate. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What I was really getting to, perhaps, was this perc-- your perception of how a bureaucracy can impose, let's say, restrictions on human behavior, or how it can relax those restrictions in order to give some latitude for normal human response. Now in this case, I think the German population was terrorized or maybe there were other circumstances. I don't know. I'm asking you for your view. 

FRANK LOGUE: It's certainly my sense that they were not giving people a lot of leeway about how to behave. They had a very authoritarian state. And their willingness to-- to take their own people. The midnight knock on the door was not something that only Jews feared in Germany. Everybody had reason to fear. And if somebody disappeared, you didn't even ask why. 

So I think the way that state was organized, the bureaucracy was all powerful. And people were very reluctant to challenge it. And clearly a decision was made by Hitler and by his followers to keep-- keep the heel all the way down. And people say why wasn't it a real revolution in Germany? 

Revolution requires hope. And you're not going to get a revolution when the heel is grinding all the way down to the pavement, and there's no hope for anything. You don't get revolution in those circumstances. 

So they-- they did bureaucratize their killing and the-- the organization of every community. So that you really had to risk your life-- to be-- to be a decent person, you had to risk your life. And not many people did that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the early days, how do you account for that circumstance developing? In the early days in Germany-- you're a student of history. And you must have some perception of how a government becomes so subverted. The Kaiser, for good or for bad, there was a certain amount of relaxation, human values, et cetera. There was the-- oh, I can't think of it, begins with a W-- 

FRANK LOGUE: The Weimar Republic? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --Weimar Republic, which was a humanistic circumstance. How did people who could have a Weimar Republic also have a-- an Auschwitz? 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I have-- that's one of the great questions of the 20th century, great questions of all time. And I have some notions about it, which are I think the Germans discovered, perhaps the first nation state to discover, the uses of propaganda and mass communication. And one of the things that the Nazi experience has taught us is how amenable so much of the population is to appeals to emotion and fear. 

And if you look at our own campaigning in the presidential year 1980, and you look at television commercials for the 1980 presidential race, you won't find much addressed to the major issues of the day. You will find appeals to emotion. I think the Germans discovered in the '30s, the Nazis discovered, what you could do with mass communications and mass rallies to appeal to people's emotions. 

And the Nuremberg rallies, for example, in that giant stadium with banners 100 feet long hanging from towers, and the pomp and the ceremony-- they discovered that even a civilized, strongly cultural people had all these emotions which could be played upon. And they developed the ability to play upon those emotions as no other regime had, no other government had. And their control was total, so that you didn't have the opportunity to criticize it. 

And I cite the example of a man named Franz Schoenberger. He was the editor of a magazine called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which is like The New Yorker, a satirical weekly. They went after him right away. He didn't last a year. 

Because he was-- he would satirize what the German government was doing. And they had the kind of society which would absolutely not tolerate satire or criticism. So I think they used mass communications to appeal to emotion and patriotism more than any other country ever had. And of course, as I said, they had a tradition of authoritarianism. So it wasn't that tough. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. Given those circumstances, and given all you have just said, the thin veneer of civilization, et cetera, that you referred to, do you think it is really possible that people can learn from history? 

FRANK LOGUE: I think they can. I should say, I think we can. I think if we bear in mind that this was a very advanced society that did this. If somebody proposes it in this country, we restrict criticism of what the government does, for example, that's a little warning. If somebody says, let's-- we do have the First Amendment, but people really shouldn't criticize the government. To the extent that that raises its head in this country, and it has from time to time, you can learn from history that that's the beginning-- that could be the beginning of the end of your liberties to permit the right to criticize the government to be stopped, or if people begin ethnic appeals-- appeal, or people attempt to arouse prejudice against Jews or black people or Hispanic people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about bringing it down to every day confrontation? For example, discrimination at it earliest stages-- young people don't understand very often their obligation to speak out when they see injustice. They don't have too many examples in the adult population, so it becomes unclear to them as to what their-- what the society will tolerate in terms of calling attention to unjust behavior. 

FRANK LOGUE: And I would hope that the focus on the Holocaust, and the focus being broad enough so people understand that the Jews were the primary victims, but not the only victims, that that-- that should say to people if, in this society, that we pick out some group to pursue-- whatever group it is, whether an ideological or an ethnic group-- everybody should understand from the Holocaust experience that-- uh, "send not to know for whom the bell tolls. It tolls for thee." That it's-- it's somebody else first. It's going to be you later. 

I believe the Holocaust can be a learning experience. And indeed, what's happening in Cambodia, the whole nation stands in likelihood of being wiped out if the world stands by and does nothing. Maybe that's the most profound lesson, that-- that somebody said, "in order for evil to triumph, it is only necessary that good men do nothing." That inaction and failing to take any action can be-- can lead to evil just as surely as cooperating with evil. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I really wanted to bring this to the point of the personal confrontation at the-- at the teenage level. In other words, young people encounter various circumstances in their school situation, in their social situation. It is difficult to, say, take exception or to speak out. Or I just wanted to explore some of your thoughts, especially when there are authority figures involved, like teachers, principals, parents, et cetera. 

FRANK LOGUE: Well, I'd say two things. I think one would hope that young people can-- can sen-- are sensitive enough to know that if-- if you're 15 or 16 years old and somebody in your group starts talking about the niggers or the kikes or the wops-- that that-- where that leads. That that-- that is prejudice. And that-- and you're hearing today it's against some other group. But it could be against you in the future. 

And I think there's a very strong obligation on the people that deal with young people-- rabbis and ministers and priests, school teachers and administrators-- to have a climate that encourages people to-- to speak up and to-- to resist that kind of stereotyping. And you're right, it's kids of 15 and 16 are very affected by their peers, and they don't want to fight the standards of their peer group. On the other hand, they shouldn't let the standards of their peer group slip to a point where pretty soon they're engaging in bigotry. And the sooner that it's resisted, the better. It doesn't-- it doesn't stop itself. 

FRANK LOGUE: Oh, one of the-- one of the circumstances that we hear about during the Nazi period was that people were singled out, and therefore the target of abuse. In the case of the Jews, it was wearing a star. And there is always a fear of being singled out, whether it's singled out for discrimination or singled out because of expression to confront discrimination. Now that's a fragile distinction. And I wonder what your reaction to the circumstance of being singled out would be, given those two different aspects of it on the spectrum. 

FRANK LOGUE: Yeah, one-- one hopes, of course, that people will, if in their peer group this kind of thing happens, will stand up and speak out. But I think it's the responsibility of teachers, and as I say, clergymen and others not to just wait for a hero to come along. Because maybe in a group of kids, nobody will be the hero who stands up and fights back and speaks out for justice and tolerance. 

So I think there's a strong obligation on the part of those in a leadership position to promote that. And I will go, of course, well beyond the teachers and people in the clergy. I think it's very important for political leaders, for mayors, and governors, and people like that, and business leaders to be very outspoken on the subject of openness. 

And I hate the word tolerance, because that-- that's a sort of paternalistic thing-- but equal opportunity. So I-- I've tried in my own life to do that. I tried to do that as mayor, to indicate that. When I was a young lawyer, I was active in the kinds of organizations that promoted better relationships between nationality groups and religious groups and so on. 

So I say that the clear moral is that silence is not neutral. Silence on the part of leaders and people in the community can let bad things happen. And so you can't say, I didn't do it. I didn't say a word. You have to speak up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there anything you wanted to ask? 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Unless there's anything that you wanted to add. That was a super ending. OK. Thank you. 

[CLICK] 

CREW: Three-- 