[TEST TONE] HELEN ROSENZWEIG: You, probably, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um, as I spoke to you on the phone last night, and I was telling you that what we'd really like to hear is a whole personal account of your life. Not just a historical-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --account of events that happened, but things that, you know, happened to you and your family and the meanings that you shared from this experience. And we'd like you to begin by giving your full name and where you were born and a bit about, you know, your family, your parents and brothers and sisters. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: My name is Helen Rosenzweig, born Mandelbaum, in Radom, Poland. But I lived in Zwolen, in a small town, as they call it in Jewish, a shtetl. I had parents, two brothers, and a sister. My sister survived. The rest of the family didn't. 

[COUGH] 

We stayed in Zwolen till 1939, till the beginning of the war, which was September 1st. Uh, this, uh-- the town was completely destroyed by bombardment. Our family left for Radom. We-- what we had before, in-- in-- in that small town was a quite comfortable, happy life, although we experienced a lot of antisemitism before the war, particularly the two years before the war, since '37. 

Because when Hitler came to power, in '33, these years the Poles tried to take and copy the Germans. Uh, we experienced small-- not in the way of a pogrom, but small student riots. And whenever there was a riot, they went out to beat up Jews. 

There was experience-- we experienced, also, people, young thugs, that they stood near Jewish stores, and they didn't let customers go in. I, myself, experienced, uh, very bad feelings with the classmates of mine. That they were-- they used to come to my house, eat together lunch and so on. And, uh, after '37, '38, they were just like they didn't know us. 

In 1940, during the war, when there was no transportation, and we were not supposed to go from one place to another, and I had an experience that we were hitchhiking a ride, with a friend of mine, who was a school mate of mine. And she told the guy that I'm a Jew. And she-- he shouldn't take me into the car. So these were things that they were shocking to us, but, gradually, we got used to them. 

Now, as I said yesterday, uh, there wasn't, uh, like rich and poor or middle class. But there were poor people, and there were people that they were well-to to do. I come from a family that I never knew what hunger is or what lack of anything. I had a lot of love, affection and enough of material things that I didn't lack anything. 

Although, when the war broke out, then when we didn't have that, I think it supplemented. The love and the closeness of the family supplemented these things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you had a relatively comfortable life? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yes. Uh, not in comparison with the life that I lead now or the life that people lead in the United States. But on the level that it was the life in a small Polish town, we were very comfortable. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you when the war broke out? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: When the war broke out, I was 16. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had mentioned to me, on the phone, about the different Zionist organizations and youth groups. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yes. There were a lot of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you part of that? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Uh, no. I was sort of a outsider looking in. [LAUGHS] 

Um, like I mentioned yesterday, my older brother was quite active in leftist organizations. This was sort of like the messiah for the Jewish people to embrace communism or a leftist organization, then everything would be all right with the world. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Leftist Zionist, like some-- Shomer HaTza'ir? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Right. My sister was a Zionist. And there were always discussions in the house. And, you know, I listened. And I took part in them. But I never joined. And, uh, my second brother, from the oldest, he was the same way. He didn't join in the organization. 

My father was a very liberal man. Like I said, they were always two newspapers, every day, although we had to wait for them, sometimes, till 12:00 or 1 o'clock in the afternoon, because they had to arrive with the bus. But they were always there. They were in Yiddish. 

We spoke Yiddish. And also, my parents spoke a very well Polish and also Russian, because they were under the Russian occupation before Poland was liberated. 

And, uh, well, the-- our lives changed completely when the war broke out. It was-- we came out after the bombardments, just what we had on ourselves. There was nothing left. The business, the house, the apartment, the-- whatever was, everything was bombed out. 

And we started new. My father said that everything is going be all right. You know, we can start new. And we're going to be fine. Not expecting what would happen, because nobody could realize that such a calamity or Holocaust would happen. 

They couldn't believe it, because my parents, when they went through the First World War, you know, it was a hardship. It was going from one place to the other or not having enough food but not complete destruction. 

And I think that's how-- there could have been-- more people could have survived if they would have believed, if they would have read Mein Kampf, like the younger generation. I mean we knew what was, because there was an episode when we came back. 

We went to the big city, to Radom. And we stayed there till 1941. In 1941, they closed up the city. And all the Jews had to move out, whichever places they lived, and they gave them about six streets for the whole Jewish population. And that was before '42, when they prepared the people for the destruction, for the Aussiedlung. 

Can I give another English word or the "Aussiedlung" is, uh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- I don't know what-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: De-Jew-ification. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --if that was-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: The-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The Final Solution. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: The Final Solution, right. So then they had people more in one-- more in compact, where they could much easier round them up and take them away. And then that time, my father said that he doesn't want to stay in the ghetto. And we went back to that small town, to Zwolen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you afraid to go back there. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: No. It was easier, much easier to live, much easier to get food in a smaller town. And being that we lived there before, my father had a lot of people, peasants from outside the town, that they-- you know, that he knew. And they would brought-- bring in-- exchange for a piece of leather or a pair of shoes, exchange for food. So it was much easier. 

And from there, we stay till 1942. And in '42, when it was the Final Solution, they were taken. We went to a-- [AHEM] to a big, uh, estate, where the Germans were running-- it was a Polish estate, but it-- it was supervised by a German. Because they needed the food for the army. It was an estate, hundreds and hundreds of acres of land. 

And we went there, because we were told that these people, who would be working there, they'd be able to save themselves. And the whole family went there, my father, uncles, and aunts. And the day when it came for the-- for the Final Solution, they came, and they round up all the older people. 

And I happened to work in the fields close by where I saw what was going on. And I went over to the German, and I asked him if I can go with my parents. 

I have to stop for a moment. [AHEM] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is it very painful? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: I think that's the most painful part. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Part of it? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: [AHEM] And I went. He said I should go. Ahh. And they took us. We walked for about four hours. And finally, we came to the train station. [AHEM] 

And we stood at the station, because they were very busy. In that time, they didn't have enough trains for about two hours. And then they counted the people. Let's say they had an allowance of 300 people. And when they took away the people, they were missing 10 women. 

And a big German, on a horse, he came riding around the trains. And he picked me out. He said, "Du Schwarze," you know, "dark one." And I-- a cousin of mine, who one sister survived, who is now in-- in California. And she was sitting right next to me. And I took her. I said, come with me. He said, no, you can't go with them. 

And I didn't want to go, but my mother told me to go. [AHEM] 

That she would be sure that all four-- all I have, four children survive. Because my older brother was on Irish papers-- on Aryan-- you know, on, uh, Polish papers, as a gentile. And my younger brother was in the same place, but he was on another field. And my older sister was in Radom with her husband. 

So we thought that-- she thought that nothing else is going to happen, that we would survive. Needless to say, that, you know, they didn't think that what was going to go after this. And after that experience, and I went back to that place. And from there, my sister sent-- it would sound very unusual-- and SS truck, which she bribed the SS. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did she do that? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, they had permission to pick up Jewish workers. And-- and the, you know-- after-- after they-- the solution, they were left about 2,000 Jews in Radom, where my sister was. And they lived in about three or four streets. 

So in each room, there were either five couples or three couples and four or five young people. So there were two young boys that they worked for the SD, which is the elite, Hitler's elite, not the SS, the SD. 

And they said that they can-- for money, that they can bribe the SS. And they have-- they would have a permit to go the 30 miles-- the 30 kilometers to that place, to that estate, and say that they have five Jews there, that they can take them out and bring them to Radom. Because we wanted to be together. 

So through-- another-- there was a 10-year-old boy, who looked just like a gentile boy. And he was the go-between, between Radom and Zwolen. And I knew where my-- my oldest brother was hiding. And his hiding place became very bad, because he thought that any day that they going to catch him. Through that boy, I used to receive the letters. 

And, uh, I send him a letter telling him that my sister is going to arrange that, probably, on this and this day, that the trucks would come. And he should come. So he sort of-- I don't know how, but he came to that same place where we were. 

So there were three of us, my brother, my two brothers and myself. And then I had two cousins, one cousin who is in Los Angeles, and a brother of hers, who was, in that time, about 12 years old. And we were trying to run through these hills. And as we ran, the three of us made it. And they didn't make it. They took them back to the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: They got caught. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: They got caught but not by Germans, by the Poles who were watching the camp. So we arrived in Radom to the ghetto. And we were-- the four of us were united. And the two-- my two cousins came later by train. They risked their lives. But they didn't want to stay. 

They also didn't want to, because we were a very close-knit family. Like I told you yesterday, my-- my brother-- my father had five brothers and two sisters. And these cousins were very close to us. And, uh-- and in Radom, it started hell. We had to look for places where to work, because if we didn't work, uh, we would-- our lives were threatened. 

And the good places to find to work meant at least sitting in a room or sewing something or producing something. And you got your bread or anything to eat. Otherwise, you had to go out and dig ditches. And that's what I did. 

Sometimes I was lucky that, for about five months, I had a job in the-- in shops where they were producing clothing, all kinds of clothing for the Germans, shoes and clothing and hats and everything. And after this, they starting to cut out, to take out a lot of people. 

And they were always-- well, every two months or every three months, there were different Aktions, different type-- kind of disturbances, where they looked for an excuse. And they would take out Jews or either shoot them or take them away and shoot them some other place or take them to another camp. 

But the most incident that stands out in my mind is the Purim Aktion, what they called. On Purim-- about a week before Purim, in 1943, they-- they let out rumors. The Germans let out the rumors to the Jewish police that anybody, especially intellectuals, [AHEM] doctors, lawyers, professors, dentists, that they can sign up. And these people would be honored to go to Palestine in exchange for other prisoners. 

Naturally, people find out. There are a lot of people that they signed up. We were so naive that we still believe the hopeful life. It was so great that people still believed in it, that maybe there's a sparkle of honesty or a spark-- a sparkle of humanity in them. 

And there were about 60 or 70 people. I don't remember exactly, but all the intellectuals from Radom, with their-- if there was a mother, still, they put the mother, if there were small children, they put small children on. 

And I remember my oldest brother was on the list. And then they took him off. Somehow, he had the feeling he didn't want to separate from us. And he went in, and they said he doesn't want to go-- be on the list. 

And, uh, we-- the same day, on Purim, they came in with the trucks and with the machine guns, and they took them out. And nobody survived, not one person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever hear what happened to them? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Uh, yes, because there were always people, Jewish people, that they had Polish passports. And whenever there was an Aktion that they wanted to record it for future generations. So there was somebody. If we didn't hear it the same day, we heard it the next day that they were shot. They were taken out 10 or 15 miles from Radom, and they were killed. 

And then after this, they-- they took me to-- because they started. From the 2,000 people, there were 1,000 and, you know, 800 or 700, less and less. Because they started-- actually, what it was, was that the Germans have their stores with the Jews. In order not to go to the Russians-- Russian war or in order not to go, the SS kept these Jews as a protection for themselves. 

So they didn't-- they didn't have actually work for us. They made us do all kinds of menial things that they didn't have any meaning. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just as a way to-- of saving themselves? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Just as a way of saving themselves. But as they couldn't go around doing it anymore, then they started taking out more and more. And then the final was that-- the finality was that there were left 5,000-- 500 Jews in the shops. They were called "shops," where they were producing clothing for the Germans. 

And my sister was there. She was left, the last one of. My oldest brother, when in that time, when he saw that the situation is getting very bad, there was an ammunition factory in Pionki. And, uh, this was the safest place to work in. 

And he went there. And my second brother and myself were sent to an ammunition factory outside of Radom. And, uh, we stayed there till 1943, the end of '43. And when they liquidated the 500 people from Radom, they had to make room for these 500 people in that camp. So they took out 500 people. 

And I was watching. I always felt that I can protect myself. But somehow, I-- I would get away, either hide someplace or disappear. I had a great faith that I can do it. And the older-- my older brother was about eight years or nine years older, but I felt that I had to protect him, that he was the one-- 

Well, I have to go back to '41. Can I? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sure. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: That, uh, I give you an incident why I, as a youngster, had to protect him, not that he was helpless. But, uh, in '41, we were still free to walk the streets in Radom. But if a German walked on the sidewalk, and if a Jew was approaching him, he had to take off the-- his hat and walk to the-- into the middle of the street. 

Now, if you took off your hat, there was certain Germans say, hey, you're not my-- my-- my equal. Why did you take off your hat? And he would beat him. If you didn't take off your hat, because we were at war the armbands-- you know, the sig-- insignia with the Jewish star? He would say, why didn't you there with the-- there was a law that you have to take off your hat. 

My brother decided not to take off his hat. He didn't care. And he got beaten up. And after that, he-- he-- not beaten up. He just slapped him in the face. And after that, he didn't leave the house. He just would go down in the courtyard. But he wouldn't leave, go out in the street. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was that affected by that? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: It was-- he-- he-- he said it would be-- if he would have given him a physical beating, it wouldn't be so hard for him to take it as the slap in the face. And that's why, through this, it stayed with him. And he was-- there were many times that they took him to work. They took my older brother, my younger brother. My oldest, you know? 

There were periods of time where they would just come into the house and take out people and take them. They would disappear for a day or two days or three days. We wouldn't know where they went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you feel when that happened? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, we felt terrible. But we prayed, and we hoped that they would show up. So my-- my-- second from the oldest brother, he was a manager in a brick factory, which was, uh, my uncle's place. And, uh, he was the director there, with-- in the office and everything. So he used to handle horses, used to love to go horseback riding. He had one of these carriages with two big, you know? 

So my older brother was afraid of horses. So when they came to the SS to work, as soon as they saw somebody who could handle horses, they didn't give him the job to clean the horses. They give the job to the older one, who couldn't handle it. 

So that's why. He saw the cruelty of the them. He was a very fine, delicate person, a good human being. And he sort of just didn't care. And that's why, when I was with him, I always felt that if I see that they are not taking him-- and I knew the transport was going to a bad place. 

We didn't know where they are going to take us. But I knew it's-- it's not good. It was better to stay in-- outside of Radom. So I was watching if they're taking my brother. If they leave my brother, then I can manage. If they don't leave my brother, then I join him. I would go with him. 

Well, they didn't take my brother. And I couldn't manage. [LAUGHS] They took me. So but I was very-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did that happen? What was that like? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, we were standing around on a-- on a place, you know in a big place. And everybody was around, uh, uh. And they were-- they needed 500 people. It was up-- there was the SS there, but it was mainly up to the Jewish police. You know, they would pick out people and put them on the side. Cut-off, say, 100 people. Say, you stay here, you stay there. You know, there was always left and right, all through that history. 

And, uh, I was staying on the side, watching where my brother would go. And my brother went to the good side. And then I was trying to push myself to the go-- to the-- go to the other side. And three, four people before me were cut-off, and we went through the other side. 

And-- but the next day, my sister came to that place, the-- my sister who was left in Radom. And, uh, I remember, I cried for about 12 hours in the-- in the train. You know, we went into these cattle trains. We didn't know where we were going. And finally, when we arrived, we arrived in Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were with your sister? No? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Alone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was afterwards? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah, after, right. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the trip like to Majdanek? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Uh, it was horrible. It was horrible. We weren't as crowded as the trains were later on, because there were only 150 women-- no, 250 women and 250 men. And if I remember it exactly, they-- we were separated. The men were separated from the women, so there were 250 people in the car, which wasn't too bad. 

Because, later on, there were 500. There were people on top of each other. And the transport that we went from Plaszów to Auschwitz or from other places, later on, that was worse. It wasn't bad. I remember sitting on straw, having room enough to move my feet and my arms. And that's why it wasn't bad. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER 1: By comparison. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: That's right. And, uh-- eh, Majdanek was a death camp. But when we came, the crematorium stopped working there. They didn't burn people anymore. They tortured. They shot people. But, uh, I tried to get around, do my work, get my piece of bread, you know? 

I had very good friends, very close friends. That was-- oh, it was like having a family, that I wasn't alone. Most of the time, people-- I mean you would hear, now, even saying, uh, a lager-sister, which is just like-- like having a sister. 

And, uh, the other thing, the good thing about Majdanek was that, uh, we had a Lageraeltester, which was the head of the camp. And then we had one who was the head of our barrack. And she was an extremely humane person. She gave us so much courage. 

She was older. You know, old in a way. Let's say she was six or seven years older. To us, she seemed like-- like a mother. And I remember the first night when we came in, she said that she would try to make us as comfortable and as possible. Whatever there is possible, she would do for us. And I think she did. [AHEM] 

INTERVIEWER 1: How terribly unusual. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: And-- a very unusual woman. And she was from Warsaw. When they-- when they had the crematoriums, before we came into Majdanek, they destroyed, they burned everybody. 

But there were 20 women left. And they were called the witnesses, the Aktions Gefangene. That means they were witness of all the Aktions, of everything that was going on in Majdanek. And they knew that they were marked for death. [AHEM] That, uh, as soon as the transport goes to their destination, to their death destination, because everybody went there, they are the first ones. 

And the-- the women know that, all the 20 women. They were beautiful. When we came in, we were already undernourished. And they gave us this blue and brown-- white stripes. You know these pashaki, they were called, which means in Poland-- in Polish "stripes." I mean you probably saw them. 

And they gave us the Holland shoe, the shoes, the wooden shoes from Holland, which was, in mud, during the winter, it was torture to walk. It was absolutely impossible. And she said, don't worry. You get used to it. Just have hope. And she would talk to us every night. 

And, uh, when finally we knew that we are going to leave, uh, uh, Majdanek and go to a-- to another camp, we tried to save that woman, myself, a friend of mine. Fortunately, they are all alive except one, one woman. One is in Israel. One is in, uh, New-- in Brooklyn and myself. 

And we had a meeting, without her. The reason why we tried to save her. In our transport, there was a woman about 28 or 29 years old. How she got through to Majdanek, nobody could understand. She was crazy. I mean she was the term "crazy," not retarded but mentally ill. She didn't talk. 

And she was ill for years. She came from a very wealthy family. She was even with her governess when-- when they took her. You know, after the-- the Final Solution, when they took her parents and her brothers away, but then she was standing with that woman. And the irony of it, that they picked that woman out and her for life. 

But she didn't-- she didn't know what was going on, at all. And we knew-- there was some people in our group that they were a little older than me, from Radom, that they said that she-- she studied in France. And somehow, she had some kind of a breakdown, whatever it was. And she remained that way. 

And, uh, our idea was that, if we can exchange that woman for the woman who was our, uh, Stubenführer, you know from the barrack, that we would do a good deed. Meanwhile, she can be saved. We don't know what's going to be later, but she deserves to live. 

But the dilemma was, do we-- do we have a right to do it? I mean exchange one life for another? So we took the woman into our, you know, group. And we said, well, you are older than we are. What do you think? 

And she broke down, and she cried terribly. She said that she appreciates it so much that we even thought about it, that we are so-- that we still have our sanity and a little humanity to think of these things. And that's what kept us alive, I think. 

And, uh-- and then she told us that she has a three-year-old child hidden in Warsaw. And she knows that the child probably would survive. And when she told us that, we said, yes, definite. All three of us, we looked and we said, yes, let's do it. 

And they lined us up the next day. And we took it. The 20 were separated, the 20 women. And they separated us. And they took us. And we took that woman into our-- our line. And the other one, the sick, mentally sick woman to do with the 20 women. And one of the women among the 20 told them that she doesn't belong there. That she's one among us. And they exchanged her. 

And then we went right-- we went-- from Majdanek, we went to Plaszów, and they went straight to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That must have been something. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Some-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, there are all kinds of people, yeah. But I wish she would be alive. Because she saved-- she-- I think she-- Majdanek was the place where it was a breaking point. You know, a point where you could go on and have a lot of-- still believe in humanity. And that's what she gave us. And-- or not, say the heck with it. I don't want to go on anymore. 

And when you said this, then-- then it happened. Because you really didn't fight. And by fighting, I don't mean fighting and fists-- with fists, but fighting just to find a piece of beet. Not beet, beet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Beets? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Uh, let me-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Borscht. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Borscht. And, uh, together, then get your cheeks a little bit rosy, that you should look better, perhaps, when they selected you. Or-- or fighting, like I mentioned yesterday. If you have a piece of bread, to share it with somebody, no matter how hungry you were. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was an interesting-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Or if you have-- or if you have, uh, a-- a big shoelace, you know, in that time, in Auschwitz, they changed our shoes. They gave us shoes. But if somebody had big feet, they got small-- small shoes. If somebody had small feet, they got a big shoe. 

But if you had a big shoelace, and somebody was walking around, and their shoes were falling off-- And I don't know, with a piece of glass or somebody got a spoon that he made it sharp, and we could cut off a piece of string and give to the next woman that. And she could tie her shoes and look more presentable in the morning. 

Because every morning, we were lined up on the-- on the place. And, uh, the SS came. And they looked over. And if somebody didn't look good-- not that anybody looked good. But if somebody looked like, uh-- you had to look. You have to stand up straight and your head high and show that you still-- you still have the strength to work, that they can pump it out of you for another month or two months. 

And that-- this was-- I think that that woman gave me a lot of courage seeing that there is-- because there were so many people that they downgraded you. And yet, if you find somebody that could encourage you, could give you-- you look up to, so you felt there's still good people outside, and we're going to-- going to live through it. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you find much of that spirit of camaraderie in-- in the camps? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yes. Yes, one, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were telling me-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, they were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --a story that was interesting with your cousin and the bread that he-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah, well, one morning in Auschwitz, uh, we didn't go to work in that time. And that was the worst part, because we were afraid. They usually came into the camp. If we marched out, 6 o'clock in the morning, to any destination, we knew we were safe for that day. But if we stayed in camp for a day, we knew that somebody would come in or-- or take out the gun or just go on a spree of shooting or there are going to be selections to the crematoriums. 

And one morning, a friend of mine came in. And she said, Helena, come on. There's some place, they want somebody to sweep floors. Maybe we can get an extra piece of bread. And, uh, I went with her. And we swept the floors. And we got a chunk of bread. 

I carried around that piece of bread till about-- it was-- we finished our work about 1 o'clock-- till about 3:00, 4 o'clock in the afternoon, arguing with myself, should I eat it or shouldn't I? Should I share it with my sister, with my cousin? The dilemma was that my cousin, I knew it, needed it more, because my sister came to-- from Radom direct to Auschwitz not going through other camps. 

[COUGH] [AHEM] Excuse me. And, uh, my cousin was much younger. She's younger than I am and much younger than my sister. And the younger the person was, I think, the more the hunger that they felt. And, uh, about 7 o'clock at night, when there was the curfew, you couldn't go out from one block to the other, from one barrack to the other, I decided to share the bread with my cousin. 

And I broke the bread in two pieces. And I went into her barrack. And I gave her the bread. And, uh, the head of the barrack, which was also a Jewish woman, came over. And she said that I don't belong in that barrack. And I told her, I said this and this. 

And she started hitting me. I mean my face was swollen for about two or three days, but it felt so good. It felt wonderful that I made that decision, that I could share my-- the bread no matter how hungry I was. And these are the things that-- that sustain people, uh, doing deeds that-- knowing that they cannot-- couldn't take away the humane part of us. 

They could take away-- they could torture us, physically. But our minds, they couldn't take away. They couldn't black out our minds. If we wanted to have good thoughts and do good things, we could, as little as the thing was. 

There were other things that were very good that, if somebody-- for me, I think they helped a lot. That whenever I worked on something, I thought that I would do sabotage. The sabotage didn't amount to much. You know, I remember once, I worked. [SNIFF] We were sorting out military fur coats going-- now I'm going back to '42, to Plaszów-- '43. Uh, that they were-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was that Majdanek? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Eh? No, Plaszów, that was after Majdanek. Ah, sending these coats-- well, first of all, the fur were all robbed from Jewish people. Because we-- in '39, whoever had a fur coat, in the whole of Poland and, evidently, Hungary, and other-- other countries, too, they had to get-- we had to give it to the Germans. 

And when I sorted these coats out, they were green, uh, khaki, you know, like the German uniforms. And underneath, there was mink, there was sable, there was, uh, all kinds of ladies' furs and men's fur. 

And I got so mad. And I get-- get-- every-- I felt that every, every uniform, uh, is some women, some Jewish women or some Jewish men's coat. And they had big elastic in order to keep the waistline warm. 

And there were one-- again, about four girls. And we decided that we were going to rip out every piece of elastic, so when the German goes to the Russian front, let it blow underneath. Ha! And, uh, they also had, uh, you know, to cover their faces. It was made out of, uh, wool. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mask? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Like a mask, you know that they should be warm. Now we decided that these would be very good for warm underwear for ourselves. So we took two. We sewed them together. And from the-- from the-- the waistline, that we had the-- the elastic, we put in the elastic, so at least we were warm. 

And we started giving it away to other inmates. We were working there. And I'm sure that every coat, they brought to the Russian front, that came through our factory was damaged. And that gave us a wonderful feeling. 

And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you-- when you talk about it, your whole face lights up. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah. Because I felt, uh, part of it I think is-- that's why I survived. Because if I-- if I would believe in the evil that they are, you know, what they were doing, I don't think I could have survived. I believed that-- to the last minute, I believed that I'm going to survive, because I believe in goodness and people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long were you in Plaszów? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: In Plaszów, I was about five months. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So until 1944 almost. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: 1944, yeah, till, uh, August or September '44. And from there, we went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Again, in-- in a, uh-- everybody or, uh-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: No, they liquidated completely. The-- the older people, they-- I have written a lot about Plaszów. I wish I could translate it in English. Aha heh. Because it was, uh-- it was entirely different than it was in-- in Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. How so? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Majdanek was strictly run by the SS. Plaszów was run a lot by Jewish police, and the SS were sort of like in the background. But it was more a working camp. So it wasn't so bad in Plaszów. 

Because, uh, we went out to work, like I mentioned before, you know, sorting the fur, the coats. Uh, other people had other work. There were tailors. There were shoemakers. There were all kind. And there were also a lot of people that they went out to Krakow. Plaszów is a suburb of Krak-- That they went out there to work. 

So if people had the-- the possibility of going out, you could exchange. If you still had a few zlotys, you could buy an egg or you could buy an extra piece of bread. So it wasn't completely at that camp. Uh, but the, uh, the-- the ak-- the Aktion-- the-- 

What they did there were very atrocious. You know, if they did something, if the Germans undertook something to do-- [AHEM] There was a hill there. And like every-- every few days, they would take out people on that hill and shoot them. And they would tell us to watch in the morning. 

You know, in every camp, there was the ritual of getting up, 5 o'clock in the morning, going down to that platz, that Appellplatz and staying there and count-- be counted until they had the-- the right amount, to see if anybody escaped from camp. 

And, uh, it was terrible. No matter rain, shine, snow, heat, cold, you had to be up at 4 o'clock, 5 o'clock down there and, uh, look good. Again, look good, even without-- without hair or-- Because in Auschwitz, they shaved off our hair. 

And it's something. I don't know. You are a psychologist? [LAUGHS] I would like-- I asked Sally a lot of time. I guess it was hysterics or was it really that we were so young. And-- because I remember I was with my, you know, lager-sister. 

And when they took us into Auschwitz, uh, that we still had our hair and, uh, the clothing, whatever we got from the other camp. Went in one door, and we got shower. And they shaved off our hair in a horrible way. It was, uh, done very-- not only inhumane. 

I mean, in that time, if anybody still had their sanity, I mean that was the edge to say, no, I don't want to live anymore. I don't want to live in-- in that condition. Not because of the beauty, because we didn't have a mirror to look at it. But just of the humiliation, we were terribly humiliated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Degraded. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Terribly degraded. But when we walked down, and I looked at my friend, and she looked at me, we burst out laughing. And I don't think it was a hysterical laughter. It was just funny. We looked funny. 

And then later on, when we saw other people in camp, and, you know, this one or that one, we said, doesn't she? She looks entirely different. Don't she look funny? So I don't know. Was it the verge of hysteria or was it natural? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like in-- in-- in Plaszów, that you say you've written some things and some stories about Plaszów. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah, there was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there anything else about Plaszów that you-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: There was 

INTERVIEWER 2: That you remember? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: --one especially Aktion. You know, one-- one of these-- how do I word that Ak-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Aktion. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Aktion. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Aktion. That they-- there were still children in that camp, mothers with children. And, uh, one morning, we came to that place, you know, where they counted us. And they started taking away the children from the mothers. 

And, uh, each SS man or SS woman, they told them such nice stories. And the music was playing, blasting the loudspeakers. And here, the children didn't want to leave their mothers. And it was so much pain, so much tragedy, so much-- seeing the separation, the parents. And the children were really small. 

Uh, the thing is that even a child, at three or four years old, if she knew that she leaves her mother's hand, that she's going to death. That's how they were-- they were. Somehow instinctively did they know. They'd cry. And, uh, I-- I can still hear it. And the blast of these loudspeakers, you know, that-- that Strauss waltz playing loud. And this was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Incongruity? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The German-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --culture with their honor. So with the-- all of these children that were-- 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Oh, they were wind up on the truck, and they were taken. They didn't even take them to Auschwitz. Like I said before, there was a little hill. They took them up there. There were children. There were older people. And in that same transport, my friends still had her parents, her father and mother. And they went with them, too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you console each other? After the-- ah, I can imagine something like that happening, and-- and, uh, people being absolutely desperate afterwards. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah, but there was-- We did. We talked to them, you know? But that was no consolation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: I mean how can you tell a mother? What can you tell her if she had two children taken away? She wanted to go with them. Yet, either they wouldn't let her or her instinct wouldn't let her go. You know, it's-- it's something that, uh, I don't think anybody can imagine it. 

It's the same thing like I said before. You know, my instinct told me to stay with my parents. Yet, later on, when I started re-- you know, rationalizing these things, evidently I wanted to go. I didn't want to stay. I wanted to live. I wanted to know what married life is. 

I mean, I was-- really, we were philosophizing with my friend, who is in Israel. She's a wonderful, wonderful woman. And my other friend, and we would sit in Auschwitz and talk. And said, God, we didn't live. We want to get married. We want to know the feeling what it is to make love to a man. We want to know what it is to have a child. 

So I think, you know, maybe with these women that the children were taken away, subconsciously, they had the same feeling. They still wanted to continue their life. I don't know how they are now if they're alive. I know one is. She's in Brazil, but I never saw her. [AHEM] 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you were transferred to Auschwitz, isn't' that right? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yes. And in Auschwitz, I was till the end of 1944. My sister and I were one of the last transports out of Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you stayed together right through the-- the whole? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, I was-- I came to Auschwitz from Plaszów. So my number is a different number than my sister's. And she stayed in a different, uh, barrack. But during the day, we could see each other. 

And that was our worry, that we shouldn't be separated. Because, many times, they separate them-- they-- they take-- took transports out of Auschwitz according to the barracks. And, uh, one day, they took out our barrack, which were about 240 women. And they lined us up on the-- on the Appellplatz, on the place. 

And, uh, I didn't know where they were going to send-- everybody wanted to get out of Auschwitz. But the reason why I didn't want to go out-- go with that transport was not to go, not to separate myself from my sister. 

And, uh, when I was in Plaszów, there were six women sent back to Radom. For what reason? And I was one that I wanted to go back so badly. But they didn't take me. And this stayed in my mind. So when that day, when that was that Aktion, where they were sending way people to some other camp, and I didn't want to go, I was very brave. 

I went over to the SS. And usually, even as downtrodden we were, but if you showed a little-- not authority, but sureness of yourself to an SS woman. And I went over to her. And I said, listen, these-- this is a transport from Plaszów. I came from Radom by mistake. The reason I was sent back. You know, I made myself one of these six that were sent back. It wasn't true. 

And somehow, I showed them my number. My number is a Plaszów number. And I said, you see, with me, there is six other women. And I picked out my friend, and that friend who is in, uh, Israel, and two more-- one died-- two more. There were six. 

And I knew either she's going to kill me or she's going to let me go-- say, all right, stay. And she made her arm. She said, OK, you can stay with the other Jews. What difference does it make? Now they took out the transport, out, about 10 miles south of Auschwitz. And they killed everybody. 

And the reason why we know about it, there are two survivors, two sisters-- I told you yesterday-- that they escaped. They hid in a peasant's hut. They ran. As they heard shooting, they started running. And they ran to a haystack. And they hid there. And the peasants hid them till the liberation, Polish peasants. 

INTERVIEWER 1: My goodness. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: They are now-- we had a reunion in Israel. We saw them. So I don't know, if you call it fate-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you stayed on in Auschwitz? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: I set-- yeah. And then, already, I went to the same barrack, because we were only six, to the same barrack. The same SS woman said, so if you are from Radom, you go there. And we stay together till liberation, till Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the liberation like? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Well, I don't know much about the liberation, because I was-- I was sick. I had typhoid. Uh, the last thing I remember, my sister had typhoid. And I saw the way she suffered, laying there. Because the dirt-- there was no water for the last two-- for the two weeks before the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No water at all? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: And I don't mean that to wash oneself, water to drink. The hunger was an-- an undescribable way. The deaths were piled up. I mean, you know the history of Bergen-Belsen, when the camps were opened. 

And, uh, my sister got through the typhoid. As soon as she got through, I became sick. And laying on the piece of wood, you know, the bed, what you call, I heard somebody pass by. And they said that if anybody who has typhoid, and they want to put their names on a-- name on a list, they can go to the SS barracks, which is much-- the conditions are much better. 

And the-- the last thing that I heard, that can you imagine that they have white sheets? And this got into my mind. And I said to my sister, I don't want to lay here. That's it. I want to go to sign up my name. She said, no. You know already the Germans. You know that it's a trick. I said, I want to take a chance. 

And sure enough, it wasn't a trick. They took me there. And I slept on a-- on a sheet. Because they were the SS barracks. And they-- already, they knew that they-- you know, they're losing the war, that it's their last day. So they just put us there, to rot or to, you know, to die. 

And that's why I say, I didn't know. But I-- I didn't know. We knew-- we knew that we were close to liberation. But I didn't-- I-- I was so weak that I thought that, that's it. That's the last, the last minute. 

And then, what I remember was that a woman, a doctor came in. She was also an inmate. And she spoke Hungarian. Uh, funny, there wasn't a good rapport between Hungarians and Czechoslovakians and Polish Jews. And I think the reason for it is because, let's say, when the Polish Jews came to Auschwitz, and they were the beginners, the builders of the camp. And they struggled. And they suffered the most. 

So naturally, when the next transport came, and it was a Hungarian transport, these women had it a little better. They-- they learned already to cope with life. Or they got a higher job. I don't know if they were good or bad, you know? 

But-- and that's how it developed, that animosity. Or everybody stuck together because of language barriers, you know? And, uh-- and it stuck in my mind that if I tell her that I'm Polish, she's not going to do anything for me. 

So she ask me, "nem todom," is "I don't understand," "I don't know." And I learned a few, uh, Hungarian words. So she asked me, are you from Budapest? And I shook my head, yes. And I remember, I don't know how she got it. She came in with an injection. And she gave me an injection. And then she came in with a piece of bread. 

And I don't know, maybe-- maybe that's why I survive. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah. Then after, then, the next day, evidently, I came out of it. That was after being about a week or two weeks in that place. I heard the English anthem playing. And I knew, my God, that's it. We are-- we are liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Yeah. But it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was a very powerful moment to you. 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: Uh, yes. Yes and no. I think I was too sick and too hungry to realize what it is, you know, to embrace it, that-- that you are free? And yet, I wasn't free. Where do I go? What do I do? You know. 

And my first thought was to find my sister if she survived. I-- I had a pretty-- I was sure that she survived. Because I knew that she came out all right after the typhoid. And figuring it out, that it's another 10 days or 2 weeks, so I knew that, uh. 

And, oh, it was-- it was horrible. I mean even after survival. We were so hungry. It wasn't like the Americans. The English were very, very cold. First of all, they kept us in quarantine for about, uh-- till everybody got better, all the typhoid patients. 

And I knew. I found out from one Englishman, from-- through somebody who spoke a little English, that it would take about six weeks. And I knew I couldn't be there six weeks without-- without anybody. I was alone, completely. You know like before, I said, well, you need your peers, and you need your lager-sister, and you need you-- somebody to hold on to. When I came out, I was completely alone. 

And, uh, they didn't give us even beds to sleep. We slept in the same barracks, you know from the SS. And, uh, I remember sleeping on the floor on straw. And they brought in enough food for us. And-- but mostly it stands in my mind is that I would came in to register. I had to register and with the English. 

And there was an Englishman. And he was eating-- I still remember-- white bread with ham and cheese. And if he didn't choke on it with my eyes looking at it, I don't know. But he didn't offer it. And you know, later on, when I spoke with people that they were liberated by the Americans, I was so much surprised. Or was it probably just that one person. 

But anyway, I-- I stayed there for about two nights. And after the third night, I had two-- I heard-- overheard two boys talking, that tomorrow morning-- Now, the place where we-- where I stayed, while-- while I was sick from typhoid, was about five miles away from Bergen-Belsen, from the camp. 

And I heard these two boys talking. They were sick, too, on typhoid. And they said, we're not going to stay there. Tomorrow, we're going to go out. And we're going to get from a German-- because there were German houses around. We're going to steal a bicycle. And we're going to go there to the camp, because they had somebody there, too. 

And I didn't say anything the whole night. I was thinking about it, that I'm going with them. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER 2: They didn't know it, huh? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: No, they didn't know. So in the morning, I went over to them. And I told them, I said, listen, I overheard what you were saying, that you were going take two bicycles. I want to go with you. I'm sure I have a sister. Please, take me. I don't know the way. And I'm too weak to do it by myself. I don't have the courage. 

And they said, listen, we barely can walk. How can we then-- we could take the responsibility of you? I said, don't worry about me. You don't have to take me on the bike. I walk. I have the strength to walk. I have the will to walk. They said, OK. 

And I walked to there. And when I came to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How far was it? 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: --to Bergen-Belsen, you know, it was cleaned up in that time, already. There were no dead bodies anymore. The barracks were much cleaner, but they still stayed in the same place. And I came-- and I ask somebody if they know-- I knew already people-- if they know if my sister is alive. And they said, yes, this one's alive. And that one is alive. Where can I find her? And she said, in this and this barrack, number 12 or 11. 

Ahh. And I remember the English, after the liberation, they gave me a black coat, a long black coat. And I still didn't have my hair. And my hair was-- were about an inch and a half and a black kerchief. I don't know. Either I looked like an old lady or I looked like a 10-year-old child, with big shoes. 

And I walked into the barrack, you know, where my sister was supposed to be. She wasn't it, but somebody else, a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] was there, who knew me. And I know her very well. Evidently, somebody told my sister that I died. 

And when she walked in and she said, ahh, [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] You know, I'm Polish. And I-- I smelled soup, such-- they started cooking there already. And she fainted. [LAUGHS] I didn't even take water. I didn't even try to revive her. I went straight for the soup. And I took my-- took a bowl of soup, and I started eating. 

And then I went up on a bed, and I fell asleep. And then my sister was there when I woke up. But today, when we meet each other, she says, Helen, why didn't you try even to pour some water on me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: [LAUGHS] 

HELEN ROSENZWEIG: I said, I was hungry. 

[LAUGHTER] 

It was more important. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wonderful. 