INTERVIEWER 1: Pleasant memories or instances that you recall that you, sometimes, with pleasure looking back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To put-- to put your life in the context of what people understand life-- and it-- so that it isn't bizarre. Like, you were living a normal life before, and then-- 

SUBJECT: All right. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then, you know, the maybe the first encounter with-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You tell us when. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --with the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 3: We're ready. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. We're rolling. All right. 

SUBJECT: OK. I was born in Bratislava in Czechoslovakia, which was a community-- a very old Jewish community established there. I always felt very much part of that community. 

However, I was a child during the war when the Germans came into Czechoslovakia. I was not yet six years old. And at that time, I was living in Brno, which was the third largest city. 

I have one recollection of the German presence of that time, which was when Hitler, I suppose, certainly went through the town. And I do remember my father saying that I was not to go in the streets. I couldn't understand why it was. He didn't explain anything to me. 

But I remember him saying, we are not going to show any support. And I felt this was a strange situation that was going on because I saw everybody else in the neighborhood going out in the street and participating in whatever there was going on. 

I had a sense of both strangeness and not total strangeness because I grew up as a German-speaking member in a family which was German-speaking, although not German at all. But my father was Austrian. My mother was from Bratislava. 

And after Hitler's coming into Brno, I remember my family decided immediately to go back to Bratislava. I came to Bratislava because it was clearly a plan of partition of Slovakia and Bohemia and Moravia. Things were not explained to me. Children, at that time, were kept in ignorance of much of what was going on politically or otherwise. And only when it impinged on actual family events were some explanations given. 

And I remember through-- between 1940 and 1944, when I left, that there was an increasing consciousness of what was happening. And, of course, one was aware of it because the whole Jewish community was very tense. And I was aware of things being said. And then when I would ask my parents, there would be these slow, very simple explanations given to me. 

I first remember seeing German soldiers just walking on the street. Nothing happened much in the beginning. But slowly, there was abuse. And the abuse came not so much from the Germans alone as it came from the native population-- the Slovaks themselves. 

The Slovaks were a rather backward nation within the Czech enclave. And they had been prejudiced against them from Prague. And they were acting the whole thing out of their resentments, of their sense of having been ignored. And they were taking it out on the Jews. 

And there would be all sorts of nasty things being said as Jews passed in the street. One of the things I remember very strongly was that this kind of abuse escalated as soon as we were supposed to wear the Jewish star. And that was, for me, a very traumatic experience. 

I remember coming home one day and seeing my mother sewing on the star on my coat. And I was aware of the fact that this was a way of singling us out. And I remember saying, let's not do this because then we can't hide. 

And she said, we have to. That is the decree. 

And what happened in the town itself was the closing in of the neighborhood. The Jews-- we did not have a ghetto. And yet, there was a ghetto atmosphere there. 

Because what happened is that certain neighborhoods where Jews lived, which were more elegant neighborhoods-- they were told they had to leave. They could not stay. So they had to move into a smaller and smaller enclave, the main street of which was Judengasse. 

And we lived in the part of town where-- the back part of the large, 18th century building faced on the Judengasse. And all these apartments on that-- in that house suddenly were just being inundated by people who had to find places. 

And I remember my mother had to take in about five or six people in addition to our family. We lived in a large apartment. So we, in effect, had to do this. This was part of our sense that the community had to stick together. 

And I do remember, slowly, this sense that even though there were no gates in the ghetto, there were no wires, that we were not welcome beyond certain streets. And I had always been a child that used to roam around, to my parents despair. But-- so I got to know the city terribly well. 

And what I would do in order to be able to continue that sense of freedom that I had would be constantly to try to wear a scarf to cover up the Jewish star. And I would pretend that if anybody addressed me in some way, I wouldn't understand what they were saying. 

But I did fear that every exit into the town outside of my immediate home was into a very hostile and dangerous environment, that I always could be found out. And I would have fantasies about, what would happen to me if they found me out? And it was always accompanied by my immediately running back home to touch base. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What would happen? 

SUBJECT: I-- the worst that I ever saw anybody was to get a very thorough beating. And curiously enough, I always expect a beating, but I never received it. I never could understand why. 

And one day, I do remember asking a teacher, whom I knew, who lived in the neighborhood, as to why everybody left me alone even though they saw me on the street. And she said to me, that's because you have blond hair. Somehow, that seemed to me to make me a little more acceptable. 

But I was aware of the fact that I didn't want to identify with the Slovaks. And yet, I wanted the freedom of the town which I had gotten so used to. And I wanted to know what was going on because my parents weren't telling me much. And I wanted to explore and sense what really was happening. 

And I-- but the worst part for me at that time was watching the transports. And the transport would just suddenly appear. And I remember that you would hear certain sounds of boots on the street. And usually, whenever there was a transport, it was accompanied by 10 to 12 soldiers coming, marching together from house to house and gathering all of the people, knocking on the doors and saying, you have an hour. 

People had only an hour in which they could gather families together. Often, what would happen is if the whole family was not together, a child would be sent out to bring in the rest, try to-- and that used to horrify me because there would sometimes be a child who would come running back, crying I don't know where papa is. 

And so what happened was that there was-- all these transports would get together on the street. And the people would wait there, hoping that the family-- the rest of the family would come. And eventually, what happened is that-- which I did not know because no one ever told me those things. And it was not possible to ask questions because every time you ask a question, they just give you a slap. 

And what I did find out was that eventually, families were united at a central post because when the rest of the family came home and asked where they were, they would rush to the police station and immediately give themselves up to the gestapo. 

And in 1943, my family decided that they had to save part of the family. They saw all these transports coming, and it was just a monthly occurrence. And there would be 2,000 people sometimes in the transports. Sometimes, there'd be considerably less. 

And we used to live in terror of these boots. And we lived on the 4th floor in the apartment. And my parents were both deaf. And I had a deaf sister, so I became the ears. I would have to warn them that the transport was coming. 

And what I would do is we would all rush in the back room. And when they knocked on the door, we didn't answer. We were in the back of the room just trying to be as quiet as possible. 

And what happened is that as a result of this, the responsibility was on me to always hear what was going on because anytime I heard a-- ten boots marching down around the corner, I'd run immediately home, tell everybody to go into the apartment. And sometimes we were together. Sometimes we were not. 

And we used to pray that nobody would be coming up the stairs just at the same time. And it got so that we all got to be very, very good in spotting. What happened is we developed eyes that looked for everything. And I was the ears. 

And so in the middle of the night sometimes, people would come up the steps. But there were no transport collections at night. But there would be what they called neighborhood spies-- people who tried to find out whether the family was still there and so on. And we had to watch out for that, too. 

And I ended up so that I was constantly listening. And I was able to identify sounds. And-- but in-- by 1943, my parents realized it was just hopeless, that there was no point in trying to live in this fearful way. And so they decided to send my sister and me to a farm family out in the country, for which they paid great sums. 

And I had to hide the fact that I was Jewish. And I remember my mother taking all the stars off my clothes again and sending me off. And this was in the-- I would say that around the spring or summer of 1943. 

I would-- I was taken by a person who was also deaf to his mother's home in the countryside-- somewhere in the-- near the Tatra mountains at the foothills. And I was introduced as a very distant relationship whose parents were in the hospital and sick, and I had to be taken care of for a certain amount of time until I got the message to come back. 

I was told never to tell anyone I was Jewish. I was told that even though I didn't have to go to church that I had to pretend that I-- everything Christian was very familiar to me and very desired by me so that, for example, if a priest went by, I had to cross myself. 

It used to be terrible to do that for me because I felt that I was going to, in some way, have to pay for this. But I, nevertheless, knew that I had my sister as well to take care of, who was a year and a half younger than myself. 

And I never saw my parents again afterwards. I did hear from them occasionally, either through letters, or through messages, or the codes, which-- they told me that, for example, they would say that we are all together still, meaning my mother and my father would be-- said that we are visiting relatives in Vienna. 

And I knew that that-- they were still all right. But then in the spring of 1944, the son came back to the farm and announced to me that my parents had failed to pay for the last five months of my stay there. And consequently, somebody else was going to take care of us in Bratislava itself. He bundled us up, and we went back to Bratislava with him. 

I had a great sense of relief because I really could not adjust to the wild ways of the children in the village where we lived because they never went to school. They suppose-- they were supposed to be in school, but they managed to get out of it all the time. And they were also quite anxious because many of them had separations in their own family. 

And they also were great shortages. And I remember one of the things that they always wanted to do was to take my shoes away. Many of them didn't have any shoes. And they wanted to take this or that. 

And we kept to ourselves. And they used to poke fun at my sister, who was deaf. And I would be very protective of her because I was really told to take care of her. 

So when we went back to Bratislava, there were various people we knew who had papers-- forged papers. And they told us that it would be impossible for us to have the forged papers. When we said, where are our parents, they said they didn't know. But they were still in hiding. 

They didn't have-- they never told us that they had already been taken by the last transport out of Bratislava. And finally, I remember one evening hiding on the third floor of a building, which was really the place where a tailor kept his workshop. And we had to stay out of the place all day long because he had workmen there. 

And, as he explained to us, that those-- many of those workmen very anti-Semitic. And if they knew that we were there spending the night in the dark, they would betray us without a doubt. And so I remember spending the days for three weeks on the streets, going into shops when it-- I had to go in, going into the church, going all over the place. 

I remember one episode, which was very harrowing, was when somebody who knew my parents recognized me. And it was rather easy to recognize me at that time because I had very blond, very tightly curled hair, sort of like an afro in blond. And he immediately says, come here. I'm going to take care of you. 

And I knew immediately that I just could not trust him. In fact, my-- I had lost trust in everybody. I was very suspicious and very careful to watch and listen for any force or difficult notes. And I said no. I wasn't going to come. 

And I started to run. And he chased me. And it was a very good thing that my knowledge of Bratislava came to my aid because I was able to weave my way around streets and corners and little openings in buildings. 

And finally, I managed to lose him. And he chased me for a good 15 to 20 minutes. And I finally-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you [AUDIO OUT] 

