SUBJECT: You tell me when you are ready. 

CREW: We're rolling. 

SUBJECT: We are rolling? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: You want to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're still in 1933, and you see it developing, people joining in more and more-- becoming Nazis. How, and what did you think of it? 

SUBJECT: I cannot explain why, because I most certainly didn't join. But there was a certain kind of fascination, and there was a certain kind of, um, resignation among the German, which-- their hopes were reawakened. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anyone talk to you this way? 

SUBJECT: Of course, I was-- my Nazi friends told me how marvelous it is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you remember who--what said what. 

SUBJECT: Oh, he's doing all those things, and the economy will be beautiful, and we all live marvelous. And the glory of Germany, Versailles. We have been trampled upon. But of course, for the little man, it was enough, or at least it seemed to be enough, because they just joined. 

Then, of course, it became so if you didn't join and were an outsider, you were an outsider. And it's like these peer groups. You want to belong. They finally had something to which they can belong, that they could believe. The drowning voice of Hitler bringing it back, that Germany had been ruined by Versailles, by the Jews. 

It just went very well for people who had given up hope. It was a reawakening of hope, I had the feeling. And very little-- if you want to have your hope reawakened, very little does it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember such a mass meeting with a speech? 

SUBJECT: Well, you heard him-- you heard him blare over the radio. There-- there was no escape. I was never personally at one of the meetings. But when he spoke, the radio blurted over the streets and the radio blared it on top, and the radio blared it underneath. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: From the point of view of the propaganda-- for example, did you ever feel yourself being swept away in spite of your oppositional tendencies-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. Did you feel very angry? What does one feel when one feels very opposed, and there's a tremendous amount of propaganda in the opposite direction? 

SUBJECT: More disappointed than angry. Because in a way, I could understand it, that they were swept away, that they had so very little else to really hold on to. But only, of course, was those people who look more as if they should be standing on a shooting gallery. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you-- did Hitler's speeches do anything to you? 

SUBJECT: No. Uh, except convinced me that-- not his speeches, but the reaction of the people, where you either had to shake your head and say everybody is completely crazy. Don't they see that it's not possible? Don't-- don't they see what's going on? Don't they see that we;ll go into a war? 

But it would be kind of like, being angry at the storm that-- that takes your house away. You just tried to survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now you describe that voice from the radio and the street from loudspeakers. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you see the people in the street reacting? 

SUBJECT: Listening. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: Listening, nodding their heads. Oh, yes, he has a point there. And if I had been in such a cult, I would have done the same thing in order not to be outstanding. So there might be-- might have been a percentage of people who just went through the movement in order not to be arrested. Because very, very soon you found out that if you are not agreeing, you are being arrested. 

And then there were the rumors you were being brought to concentration camps, and the rumors that you might come home beaten up. But those were all rumors, and if you really want to approach somebody, nobody knew anything. We heard somebody, oh, yes, he just came home. And then the whole thing was kind of-- the blanket was put over. 

At that time, there were big collections for-- the Winterfhile help for winter, where everybody was supposed to collect. And wherever I went, there was the sign that people had given. 

Again, how many people had given-- I gave. How many people had given because they had to in order to-- to not be obviously against, I cannot say. But it was so that-- like in the dark wood, one person starts being afraid, and everybody is being-- it's contagious. 

And stories that are being told like, for instance, of mistreatment of people in prison-- and at first, it was mainly socialists, of people who officially more or less were against Hitler and made one remark about it. Also, contributes to the fact that you become afraid, that you look around, is somebody following me? Or you'll go up-- up the staircase, and you hear a noise behind the door, and you look as if-- if the little glass thing in the door is being opened. Look who comes up with you. 

So that you constantly were aware that some people observed you. And they did. It was not only a kind of paranoia that comes from the bad conscience that you have in doing things that are not allowed to be done. 

Of course, it was already very bad, and there were-- everything was highly organized. The tenants in one building had to organize and go to meetings. I don't know if I ever went to one of the meetings. I somehow tried to finagle myself out. Maybe I sat once through one and agreed to go around with a little box and collect for-- for one or the other thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nazi meetings? 

SUBJECT: Nazi meetings. Or it wasn't called Nazi meetings. It was what's called tenant meetings, and then block meetings, and then there were delegations. And then at those meetings, of course you were told all the good things that had been going on with everything, and how wonderful life is with Hitler, and how much better it will become. 

And I think after that first election, there were no more elections. You trust probably most of the population was-- was in the stream. And who could and was against it left. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When the loudspeaker-- speaker blurted out anti-Jewish propaganda, or in the meetings, what was the-- what response did you observe? 

SUBJECT: Oh, it was wonderful to-- to have a scape goat for all the trouble that you are in. It is just the most marvelous thing. Every man could unburden himself against Jews. And this was the beautiful pictures of the Jews that were published on all the posters in the city. 

You could really be very angry. It's like in the South in former times with the negro. See a black man, and everything that is bad is being attributed to that person. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, did you hear anti-Jewish remarks also from the common citizen? German? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Stories? 

SUBJECT: Oh, well, they're warmongers, critics, criticasters troublemakers, taking all the money away from the poor people, bankers, just taking the money. That goes very-- if you have such a nice boogie man-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it like talking about the weather here? 

SUBJECT: No. It was a little bit more serious, I would say. We talked also about the weather, but, uh, the weather, you can blame a few things on the weather. But the weather is not the-- a person with a heart and ears and hairs and a crooked nose. And it was a beautiful scapegoat. You could-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: At that time, you were not a Jew. 

SUBJECT: At that time, I was not a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So how did it affect you? 

SUBJECT: It affected me that, for me, Jews were people. And uh, the Jews that I knew as being Jewish were also people. And I was also kind of informed about Zionism going on, which I, at that time, called Nazism on the other side. 

But when you see that one part of a population is being taken to be beaten-- not to be beaten-- to-- to be devaluated as human beings, made worse than-- than a beast, you revolt. I revolted. And I'm sure there were other people who revolted too, but didn't so it. I didn't show it officially either. 

But I didn't-- I had my outlet in being in my group, and having a feeling at least, if it's only a little bit, I do something against it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your mother particularly upset? Was she very-- 

SUBJECT: If she was upset, she didn't let me know. About Jewishness. I don't know. I think with my mother, she was-- she usually could make herself believe what she wanted to believe. So if she wanted to believe that she is non-Jewish, I think she almost believed it. 

But it is her particular temperament. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You began to talk about the group again. What, uh, activities, what events, do you recall? Messages? 

SUBJECT: I don't recall any messages, as I have told you, only the feeling of a common cause, namely, to try to get Hitler out of power. 

The message is-- whenever I speak about my experience, people think there is something very heroic. I was a very small wheel. I wasn't one of the people who sat down and tried to analyze the economy or the political situation. 

I was-- how should I compare it? Like, an x-ray developer who puts the picture in and develops it, and then the doctor has to take it, and look at it, and say, ah, here, and here, and here. And then the doctor says, well, you have to take a picture from the other side. And you go, and somebody takes the picture, and you put it in-- into the developing fluid, and then you put it in the fixer, and then you bring it again there. 

There's nothing heroic. You don't feel as if you are-- like you see in movies, you know, big hero. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was the decoding of the-- 

SUBJECT: The coding of letters, the typing of letters. No one letter would have a complete message. That would be much too dangerous. So you got a little bits of-- of-- of messages. Some of the carrier pigeons got lost, and some of the other people were not there, and you had that little bit of thing, and you gave it on, and the message, really, in its full impact is never known to you, which, in a way, is good. 

But I was very young. I'm sure that if I were to join an under-- if I had joined an underground movement when I was 35 or 40-- I was just a very mature teenager who in a position to-- but teenagers think now-- still thought-- that the world can be a better place, and that I can contribute to it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you pass information from one to another? 

SUBJECT: I had telephone numbers. And as I said, I-- if I could, I tried to reach Conrad. If I couldn't reach Conrad, there was somebody else whom I could reach. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In? 

SUBJECT: Another man-- I give a name. We-- we changed names continuously. Conrad was for me Conrad. But for another person, he was Max, or Francis, or somebody else. 

So I had several telephone numbers of people who I could call in case something happened at our house to inform them, because any movement that you made had implications. I could be arrested. And if they can't reach me, they would probably think that I am arrested, but if I hear that somebody is arrested, like-- like our friend who was living next door, I would have called and given it on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And Conrad's fate? How did you find out? 

SUBJECT: He-- well, when I was not-- I left in '36, and I heard, I think, before the outbreak of the war, that he was released. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But how did you find out about his arrest? 

SUBJECT: Somebody called me. I had a date with him, and he didn't come. And then I got a telephone call and was told what happened, and was told also that I should be also on the alert, that I might have to leave on the spur of the moment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what about your SS boyfriend? 

SUBJECT: I got rid of him. He became too-- too dangerous for my own-- [LAUGHS] He wanted to marry me. He wanted me to get divorced, and wanted to marry me, no matter. And I thought, that is becoming much too involved. And uh, I told him that I never could do that. I gave some kind of heart-sobbing, there's the child, and you don't want to deprive a child of his or her father, and I-- I broke off with him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But can you describe the man? His-- what was he like? His thinking? 

SUBJECT: Well, his thinking was that I should learn how to shoot, because a good German woman should know how to shoot. Now, I didn't want how to learn how to shoot. So I had to talk him gently out of that. 

It became just too involved. It was nice to be seen with a uniform on the street. But it was too involved, and it became, also because of that, too dangerous. I-- I was a very robust youngster, and he-- he put me on a pedestal as if I was a nymph. I was a fat young lady, and in there, I saw myself in the image of that man floating around like a small little delicate human being. I just couldn't keep it up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you use that connection at all to get information? Or? 

SUBJECT: It was very good to have such a protection, and invite him if there is a big group of people, among them maybe somebody who has to be brought to the border. Uh, just as-- as a camouflage. But you have to be sure that that camouflage doesn't take the whole thing off, and there you stand. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You came-- you knew-- you came to be acquainted with him. What kind of person was he? 

SUBJECT: He actually was not a very nice person. Uh, he was very romantic and very patronizing, and very insistent. He most certainly didn't look like my image of the man with whom I really wanted to become involved. I think I more or less became involved with his uniform, not with the man. I just took the man as long as he didn't make too much trouble for me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now that leads us up to your leaving. Your mother left first. 

SUBJECT: My mother left. She went to Switzerland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what led up to it? 

SUBJECT: There was somebody in her group -- we were both in two -- not group. In her-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Section. 

SUBJECT: In her section that got arrested. And also, my mother could not very well be quieted down. She was a very outspoken woman, so it was thought if she can-- if we can arrange it and support her in going away, it would be best, so she left about three quarters of a year earlier than I. She left in the fall of '35, and she went to Switzerland. 

And then after Conrad was arrested, it didn't take that long that I was told. My husband was completely apolitical. He knew that I was involved with things, but he didn't know exactly what, so he stayed in Germany, and I took my child. And we took a grain. And I smuggled some jewelry for one of the people who had already left. You couldn't take-- at that time, you were allowed to take a small amount, I think, 500 marks out of the country with you, which didn't last very long, so I was bedecked with a few rings and a few golden chains, and left for Switzerland. It was very fun-- very, very pleased when I arrived there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: I was very nervous when I left. And my daughter, of course, like children, felt my nervousness and was also very nervous. And she wanted to go to the bathroom every three minutes. 

How nervous I was. You know, it's the train of adults. She held onto a door, which I opened. And in opening it or holding onto the door, the train rattled and her nail got caught in it, she got hurt. And, of course, it was a big commotion. 

But I saw how nervous I myself was in the reaction of the child, and that such an accident could happen, that I wasn't more protective. I could have very easily have pushed her on the other side and protected her. 

Uh, I recall that I was riding first class, and that I was very well dressed, to make the jewelry that I was carrying more-- I felt very insecure. I didn't know-- I still thought maybe I can come back. I'll just visit my mother, and in 14 days, I go back. But somewhere, something in myself, told me that it's forever. 

So I left my apartment and everything. And then a little later, I wrote to my husband he should leave everything and come and join us. And were in Switzerland, where we couldn't stay. We looked for a place where we could stay. 

I had my passport. You know, the moment Conrad got arrested, I got my passport. That was the first thing, and I was very glad when I got it, because that usually means that there is nothing against you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did Germany look like from the outside shortly after you left? 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, there you heard many more rumors than you heard inside. But it was surprising how little the people knew what really was going on inside. And the funny thing, in the German part of Switzerland, there were quite a few who were very much in favor for the Nazi regime. 

There were also people who illegally got over the border into Switzerland because they were-- politically, they were on the list of the Nazis, and this was sending them back, which was their immediate deaths. Or their eventual deaths, let's say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever go back to Germany? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When? 

SUBJECT: I went back to Germany in 1950. When I-- I came 1940 to the United States. In 1950, my mother had a heart infarct, and was dying, and I went back to Switzerland. And then I went to Germany because I wanted to visit some of the people who, by then, I knew had stayed in Germany and had survived the Nazi regime. 

I went to-- along the Rhine and went into Holland. I went wherever I had people-- in France and in England and in Holland, and also Germany. And I felt very, very, very uneasy. Then I was-- later on, when I was living for five years in Switzerland, I was invited to give a speech in Freiburg And I arrived at the University there, and I still saw above the portal to the university, it was red brick building, saying, dem ewigen Deutschtum. 

I almost-- which means, for the -- dem ewigen Deutschtum -- the eternal Germanness. I was ready to pack my suitcase and immediately leave. And then I only once rode through Germany, but I have-- I would be interested how various places look. 

I went once back also to Munich, but I tried to make my stay there as short as possible. Still-- I still don't trust the people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Afraid? 

SUBJECT: No, I'm not afraid. I don't trust them. They fall all over you and tell you that they never have been Nazis, that they didn't know anything, and I cannot understand that, except maybe as a self-defense for themselves. But I think practically every German must have known, more or less clearly, that there were concentration camps, that the people in the concentration camps were not treated very gently, to say the least. They might not have known that there were death chambers, but I doubt that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your father-- did you ever hear what happened to him during the war? 

SUBJECT: My father died when I was three years old. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He died. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was a time where there was no penicillin, and he died of a diphtheria. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Having talked about this now, what is your response to this-- to our meeting here? 

SUBJECT: Well, I knew about the meeting. I came here for the meeting. My immediate response will be nicely formulated tomorrow morning, because I am a very slow person. I know that, um, I'm speaking to you as an analyst, but I have some of the heartbeat that I very often had in Germany, in reawakening the whole episode. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The terror is alive? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Seems to be. Seems to be still-- there still is-- I wouldn't say it's a life. I would say it's more like a-- I like feel like a big bass fiddle with a violin making some noise, vibrating. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Could you tell us a little bit about your life in France? Were there any politics involved in your life there? 

SUBJECT: My life in France-- well, first of all-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What years? 

SUBJECT: It was '37 to 1940. It was very difficult to get papers to live in France, so for the most part, we lived illegally there. I worked legally in an office of a group of immigrants, where I just could earn enough so that my husband and I could stay over water. 

My child I bought to Switzerland into a home in Ascona, where there were many children of refugees. And there, from time to time, I also worked with some of the children there. I-- cooking for them or doing something, because there was always very, very little money. 

My husband translated English books into German for Swiss publishers. It was actually a very interesting life. I didn't like Paris. Somehow, it didn't correspond to what I saw Paris should be. I found later on that Greenwich Village in New York much more corresponded to what I had imagined Paris would be. 

I got very well along with the French, though my French was atrocious at the beginning. Had that heavy accent that you hear in my English. In English, it sounds good. In French, it just sounds so that you don't want to hear yourself. And life, um, without papers is not always easy. But it was-- we survived. And we had fun, and we had friends. And we had most of the time enough to eat. 

And we were very lucky that we could-- that we registered at the American consulate before the fall of Czechoslovakia, so that we were, in quotation mark, "early" quota, that the quota came through in December, 1939, when the American consulate was already in Bordeaux. Just at the last moment to be able to get out of France without going through Spain and Portugal. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you think at the time to continue your political links with the German underground? 

SUBJECT: No. I-- and most of my group thought that during the war there, there is nothing that you could do. And the tendency was to get everyone of the group out of Germany because it was too dangerous. There were then so many small groups that got detected and people around Ilse Scholl. 

There is that Polish name of one group that was a military conspiracy against Hitler. There are so many small conspiracies against Hitler. They didn't lead anywhere, except that the people involved lost their lives. 

So by that time, it was-- in Germany, my husband had good work, and I had some money on my own, so the immediate "how do I fill my stomach" was not important. In France, to stay alive and to have enough money was important. And when I came to the United States, I went to factories and worked there for the first two or three years. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What was your view of America before you came? 

SUBJECT: A heaven. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Especially with your political background? 

SUBJECT: A heaven. It was a perfect heaven. It was a dream where, uh, where you finally became legal again, or could be legal. And the only thing that really shocked me, that I have was interrogated by the immigration officials about all the kind of things-- mental diseases, criminal record, and have I ever been a Communist. But nobody asked me if I had ever been a Nazi. 

That was the only sour grape in that heaven. And when I came here from the black out-- Paris in the black out, 14-day voyage on the ocean-- into the streams of light. It was marvelous. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was the only sour grape in America? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah. Well, at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 3: How did you feel when you-- when they asked you about communist background? 

SUBJECT: I said no. That's not the first time in my life that I did lie to survive. I just didn't want to be somewhere dropped in the New York harbor or stay in France. And I really had never joined the Communist Party, so in a way, I was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: At what point did you discover that your mother was Jewish? 

SUBJECT: When my mother died. I found the diaries of, um, my grandfather, where he had made some notes of Nazi persecution, that he had to sweep the streets. And he was then about 80 years old. And he must have died then very soon after. My grandmother had died before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was your Viennese doctor of a grandfather? 

SUBJECT: A hofer, the herr hofer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who had converted early his life-- 

SUBJECT: To Catholicism. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sweeping the streets? 

SUBJECT: Streets, yeah. Professor Freud had the luck to be able to come out earlier. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: All right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. Can you please-- 

