INTERVIEWER 1: Soldiers, anything during-- 

SUBJECT: One time they came when I was in hiding in the farm, and I-- they hid me in the attic for a while, I remember that. And I spent the afternoon there while they visited, and I suppose that the farmer and his wife had given them some tea or something, I don't know. But that's about the closest I came. I don't remember seeing any Germans ever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Though you must have seen Germans until you left Brussels. 

SUBJECT: Yes, but I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How frightened were you? Even not seeing. 

SUBJECT: That is such a vague time for me. I mean, I have-- I have so-- I almost have no memory of that time before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After the orphanage, and you were reunited with your mother-- this was after the whole war was over, she came to get you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you scared that she would not come to get you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. Well, she was-- she, she was sick afterwards, and so I didn't go home what I thought I was going to go home. And I stayed another, oh, I don't know, four or five months after I thought I would go home. And I took it pretty hard. 

In fact, it was a whole mix-up, when I went home. She claims she didn't know I was coming home that day, and they claim they told her, so I was in the train station by myself for a while. And at the last minute, she thought that perhaps I had been sent home, so she came and got me at the train station. But I was pretty upset by that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And then you were put on a train with other children? 

SUBJECT: No, I was-- there were some arrangements made, but then the relay stopped once I got to the train station, because they just assumed she would be there. So I guess I was just told to sit on this bench for a little while. I don't really remember. But I remember that she wasn't there. And I remember walking around. 

Also, I had been very sick at the orphanage. I got all sorts of-- and so I had-- had had cold sores, and I had very bad skin. And anyway, she walked by me at one point and claimed-- and didn't recognize me. And of course, it was just a small thing. I mean, she just-- you know, I just sort of ran after her, and pulled her. And she turned around, and of course said, oh my God, it's you, you know, and something like that. 

But I think I-- in the orphanage, she used to come see me in the orphanage. And I think that was the one place I always cried for her to take me home. I think I sort of had made some kind of adjustment with the Belgian family, but I hated the orphanage. It was an institution, so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What glimpses? 

SUBJECT: I remember we had porridge every single goddamn day except Sunday, when we had a soft boiled egg. And I remember the long tables that all the children sat in, and that little egg on a Sunday. That was such a big treat. I remember that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How Did you come here? I mean, how did you come to the United States? 

SUBJECT: We came to United States because my mother knew somebody who had been in concentration camp with my father, in Buchenwald. And they'd been in the same cell, or bunk, or whatever. And we don't know how my father died. And so we spent, I remember, for years and years, always looking for my father. Trying to go to various agencies in Brussels, Jewish agencies. 

He-- through the Red Cross, we knew he was alive during the whole war. He-- but when people came back, he didn't come back. And we don't know what happened. So through this man who tried to help us. Well, he claims that my father, that one day they had sort of opened the camps and just let everybody out before the Allies came in-- that they just killed all the sick ones. And that my father was in the infirmary, and he had something wrong with him. 

And this man, Arnold never tried to find him, and just never saw him again. And so there was no proof that he had died. So we did everything possible. We just spent-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you believe that he would come? 

SUBJECT: I always thought he would come back. I always thought he would come back. I thought-- I used to fantasize about it, that someday there'd be this man, and say, "Guess who I am?" And then I used to fantasize that he didn't want to come back. That he found somebody else, and that he remarried, and that he had another child. 

But later on, anybody who had any kind of connection came back and looked for them. I think people were desperate to find. And so he would have come back if he were alive. There is no way that he would not have come back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know what you were thinking about when you and your mother were looking in the various places for him? Do you remember what you thought about? 

SUBJECT: I always thought it would work, I always thought we would find him. I always thought. I always thought that somehow-- I always felt-- I always thought we would find him. I always felt that somebody would be flipping through papers and say, "Oh, yes, yes, yes, here it is." He's there and there, I always thought we would find him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Any disappointment, after this? 

SUBJECT: I think it sort of gradually-- in fact, I think-- I think I stopped believing it when we came to the states. Because I think that was-- of course, I was older. I was almost 13 by then. And I think I really understood that that meant-- because I used to-- I remember the very-- we had, my mother, there was no reason to stay in Belgium. Nobody stayed in Belgium after the war. 

And I thought about the first time my mother talked about it, I think I panicked and said, how's he ever going to find us in the states? But I think I was sort of at first fatalistic, and felt oh, if he's meant to find me, he'll find me anywhere. He'll just find me. But then I think gradually I think I understood that he was not coming back. And that-- I think I gave up on him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you go, when you went to the states? Right to-- 

SUBJECT: To San Francisco. To San Francisco. The man Arnold had been living there, and he was our sponsor. And he gave us the papers to come. You have to have papers to come to the states. And so we went to San Francisco. And that didn't work out very well for my mother. And so we moved to Los Angeles, where she knew some people. 

And life was much easier in Los Angeles in '52. It was easier to find a job, it was easier to find an apartment. And that's where I spent my adolescence. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what was it like to a young girl to come to-- 

SUBJECT: I loved it. I loved it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was different. I hated Belgium, I always hated Belgium. Well, and I think partly in Belgium, I always felt the anti-Semitism so strongly. I was the only Jewish girl in my class, I always felt uncomfortable. I don't know. I was-- I was very happy when my mother and I decided to go to the states. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean from the time that you entered school in Brussels, when you were six, seven years old, until you were 13, you always felt uncomfortable in school? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I didn't like it. Well, I didn't know at first that, you know, emigration was possible, or that there would be another life. But I never was unhappy. And I've never regretted leaving Belgium. I've never had. I've-- it's better here. It's much, much better here. There's no comparison. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you ever relate your experiences to other people your own age? Did you, when you came here? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't talk about it. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

SUBJECT: I didn't want to talk about it. I think I came, I came when I was 12 and 1/2, almost 13. I think it's a very difficult age. I think you want to be like everybody. And I thought that it would stand me-- make me stand out too much. I really wanted to be assimilated, I wanted to be invisible for a change. I wanted to be like everybody else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother, did she want to relate to other people that had suffered like she had? 

SUBJECT: Well, just about everybody I know has been through this. And there's so many foreigners in Los Angeles. There are many people there who have been through war. I think anybody her age, she knows lots of émigrés. I mean she knows-- most of her friends-- in fact, I don't think she has any friends who are American-born. And everybody who's come from Europe has been through something like that. 

Nobody-- when I was growing up in Los Angeles-- there was nobody in my school. Although there was a very predominantly Jewish population in school. But they were all Americans. I don't know, I never felt the need to talk about it. I felt-- in fact, I didn't want to. I think it's only in the last year and a half or so, or year, actually, that I've come back to it, and I've began to think about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the other children notice that you must have had an accent in your speech at that time? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I sometimes told them I was from New York. 

[LAUGHING] 

When they asked me what kind of accent it was. I picked up-- I picked up English pretty quickly, because well, by the time I was seven, I had learned three languages. I spoke Yiddish, and Flemish, and French. And so picking up another language was no big deal for me. 

And although it's true that for a couple of months, I had a very strong accent-- which the children recognized immediately, and called me Frenchy, which I hated. But I just told them I was from Belgium, and that my father was dead. That's all. I didn't tell them that my father had died in concentration camp. In fact, I don't-- It's not that I hide it, but I mean, it's not something that sort of casually comes up in a conversation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother's friends were mostly émigrés. Was it uncomfortable for you to be with them? 

SUBJECT: No, no. I think, I think not any more so than the typical teenager growing up and you know, finding that one's parents are kind of irrelevant. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your mother remarry? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you make this flip, one day being in a Belgian school, and next day a teenager in America? I mean, this is a different group of people. What did you do-- 

SUBJECT: I've always been a very imaginative child. I was always movie crazy as a kid. My mother used to give me money, and I used to go to movies by myself. I went to see American films. I was crazy about America as a kid. 

I bought an English book and started teaching myself English. I used to fantasize about what it would be like, because I was convinced that I was going to become a famous movie star. And so I-- by the time we knew we were coming, the period between knowing that we were coming for sure, getting the boat reservations, and the months that it took to settle everything-- I just sort of by my imagination was already there. 

And when we came, when we came to San Francisco, I thought it was paradise. I was not disappointed. And so it's not as though-- so it wasn't that disruptive psychologically for me, because I had an imagination for a year-- I don't know how long. But I had always been attracted to my fantasies about what America was like. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You'd been getting your American life in Belgium. 

SUBJECT: Yes I did, I did. Through movies, through magazines, through whatever I could lay my hands on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why do you think you've begun thinking about the past-- the past in Europe recently, in the past, you know few months or a year or so? 

SUBJECT: Well, I broke up a relationship that was very important to me, that had been going on for a long time. And various things happened at the same time, that I took it very hard. And to help me get over this, a good friend suggested that I see-- get some therapy, to just ease me over this. 

And I went to see a therapist with was the idea of talking about a love relationship that had broken up. And I don't know what happened, I walked in there, and I talked about my father. And I cried, and I-- I don't know what happened. But out of a clear blue, I thought I was going to talk about one person, and I just talked about my father, for the first time. 

I really-- well, it's not the first time I talked about him, but it was the first time I cried about him, like that. And it was an absolute blow to me, to realize that so many of the feelings I've had all these years, many of-- that it had been with me for years. I just-- I suppose I wasn't ready, or I was scared, or I was repressed, or-- or it just seemed to have taken a tremendous emotional shock to sort of jar me loose and open the door, I don't know. I don't really know why, I don't know why. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any bitterness toward people generally? Or do you have any feelings about what happened to you, and the reason that it happened to you, the unnecessary reason that it happened to you? 

SUBJECT: I think-- I think I hate the Germans. I think-- I think for years I felt my father abandoned me. And I think I must have been very angry at him. But I think once I began to really, through therapy, through my own working this out, I began to understand what had happened, and I felt less as though he had abandoned me. 

I began to feel more as though he was a victim. I began to understand what had happened to him. And I think that was very hard, because if he abandoned me, then I can be angry at him. Then it's not so painful. Then he's not such a victim. But once I began to see what had ha-- when I began to really understand what had happened, I just can't accept it. I mean, he just-- he never caused anybody any harm. And for those damn people to just take him, and put him on a train and kill him. 

[CRYING] 

That's, I think-- I think that I just had deal with his death. And I feel so sorry for him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think of his last moments always being in a camp? Do you imagine that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, yes. 

[CRYING] 

Think of what he had been, he would have missed us so much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Think what? 

SUBJECT: Thinking about his wife and his daughter, and being afraid for himself. And how he never saw me again, and I never saw him again, never. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are these-- are these vivid fantasies? 

SUBJECT: They're not fantasies. Oh, he was-- I remember him as being good. That's what everybody says, everybody who knew him, who-- there are people who know him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you feel about being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: It doesn't matter anymore. I don't know. I've been through so much, so much thinking about that. I don't identify any more as being Jewish, I don't think so. I just identify as life is evil. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you imagined America in the future, I think you also now imagine backwards, and you've written about it. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It seems to be that some years are a bit blind, but you fill them. 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, I did. I did write about it, that's true. I think-- I think, in a way, in my poetry that I was ahead of what I was able to do, to deal with rationally. But I think-- I think that art does that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you do anything now in your life to help other people, to somehow reach out to other people? Do you have that need as a result of your own loss and suffering? 

SUBJECT: Not yet. I don't think I can. I think I've got to-- I think I've got empathy. I'm not sure that I have any more than anybody else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you concerned about evil things when you see them? Do you do anything to-- 

SUBJECT: No. I don't think I believe strongly enough that something can be done. I don't know. I don't know. I think half of my-- I think most of my life is trying, has been spent trying to forget it. Trying to lead a normal life, trying not to think of that man in a concentration camp. Trying not to think of him being beaten. I can't keep thinking about it. 

[CRYING] 

INTERVIEWER 2: The poems probably serve their purpose. 

SUBJECT: I didn't bring the poem. I wrote a poem about him in concentration camp, but I didn't bring it, I forgot it. I forgot all about the poem. I don't think I ever went deep enough in a poem. I think I-- that's why I keep writing the same damn thing over and over again, like layer after layer after layer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But the poems are also not only about him? 

SUBJECT: Excuse me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The poems are not only about him? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you want to read? 

SUBJECT: Do you want me-- I have been, I have been trying to remember the family that hid me. And I wrote this poem called, "Hiding in Other People's Houses," which is directly about that experience. I had been writing that poem for years, and never could do it, because I had the whole thing transposed on a tropical island, and using metaphor after metaphor. 

And I was lucky enough to meet a good poet once, who read the poem for me, and who, rather than criticize the poem, began to ask me about the experience. And when I talked about it, she just said, well, why don't you just write about it? What is this nonsense about putting it on the beach or whatever? And I thought about it, and I said, she's right. 

I was afraid of being too autobiographical, you see. I write poetry because I love poetry. And so I thought if it's too autobiographical, it won't mean anything to other people. But I don't care anymore. I think I write poetry for myself now. 

And so this was a poem about this. About-- I don't know, I don't know all the themes of this poem, but that was a poem about it. Do you want me to read it? This is called, "Hiding in Other People's Houses." 

First, my mind must be absolutely calm, like water in a well, or those back streets of childhood, unvisited for days but for the wind moving a little dust from one stone to the next. Then perhaps you might appear, the four of you emerging in the street. Your face is ready for the unhampered wind. Now you're in the house again around the kitchen table. Father and son between the wife and daughter and me. I'm squatting in a corner, crying, still the wild child it will take months to tame. 

It's very quiet in the room. You're praying, upset by my display of grief. Slowly, the child leaves her corner to join you in your meal. This time, no one will drive up to your door at midnight to give warning. This time, no one will have to hide in the attic. If questioned, I'll simply close my eyes and disappear. 

Yes, my mind must be absolutely calm to put myself back in your life as the converted niece some dead friend gave you. Remember the five of us kneeling in church, then strolling through town like any other family there? The five of us working in the fields, my job to sit under the cherry trees, banging a pot to scare the black birds from the boughs. 

I scatter chicken feet and fetch the lambs. After the Sunday meal, the father took me on his lap to teach me Flemish songs and prayers. And so it might have been the little Jewish girl you saved from a damnation worse than Buchenwald would grow up one of yours. Instead, at night, I walked into my sleep like Bluebeard's wife going into that forbidden room where dolls, their stuffing coming out, stared at me with faces like my mother's, and hanging by his hair, a man who became my father, burned and revolved. 

Afterwards, I cried for hours, calling my name, my own banned Yiddish name, refusing the comfort of your crucifix. Now when I try to find you, faceless figures turn their back on me. A smell of lard cooking and of incense surfaces, then retreats. 

Unreconciled to my recurring dream, I can't imagine seeing you staring from street cars rattling uphill, or queuing up at banks, or waving from a boat going to America. Since you won't budge, I'm the one who must go back, after so many years, to those deserted streets, find your house, knock on the door, and ask to be taken in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever tried to go back? 

SUBJECT: No. I've been back to Belgium twice, and I think I will go back. I don't know where to look. But I think I'm going to have to do some probing, and some writing, and some-- I don't know, where to look. My mother doesn't remember the name of the village. 

I don't think it's bad faith in her, you know. My mother is not literate, she never went to school. She doesn't know how to read and write. And I think-- I think for people who are illiterate, the world is much smaller, and things are not-- things which seem so common sense, about looking something up, writing something down, keeping a diary, or a journal, they're not commonplace. But I think it would probably be possible to find it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother doesn't read and write Flemish, or French, or Czechoslovak? 

SUBJECT: No, she writes Yiddish. I shouldn't say she's-- I shouldn't say that she's illiterate. No, she never spoke Czech, and she has forgotten most of her Flemish. She always got along, she was a very bright woman. Oh yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're very brave. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, I think that the poetry has it all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm glad you read it after you told us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just one-- do those years-- the way you described them, they look like a blank to some extent. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they are. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Filled with dread, is that correct? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Do you know how I can lift that blanket? I think I really want to. I thought I didn't, you know, I thought because I'm getting along so well, obviously. But I can't stand it anymore. And also, I feel very strong, I think I can do it now. I don't think I would-- I'm not scared anymore of it. I think I can do it. 

I don't know how, except perhaps keep writing. I mean, that's the most-- I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. Are we done? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, I think that you've given us a great deal, and a bit too much. I think it's been very hard for you. 

