[BEEP] SUBJECT: All right? 

CREW: Ready. 

SUBJECT: OK. That detail we told you we were not to work. We was no-- we were on our way back to camp in the evening. And all of a sudden we hear-- saw a squadron of airplanes on top. Normally, we were happy, you know, to see them. 

At that particular intersection, I said we were a short way from the camp, which was the factory of the VVV V2, V1. To our opposite left side was a major railroad station connections, sort of, you know? And there was an industry to our-- in front of us. In the back of us was another camp, which Nordhausen. 

And at that point, we knew we were in a target area for them to bomb. At least we could sense that. And as we hear them overhead, we hear the flak going, you know, anti-aircraft. And as anti-aircraft go, the guard motioned us to go back in the field of the road. And we split. The whole-- the whole squadron split in the field. And bombs came down. 

Bombs came down so much so we are tingling, you know, ooh, bomb and explosion. He ask, where was it? At the moment as we lay down, each one, you know, we hear the explosion. And once we-- particularly, I remember lying down and getting hit by something. But what it was is a mass of earth came out, covered us, it covered us with me and a few more people that I know, closely on top of each other. And I say top of each other because we laid on the sort of a some kind of fence, you know, just only fence that divided the area there. 

And hit, you know, like squashed by the soft earth. And shortly later, we whenever we can, we got up and dust ourself off, you know? We're bruised some loose stones. And in front of us, not even-- I don't know-- 10 meters or less was a big cavern dug up, so big you'd think an ocean was there before. Two or three bombs in the same spot dug it all up and threw the earth on us, you know? 

And later on as we got it together, we found out that whoever in that area we saw bodies spread all over, all in this part of the earth and field, half a dozen or so inmates blown to pieces. And-- and this, the incident goes further that at the next motion, still was going on the shooting and the bombing. But not at our area. 

One of us commanded us from the inmates because he's a former army man. He said, everybody into the hole, you know? That's the safest place, into the ditch where the bombs just dug it out. And we went in there. And some of the people bleeding and limping and spread out around the hole. 

And at that point, the point I want to make that the-- at the years past, we were waiting for American bombers or pilots, anything, a sign of somebody else. And there they come. And there were-- and they're we're at the point, shivering. When I say shivering, just trembling, trembling at the sight of bombs and death and devastation once it came. 

And nothing to be hold against the Americans, but at the first experience we had, when bombs, when they finally came, they came on top of us. And I said, but that doesn't-- that doesn't. End the incident. We finally, after a short while later, we got the-- get out of the hole. And they marched us back. It's a couple of the guards died too with him in that melee, and finally march us back to camp. 

On our way into camp, there's a road up the hill, which goes up to camp, the side of the road is an entrance to the cave, to the factory, which consisted two big doors. The inside of the factory, which I later learned-- learned about this, is as big as a small city. You're just driving with trucks and trains under the hill. And the hill the thickness of 60 meters or granite, you know, unbombardable at the time. 

And uh, one we-- once we come close to the camp, the airplanes came back. And, uh, so a siren sounded again. Just they came back, and we are still on the open, uh, territory. 

And also a machine gun aircraft, anti-aircraft machine right on the top of us near the intersection going into the, uh-- to the factory and up to the hill. And the machine gun camouflaged-- one here, one there, one there-- they start shooting up. And we know also the entry to the camp was camouflaged with beams and trees and so forth and so on. 

And they figured, uh, our experience is the best safe way is into the-- under the mountain, into the, uh, factory. As we rushed towards it, they got over there, shut the doors in our face. You can't come in. You know? Or the group of us, 30, 40 still left. And we will remain outside. 

And just thinking it, uh, I said there are all kinds of woods around camouflaging. The bombs come down. You lay down-- we lay down in the corner and figured if the bombs won't kill me, the tree will kill me, the wood will kill me. So forth and so on. We calculated, you know, in our mind, something's going to happen. Because shooting up, that's going to come down. 

And as a matter of fact, I got pictures home. Not that I took it, but, uh, they were later in an American magazine in New York in the early '50s, which I got the whole picture of the whole site and the inscription of all what's was going on over there. 

But anyway, standing there in front of the camp, uh, the doors, and, uh, all this bombardment goes on here and there. And finally-- they didn't let us in. Finally, at, uh, one moment a car came, a military car, you know, a little half-track with a commander and everything else and shouting at top of his lungs, Aufmachen! you know? For him. You want to run to safety? 

At that point, the door swung open. He came in like a rocket with his car, running away, hiding. And we went after him. And somehow, we got lost in there for a while until the bombardment was over. And later on, you saw the devastation outside, you know, from bombs. 

But, uh, that doesn't-- that doesn't end there at the moment. We were hauled back to camp later on. And, uh, two days later, evacuation again. They got at everybody. The whole camp, which is, uh-- they-- they count at the normal time 100,000. 

And trains were waiting. Cattle cars, you know? Cattle cars and shipment someplace. And constantly loading, you know? Constantly loading. At random, you know? They came in. 

We always-- camp started functioning as such, but everybody remained in camp. No food. Nothing whatsoever. And the guard came in. OK, now this barrack goes. This barrack goes. March to the train, load it up, and gone. 

And at one day, the first day, they didn't, uh, finish loading everybody. In spite trains were full on the track, but apparently they didn't have clearance to roll. And after second night over, well, incidents of hiding behind, uh, dirt underneath took place. I was one of them, and, uh, hoped that, uh, this time I'd be lucky from all hidings. 

And-- but, uh, morning came, and not, uh-- not everybody's gone. The guard was still there. And, uh, a lot of inmates were still there. And they took another day of transporting the-- the rest of the inmates. 

I think that I'm talking about the third day now. And the third day, finally, uh, they came after us. We were tired of hiding down there, because as long as-- we mixed up later with the rest of us. We came out from under the wood, you know? A dozen guys of us. 

And some-- some remained, took a chance. I figured, uh, if they catch somebody, they start looking. Nobody is going to come out alive anyway. So we mixed up with the-- the group that I was with and went on the train and transport. 

Train and transport is, uh, probably the hard, the-- the most horrible episode. If you compare, uh, anything, six or seven days on an open train, squeezed in, standing [INAUDIBLE], you know? With the-- at best, talking about, uh, incidents which I cannot repeat right now, what took place on top of that-- that transport for seven days. I-- I cannot. 

And in my best conscience I don't even know if I could tell you privately, uh, the horrors that was going on. And there was, uh, all kinds of nationalities. And what took place, and especially to the Jews in that train-- 

O-- Overall, we-- uh, at-- at the end of seven days, we were bombed in the middle and between. I say seven days because we-- a lot of the time we standing still on open tracks, no clearance, or couldn't make by, because we didn't go that far. 

We wound up in Bergen-Belsen on the seventh day, at least outside of the camp. And they unloaded whatever was left alive in the-- in the tr-- in the trains and dispose of the bodies. And, uh, we wind up in the camp Bergen-Belsen. 

Bergen-Belsen, again, was a point, uh, near Hamburg, as you know. Hanover, Hamburg, Celle, that region, uh, was Bergen-Belsen. At that point, uh, you know Bergen-Belsen was a-- primarily a camp by the name of Belsen, barracks, crematoria, and everything else. And a big woman camp over there too, for inmates of women. 

At my point, when I got there, th-- this camp was overfilled. And, uh, I joined it with a former, uh, military barracks or-- or blocks, which was called Bergen. Used to be brick buildings, like blocks and two stories. At one time it was something to look at it as far as architecture and-- and the walks and the gardens and everything else. 

But apparently, it got emptied and, uh-- and everybody from the road, wherever they came from, are stacked in-- in those-- in those blocks [INAUDIBLE] and became combined in Bergen-Belsen. We knew the other camp. You know? We-- whatever the short time I was there, there was no more any rules or regulation. 

We wandered around, walked around. No food. No facilities of any kind. Uh, death-- you just couldn't help but stepping over them. You just couldn't help but stepping over them. You-- people, and they're not only dead. The people were alive and dead in the same situation. 

You saw people with, uh, open eyes, and they're not quite dead, but they're not alive. And if you touch them, they just keel over. You understand? And that's prevalent all over the place. 

And whoever can walk walked. And, uh, you-- there was-- you weren't-- you weren't, uh, assigned to any particular place. Just like cattle. Go in there. And anything could happen to in there from other inmates, that they were stronger. 

Uh, at the-- what happened over there, there's a chapter again not to be told. Not to be told because it's got to be believable. It's got to be physically to tell you and what happened in this particular place. 

But the lucky part is it didn't take long. It took, uh-- within a week's time the English liberated the camp. Uh, one day, we know the guards-- uh, we heard it. We also knew later that, uh-- we talking back about a 12th hour, remember? Back in the camp. The story goes-- I think it was written about it. 

And there was a solution there for the last minute in the way of, uh-- a way of poison and poisoned bread or food or something like that, which was discovered later stockpiled. It's been never given to us by a particular doctor that was in charge of all that. 

I think later on, when it became a refugee camp or-- or a displaced person camp, I think that doctor took some onus for doing, uh-- for helping, uh, not to eliminate by which-- whichever way he was meant to dispose of the, uh, inmates. It's been written about it, uh, first years. Of course, the camp commander was late on, uh, caught. 

And the inmates-- the, uh, guard, uh, at the time-- particular the beginning of the liberation, a lot of vengeance took place. Uh, I don't think, uh-- I can't remember any Jewish people being even, uh, capable, physically, doing what they would have want to do. Because, uh, as-- as in-- usually they were the minority and most abused or [INAUDIBLE], uh, to do anything to say about it. 

There were a lot of political prisoners got it from all over. And I was trying to tell you before when we got into it, the-- the triangle, which indicate the four different colors-- your religion, criminal, homosexual, and, uh, another kind. And you knew who were the political prisoners there and the criminal, because some kind of alliance. 

And they had, uh, usually-- they were the-- not the elite. They were in charge of everything. They could help themself most of the time to whatever food or-- or any rations that were around And by them, by their orders, I think, uh, it-- It started up a-- a series of vengeance against, uh, a former SS guard over there. Also some-- against some of people that cooperated with the Nazis. You know? 

And, uh, life under the English-- now, you jump over without, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what was-- 

SUBJECT: --revealing-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that moment-- what was your experience when the English came in? 

SUBJECT: Well, particularly, you hear, uh, you hear music. A truck came in. They'd been in the-- someplace. And If I tell you I called out with the help, uh, three, four other guys, you know, leaning on each other, going out and see the miracle. You know? See something unbelievable, that, uh, somebody, but a-- but a German, you know? Uh, we're at the point, uh, lying down on the floor rotting away. But you hear the music and loudspeaker. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Music? 

SUBJECT: Music. They-- the half-track with the English soldiers that first drove into the camp. Uh, just to acknowledge that there-- that were loud uh, types of music, uh, and bullhorns, uh, um, shouting, you-- you liberate us, so forth and so on. 

And we knew the shouts of inmates outside, uh, you know, applauding and hollering and crying and weeping and put himself on the-- hanging all over the-- the half-track, one or two of them. And just grabbing at the soldiers, whoever-- whoever was still physically able to walk. 

Uh, my witness was me just, uh, walking, calling, and leaning against somebody to the doors and looking up, see what's happening. And, uh, if any satisfaction, not believing at the moment, OK, I'm liberated, I'm alive. I just I'm alive to see it. Liberated and alive is a long way off. 

Because, uh, that time, most of the bodies in that camp were at a point that, uh, nobody would say, uh, survivable. You know? Everybody dehydrated and, uh, without anything left, uh, of substance of the persons. So much so that, uh, we knew then that, uh, a lot of disease-- 

When the English came, the war was still going on. At our wildest dreams, we always thought, if we ever get liberated, we would only want to see one thing, uh, food coming down in parachutes so you can get yourself to eat. 

That did not happen, although it happened later on experiences with other people that were liberated somewhere in the American zone. Uh, food was, uh, for them available, everything and anything. And over here, the English have not had it. They barely had it for themself. 

And for us, uh, what you were waiting, for food, that's about, uh, the biggest dreams of ours. And, uh, the contradiction of it is that, first, they didn't have it. And then, finally, the day after-- the day after they came along with the types of cereals, you know? And lucky maybe at that. Lucky maybe at that. 

Because what happened is, when they start feeding us, as little as they have, for the majority of the people, they couldn't take any food. Stomach was too much shrunk. With the slightest little bit of food that had some protein or something, uh, nourishing, the stomach just wouldn't work. It was shrunk up. It, uh, cuts you to pieces. 

And, uh, drinking was, uh-- the whole camp became a quarantine right away. And a typhoid start-- uh, was prevalent at that point. The whole camp was quarantined. But they start to manage, separate the camp, because they couldn't handle that many amount of people and that many among the sick. So they designated thousands of different directions, hospitals or-- or way stations, camps. 

Uh, I personally recovered. I don't know which way and how. Although I wind up in a hospital two or three weeks later in a different city. Hospital for typhoid. And getting into that is, uh, quite another story. I got some inmates that were with me then, then and there. 

There's-- as a matter of fact, there's a doctor in New York that he was with the English army, Jewish doctor who was with the English army who treated me at that time in the hospital of typhoid. Uh, getting back-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did he speak to you? Did he ask you what happened? 

SUBJECT: The doctor then or now? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then. 

SUBJECT: Then? Then I was only a patient, one of many. One-- one of many. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anyone of the liberators speak to you about what happened? 

SUBJECT: The liberators-- let me tell you. The liberators had-- the English had their hands full. For the first two weeks, I remained in that, uh, Bergen-Belsen, the quarantine, or the camp, whatever was still open. We had no freedom of going out for fear they say of spreading disease. Or where would we go? 

They still wanted some-- something. They knew what's-- vengeance or whatever it was. They know what's always going on the first week, the killings and vengeance against the German SS and other collaborators. And they held the camp tight. 

And food was not enough. It was not enough that people still went around, ate garbage, ate, uh, leaves of trees. And what, uh, uh-- what, uh, was going on then as far food was still not clear. Either they didn't have it, or they figure we're not ready for food. 

However, people, uh, now and then went out of camp, smuggled themself out. The camp was guarded by English. And it was guarded by, uh, former German troops, but not Germans, Hungarians that were in the German army. They give them, uh, ammunition just to guard. 

However, people went out who were brave and smuggled himself over at night and came back to camp. Again, there was no place to go. You know, when they went out, they came back at least with food. They went to farmers and door to door-- door to door and begged for food. Simple as that. And they came home with a bag, divide it and helped and starting to have a little food around there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean-- 

SUBJECT: My-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --after liberation you were still guarded by Fascist-- 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Right, and by the English. And the whole camp-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hungarian Fascists? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, right. Well, they must have been because they were in the German army. They weren't ordered to kill us. They weren't ordered to abuse us. They had no-- that kind of orders, but, uh, helping out supposedly the English army, which they still were in the war, I imagine. At that time the war was still going on, and they had a minimum amount of troops. 

Uh, what, uh, I want to relate is I finally went out of camp as a-- I don't know why I go into personal thing. With a group, you know, at night for food. That's the only thing that was still on our mind. And that goes almost two weeks after liberation. And you knock at the door. 

No, the first thing also was, well, know we're free. We'll recuperate. Any way to walk around, somehow, and go see the world, see what's happening. And we go out, where do you go? It's within walking distance, a roll down the street. 

I don't know if we should recorded this, but nothing that I put something on myself. The first instinct was get me something, anything to kill somebody. You know? That's the first instinct. Yet, uh, my friend who's in Israel now, we knocked a few doors and couldn't get anything. 

Finally, knocked at one door and threatened-- we break in unless you open up, so forth and so on. You know? And always can hear a woman crying and a baby crying, crying from the other side of the door. And that was enough to stop us emotionally. 

Everything-- all the-- everything that was bottled up. If it would have been a man in there, I think-- I didn't know what we would have done. We would have forced our way in and wouldn't have left it without, uh, venting our anger at least to a degree. But there we were and forcing our way, trying to. 

And then we hear cries from a baby and a woman. And that was enough to shut us off and keep walking. That dem-- that demobil-- demobilized us at the moment. The first freedom, the first thought of vengeance. That's the only thing that, uh, I can tell you that, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not on a German woman and baby. 

SUBJECT: Not a baby crying and a woman. It just demobilized. I didn't think, uh, if, uh, others acted that way. I wouldn't-- I wouldn't vouch for it. But, uh, that's just an experience I went through and-- and asked myself, what did you do before the war and what did you do to Germans after the war? 

Of course, the--- from there on starts another chapter, which you eventually came back from that trip and, uh, wound up at, uh, typhoid and went to the hospital, which relates later. And then, again, after months, six weeks of recuperation, somehow back to the same camp for displaced person. Which, uh, another life started over there with very complicated different ways. 

Uh, but that's just glancing over part of it, this deliberation, how it is. There was nobody-- there was nobody to go to home and say, look, I survived. Uh, there has been-- the only one thing, uh, what happened since then is I-- form of search, search for family, uh, camps. 

People liberated all over Germany had free travel. At least, everybody was allowed to travel eventually. I'm talking five, six weeks later, when the camp finally was opened up. Yet there wasn't where to go. But you could go, if you choose. And-- and some people traveled [INAUDIBLE] from at one camp to another. 

And the reason most of the travel was done, well, you look for family, relatives, survivors. And you found-- uh, you hear. You ask, where are you from? And, uh, did you see? Did you know what happened over there? And did you see anybody? Have you been with anybody? You get the information and you try to follow up. 

And after that, there was a period of a year just from train to train, from one part of the country. Somebody saw somebody, heard somebody, thought they saw a family. Somebody thought they went with, uh, this one in this camp. And you must have wound up over there. You come over there. You got [INAUDIBLE] dead ends. 

So for one year, it just, uh, train-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You kept looking. 

SUBJECT: --train-riding until I finally gave up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did-- did you have any opportunity to vent any of the anger when you-- 

SUBJECT: No, that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. No. 

SUBJECT: That was it. After that, you became a human being. And then you think in different terms. Uh, so much so that, uh, you wind up, uh, living with Germans later, or living by them and their houses. And, uh, if you go into a chapter in reverse, you know, and see what the Germans are like after the war, and that's, uh, very complicated too. But, uh, vent and anger, uh, it was, uh, useless and pointless. 

Uh, you figure-- you-- plus, you're busy with yourself. In, say, the first year, you still hope for somebody someplace, and so many leads you follow through, mistaken identity and, uh, all, uh, the people that thought, uh, they saw somebody. And they did not survive [INAUDIBLE], and that one did not survive over there. And I'm talking particularly, uh, a couple of brothers that, uh-- that were in camp. And you finally, uh, narrow it down where they perished. 

Finally, there-- there was nothing else to do then. First of all, there was no place to go home to. You-- as I told you, you're liberated, uh, people think, uh, you always wait for the satisfaction, say, OK, mom. I did it. I made it. Look, uh, there's nobody to go to and there's no where to go home to. 

Although, I attempted to my travels one time to go back where I came from and just, uh, for some purpose, I don't know, nostalgia or some-- something. Maybe a miracle. Maybe somebody came home and told somebody. But I came as far as close to the border and frightened for the inevitable and turned back. I knew the-- I knew the conclusion. 

Many times, and just maybe, maybe, maybe. But after a year of constant traveling on trains and nighttime and cattle trains. You know, transportation then wasn't, uh, what you can imagine. You just, uh, hitchhike from-- like a hobo, from train to train and nights and cold, already in the fall of '45. And you finally give up, and that's that. 

Till about, uh, two, three years later, you still look to leads, you know? Because this immigration of people went through till about I left the country over there, which is 1950. Uh, people traveling from end to end. And you're always hungering-- Oh, you're from that city? Which transport did you go? And where did you wind up? Have you seen? Have you heard? 

And I relate to you in the beginning as far my city, the first transport out through camp was this block, particular block, which subsequently, I heard later, that, uh, it took turns. 

Every month, every few weeks, a different corner was surrounded and taken away, which eventually the city, whatever remained the rest of the city, which was the-- the, uh, uh, committee which ruling with a few people that, uh, in the hundreds from so many thousands, which in the hundreds. They put them in a ghetto outside the city, a small place, which eventually they eliminated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are you left with today? 

SUBJECT: You mean personal, like kinfolks? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no. How are you different? 

SUBJECT: My situation today? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How are you different? How do you feel you're different? What do you carry with you from what you've been telling? 

SUBJECT: Mentally? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Well, I always say it, I envy people that, uh, they can get out of themself for one minute sometimes, a while, at a situation. They can laugh in joy. You know, you see a movie. Anybody in my situation, they cannot- cannot laugh and enjoy [INAUDIBLE], you know? Or it's superficially. 

There's always in the back of your mind-- it's always in the back of your mind everything. How can you? How ca-- how can you enjoy yourself? It's almost a crime against-- against the people that you lost that you can live and enjoy yourself. You try to laugh. You try to-- with everybody, you take part into something. 

And you see people getting out of their mind with joy and fun. And, uh, I had some times, uh, right now, uh, raising a family. Married them off and had some very good times. Uh, what you call-- you got, uh, from your children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nachas. 

SUBJECT: Nachas, uh, joy in their accomplished. Yet you can't fully get out of your mind that, uh, there's something missing. There's nobody you can prove it to, you can, uh-- you can demonstrate, uh, look what became of you. Uh, you accomplished something. 

You've been, uh, strong or you've been brave or you've been lucky, whatever you will. And, uh, you come out, uh, to a degree of respectability. And who do I want to prove it to? Of course, the children. That is a different breed. Uh, people around, uh, you figure, they won't understand, because, uh, how could they? 

I mean-- and the one that you want to prove it to, who will understand you, is not around. And is not around. You know why they're not around. And you feel I'm-- I left everybody and went to enjoy myself, That is-- that is the point. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: I left them in trouble. Not as-- that's-- that-- that's what's in my mind. I-- I just-- not that I did-- I'm not guilty. I'm not guilty. I don't feel it. But I can't express the joy. Hey, I accomplished something. Look. There isn't anybody to tell you. 

Whoever I tell you, it's-- it's normal. To anybody else, it's a normal feat that you either prosperous or healthy or you've got a family, you did everything. It's common here, right? There's nothing unusual about it. 

But to the people that I'd want them to look and there to tell. And, uh, I know where I left them and how I left them. And that's, uh, in the back of my mind. So any enjoyment is-- is cut, uh, till the end of my days. I just can't get-- can't get out of myself. Even getting drunk, you feel guilty. 

So, uh, all in all, you might think this my life story, this is something that I can glance over it. And what I left out in between is, uh-- is bothering me. What I left out in between, uh, it bothers me because you don't know. You can't know it. Or you or whoever wants to know it, you can't know it and you can't assess it. 

And, uh, therefore, so much so, just to give you a-- an example, years back, or even now, uh, at the-- at the point when I hear just war, you know, just war, it maybe anywhere in the world, I see it and I hear it with different eyes than others. To me, it's-- I just shrivel just to hear the word war. 

I'm not a pacifist by any means. But when you're telling me what's happening over there in the war, what's happening over there though. I'm just in it. And-- and-- and I'm-- I'm right back in it psychologically. And yet I-- when I hear people talking of war so common, so without emotions, like it's, uh-- you go buy a loaf of bread, it's unreal. I can't understand it. 

I used to come home and, uh, even my wife, my late wife, she knew I'm interested in everything. And she used to relate, she sa, oh, I read in the paper-- in the paper there's war over there. I couldn't-- I couldn't understand. I couldn't tolerate with what tone she said it. 

If you talk about war, you've got to talk about sad. You've got to feel it. You've got to talk with regret. And I don't know who the enemy is, who's suffering what. But just thinking about it, you can have-- you have to-- you have to have the picture in your head, somebody is suffering over there. 

And anybody that talks it willy nilly without any emotions is-- is just, uh-- I feel guilty for them. It's, uh-- It's just, uh, not human not to talk or not to be sad about it. And I don't care who you talk about, what war and where it happened. That, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's as though you feel that you have a language or a knowledge that you cannot tell others. 

SUBJECT: Of course not. Who-- who would want to be burdened with it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: They would not know. 

SUBJECT: To tell it, is-- you got to-- you know, jeder Wort, put it on me. Hang it on them. You want to hang your troubles on somebody. Telling it to somebody, and if somebody wants to listen and wants to get into it, I-- I'd feel if that person listens and understands it. 

And if he does, it must have an effect on him. Then I figure-- then I feel I put my burden on him. And have I got a right to? If he wants to in the first place, if he wants to, and if he wants to, do I got a right? It's, uh-- I got a-- it's not my dilemma. It's general. If you talk with everybody. 

Now, I can talk to people out there that, uh, got the same kind of story. I wouldn't have to go into details. I've just mentioned an aspect of it or relate an incident, and we right home. We know what it is and without getting into it we feel the same way. 

But, uh, with an outsider, you haven't got that luxury. Either/or. Either they don't, either or they won't understand. And if it's-- if it's not either one of them, you figure, how can you burden them with them? How can you burden? You-- you almost need to educate them for them to understand. If they don't understand, I don't blame them. They can't. They can't. 

And go back to the beginning of the whole program. Talking about it, all this or more, each, each incidence need so much explaining. It needs explaining to the other person how and why and, uh, for them just to grasp it that you could live through it, that you could live through it consciously without doing anything, without converting your own person to a different person that you are right now. 

All this you lived through, all this you saw, and you go out and work for money or you go out, you drive a car or whatever. That's-- that's not normal. How could you? What-- what does this mean anything to you right now? It couldn't. 

And it shouldn't mean. It shouldn't be-- should be as you know some people that, uh, turn away from life because they-- they found it senseless. It doesn't add up. And I and the kind of people that went through it should know that it doesn't add up. Nothing adds up. It doesn't make any sense. 

It won't-- nothing justifies it to-- to go on and on and on after you know what the world is like or what it was and what even might happened. 

Uh, it-- it occurred to me talking about, uh, the, uh, dilemma of the Holocaust, understanding it with all its aspects. And the question was always, which very little has been, uh, gone into, which is hard, why didn't you fight? Why didn't you organize? Why didn't you do? Why didn't you that? It's been raised, this question, so many times. 

And every time I hear an answer about it, I disagree about it, because I disagree it wasn't answered properly. And answering properly about a-- anybody, there is no stock answer for a particular person in a particular time in a particular place, surroundings and, uh, surroundings, uh, geographically, and the makeup of the people and the makeup of-- of everything else plays a role in the possibility of whatever could have happened here or could've-- could've happened over there. 

And then again, lately, [INAUDIBLE] not me, but there must be-- somebody must be asking question, what's going on now? You see this hostage taking everywhere, you know? With every place. You know, I'm just trying to draw something, that, uh, few people could take, uh-- accomplish something, right or wrong, in other parts of the country, just by taking hostages of any kind. 

And anybody ever thought if Jews in time of Germany, they could have stormed a kommandatur you know? Take 50 Germans or 20 or 10 and hold them for hostage and get-- get what we want, and so forth and so on. Did this question every occur to anybody? Have anybody ever think what would have happened if this would have happened? 

And, uh, the answer to that is simple. If you knew what happened, where you were and who you are dealing with, then you just got back-- go back to history and see just, uh, one German officer I think talking about [INAUDIBLE]. One was killed what they did. 

And if you ever can imagine that a, uh-- a group of, uh, inmates taking-- especially Jews taking, uh, some Germans hostage, do you have an idea what might have happened? I can tell you. As simple as that, they would've probably marched thousands right in front of the-- front of the thing and gunned them down just like this. Not enough? Thousand more. Thousand more. Just gun them down like flies. 

That's what we were dealing with. There was no any way, possibility of resistance in a normal sense of the way. And, uh, of course, uh, types of resistance occurred, And, uh, can't go into it right now. But, uh, that's who we're dealing with. There's no-- nothing rational. Life in camp, life in the ghetto. My god. 

I'm horrified when I read it right now. I'm horrified to the point that, uh, any time I read about it I'm right there. I'm right there. To me-- to me it's not something that, uh-- a version of-- of fiction, and not, uh, something that, uh, has been retold. And it just brings me right back then in the midst of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the two worlds are not quite reconcilable. No reconciliation between then and now. It's not-- and maybe it should stay that way. Is that-- 

SUBJECT: Uh, it should stay that way. It has to stay that way. There is no way of changing. You-- you can take-- unless somebody just without mind or brain can just, uh, lock himself, shut himself out the past. I wish it were possible. How can any thinking person do it? How can any thinking person do it? That-- that's not possible. 

That's-- that's going back-- it's in the back with you all the time. And, uh, sometimes I even sympathize with the regular soldiers of a war, Vietnam, they went through, you know? Uh, I can imagine. I-- I'm talking about, uh, you go through this. You-- you say, separate yourself, what it was, what it is. It's a constant, uh, coming true nightmares. 

No-- I-- I live a true--- anybody live a true-- you ask, uh, what triggers it. You watch a movie or you-- something-- something connected with it. You read about it. You read about it. And as sure as anything, you come at night, you just, uh, wake up in a sweat and you don't know where you are. And this whole thing is right back there, and not-- not remote. It's right there. 

So how can you dis-- disassociate yourself from you? During the day, it's almost, uh, a cure, a therapy that you're busy. This, uh, is our busy system, that you have to forget. But once you relax and you-- and you gather your thoughts, even not for one minute, you've got to know who you are and where you're from and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And-- 

SUBJECT: --what was what. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those are two separate lives that go on-- 

SUBJECT: Entirely. I-- I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --inside. 

SUBJECT: I look at my back-- oh my god. When I look back, that's me from there? From this? From that? It's two person. A Jekyll and Hyde sort of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even now two separate lives-- 

SUBJECT: Right, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --that go on. The night and the day. 

SUBJECT: The time I function for necessarily, of surviving, of existing, and the time that I, if I do shut off, I'm just right back there where I was. I bury my head in a book or with something. And-- and one way or another it brings me back. Can't relax. And, uh, that's what you got from me. And, uh, on other occasions I might tell you more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: OK. I hope you use it for the good part of it. Do you want my mic? Can I take it with me? 