INTERVIEWER: Now, Linda, I will try and-- how we fell asleep. That's where you left off. 

CREW: OK, stop. 

CREW: Right. 

CREW: Let's drop. It doesn't work. 

CREW: OK, we're rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, you were at the switcher. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. I'm still trying to recollect the reasons why I found myself at it, because in the camp, you could only survive if you were alert and you had friends, or you had some people, either inside or outside, that will help you one way or the other. In Anhalt my first camp, the first six months, I helped myself by contacting my parents while they were still alive. And they were sending me packages. And I, in fact, I sent a German to my father, which was very unusual. This is the story that I gave an interview. 

It was, in the beginning, and I was still, you know, not accustomed to the, to the rigors of camp. But after we went to Markstadt, everything changed because there was no more contact with home. My parents were gone. And my sister, I could only communicate rarely with her. And I knew that I had one friend, because when I was very, very ill and I couldn't stand at the appellplatz, as I said, at the assembly, I noticed one morning that somebody fainted, and they took him away. They said the order was put them into the lazarette, to the, to the sick, sick room. 

Well, the following day, I felt the same way. I, I, I was near exhaustion. But I was still alert. So I don't know whether I fainted or I faked it. Anyway, I fell. And I, and I was left there, and they were marching out. And they took me to the so-called Krakenroom which was just another barracks, and there was nothing there. It was exactly like the other barracks. 

And shortly thereafter-- you see, there were sick people in it-- a kapo came. His name was Davidowicz. And he was the kapo in the previous camp too, with whom-- who wasn't as bad as most of them. You know, I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Explain kapos. 

SUBJECT 1: OK, a kapo was a supervisor, who was in charge of a unit, of a group. Mostly the kapos where there because they had better conditions. They had better barracks. They got more food. And if they were rough on their fellow Jews, they got some bonuses. They were helping out both the Germans inside the camp because they were leading the people out. And they were helping out the meisters, you know, the supervisor, the German supervisors from the working places. So that-- they were supposed to extract the maximum from the Jews. 

And when there were some sadness among them, they were using it for their own personal vendettas too, if they had somebody whom they didn't like. I wasn't very liked because they called me intellectual. You know, I used to talk about, you know, I was a dentist apprentice. And I read a lot. And I tried to fantasize. 

And I had a very small group, and this Davidowicz was one of the people that I communicated with, although he wasn't in my group. You know, people found their own people to communicate with. Anyway, he took a liking to me for no reason. I didn't give him anything. I didn't-- he wasn't from my hometown. 

So there were some people who were there because they tried to help others. You know. And when I tell you the story, you'll see that there was a kapo, you know, who helped me. 

SUBJECT 2: But they were dressed better, and they were-- 

SUBJECT 1: They were dressed better. You know, they got like when they took out from the packages, which they didn't distribute. They gave it to the kapos. You see, so even if there was a good kapo, he couldn't recognize where the package came from. So anyway, when I fell on the appellplatz, they took me to this sick room. And shortly thereafter, this kapo came, Davidowicz. And he said to me, Jacob, you better get out. Get up, and I'll take you to work, because the German came with him. You see, the cologne, the detail was marching already out. And he came in, and he said, you've got to do it right now because we won't be able to catch on to the detail. 

So I said I can't. I'm exhausted. He says, you can, because if you won't, do you know what's going to happen to you? They're going to send you to Auschwitz, because that's what they're doing with people who can not make it. Well that put me right up. And he, you know, I leaned on him, and he joined the group. 

Well, shortly thereafter, I was near exhaustion anyway. Shortly thereafter, the my kapo-- you know, he wasn't my kapo. He was, he just was a friend-- changed my detail. We were working night shifts. And it was in the winter. And it was very cold and snowing, as I remember. And he came over, and he says, you get up. And you're going to be sitting at the exchange of the rails. And all you have to do is just switch the rails when you see a red light. 

Well, at that time, I didn't fake it because I really fainted. And it was a moment where I saw death coming, because I read about all these things, what visions you have and about your life goes through your mind, you know, in seconds. And that was very close to this thing. And I woke up. The Germans were standing over me and beating me. And there was this commotion there. And I really caused a clash. And one of the Germans was severely injured. I think he died. 

And they brought me to the camp, beaten up. And the head of the camp looked at me. And of course, the first thing that ran through my mind is they're going to hang me, because they hang people for lesser offenses than that. But somehow he said, you go straight into your room. No, he screamed at me and, you know, insulted-- threw insults and so forth in the presence of the Germans. and the whole commotion. 

He says, you go into your room. And I want to see you here in five minutes with your belongings. At that time, we still had belongings. You know, that was 1942. And he says, you come to the appellplatz. And I came. And they had two groups of people waiting. These were sick. They were sent away, you know, people are exhausted. 

And there were two, two groups. One was completely in rags, I mean, literally rags. They didn't even have wooden shoes. They, some of them were barefoot. The other one was in wooden shoes and also in very tattered clothes. And he just pointed, go to the right. 

And we knew right away what was happening, because the left, you know, the state that they were in, we knew that they are going to Auschwitz. Auschwitz was not too far from there. Our group was sent to a-- through a train ride that I will never forget, because this is the way it-- they loaded us into a cattle train and squeezed people all that you couldn't stand on your feet. You actually were suspended. And they closed the doors. 

And we were suffocating. And people were dying from suffocation, vomiting. It was a sight that I'll never forget as long as I live. How long the ride lasted, I don't know because it was dark. There was only one, two small windows on the top, everything else was closed. They were crying. They were praying. 

And I thought it lasted two days, but I'm trying to figure out the distance, you see. And it wasn't that far. So either we were standing on a side rail or whatever. I just know that it was-- it lasted a very, very long time. 

And then when they opened the gates to the train, they took us into a camp called Ludwigsdorf, which was a sick camp, special for sick people. They put us in barracks. And there was just lying there. And outside there was only one activity, burying bodies. 

There was no work. And people were dying in front of me. A man will get his ration, and would start eating, and die. And somebody would grab it who has still strength. I had no strength, so I was just lying there. And I was conscious. I knew what was happening. And they, the man on the top of my bunk died. And the orderlies came in in white coats to take him out because, you know, this was a regular procedure. 

And in a flash-- and these things happened to me at every instance, when I was saved or something happened to me, that somehow I-- and that's why I say, this is not my doing. It was just a something. You know, it was like a, like a spark that says you've got to do something. So I pulled this man by his trousers. And I said I want you to take me out of here and help me take a shower because, you know, I haven't showered in days. And I was all filthy, and, and I couldn't walk. I was completely exhausted. 

SUBJECT 2: And the lice were biting you. 

SUBJECT 1: And the lice were biting. And he said-- it was a German Jew. In the paper they wrote it was a German. It wasn't. It was a German Jew. 

And he says to me, why should I do that? You know. I said, I got something for you. And, you know, I figured a white coat. And I was a dentist, you know. And I had some dental instruments that I kept, you know, all through the camp. 

I said, you can have all the instruments. All I want you to do it just take me to the showers. So he said, OK, I'll take out the body, and I'll come back for you. And he did. And he took me out of the, of that room and helped me take a shower. And I never went back to the barracks. I just lied in-- it was like March or early April. And the sun was shining. And for the first time I saw, you know, life. 

And I said, no matter what they do to me, I'm not going to go in to see the stench and all that. And then they saw me. And I started walking. Actually, I can say the sun gave me the strength to get up. It was a transformation. 

And then, when they saw I walked, they took me to work. And that was in a ammunition factory, where we were sitting at the desk. These were the remnants of the krankentransport, of the sick transport. Most of them died. A few that survived, they were taken to get the last of his energy out by weighing metallic-looking powder. 

And it was underground. I know we were going through a labyrinth. And we were sitting at a desk, at a metal desk. And all we had to do is just measure powder. But there was a strange thing. You see, the powder was red. And the older people were, looked red. And my skin started changing. 

And then I asked question. They told me that this is the end, you see, because food started tasting bitter. They gave the food. This time they gave food, but you couldn't eat it because it was bitter. 

They had three different details, you know, measuring this powder is for fuses. And one was the red. One was green. And one was yellow. The yellow affected the lungs. The red affected the stomach. So that, you know, here again, I was right near the end. I knew that only a few weeks, that's all. 

There were very few survivors from that camp. And again, something miraculous happened because I was working on a night shift. There were three shifts, three eight-hour shifts. My shift ended in the morning, 8:00. I think it was from 2:00 to 8:00. 

So you see, you didn't even-- you couldn't even sleep. Because when you were in the camp you see, they took out people to do the details in camp. So the night shift people had it the worst because they couldn't even sleep. 

But when we came from the camp, before they dismissed us, you know, there was a assembly going out and an assembly coming back. We saw there was a commotion there. And the lame selector or-- how they call him? The lomis moykher? 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 1: The lame merchant was there. This was a man, a German, who was trading slaves. You know, he needed some people in at one camp, you know. So he took them out from another camp. 

Well, he came to select some people. And they told us to line up. And he was going around. And he says, you, you, you, step out. And I don't even know whether he really pointed at me. It looked like he pointed at me. I stepped out because I knew that-- I always had to evaluate what can be worse? I mean, take the better of the situations. 

I knew that this is the end. So whatever comes up should be better than, than that. And it was. Because they took out that group of the selected people, and they sent them to Graditz to a different camp, where I was like a half worker because I couldn't do the physical work. And there were some teenagers. 

We were getting half rations in that camp. And this is where we were lying, as you said, in those-- you know. 

SUBJECT 2: Instead of bunks, they had tall [INAUDIBLE] they used to call them. 

SUBJECT 1: That's right. There was like a long bench, three tiers. And you were touching. You couldn't move away from somebody because there was no room. You see, there was so many people there. And this is from where they took me out to build this, to help out in putting that wire fence in, in Fleckner, in that factory. You see? 

By coincidence, the commandant of the camp didn't like what Fleckner was having. He thought they treated the Jews too good, you know. Because after all, they were still coming back, you know. And they were fairly good fed, because the Germans helped them out. You know, when you have a contact with a coworker, you make connections. You get some bread and so forth. So when they asked them-- the administration-- you know, the Fleckner from the factory asked the camp administrator to send them 10 workers, you know, to erect the fence. 

So he called an assembly and picked out the worst looking guys, you know. And I was one of them. You know, lame or people couldn't stand on their feet. So each one of us was in bad shape. And this is where I made the contact with this carpenter. And, and he took me out of that camp into Fleckner. And this is where-- this was where I turned a new leaf on life, because the entire population of Graditz or almost the entire population, perished. Because shortly after I came out of that camp, the epidemic of typhus broke out. And most of the people-- 

SUBJECT 2: Are buried there. 

SUBJECT 1: --perished there. It was only a short time after that. And I was, at that time, waiting for my sister to come. You see, that was that period. And I-- you know, they transferred me. On the one hand, you know, my conditions improved. But on the other hand, I lost contact. 

SUBJECT 2: But in-- being in Langenbielau After you came, he saw a different life, because it was a smaller group of people. Was a little-- conditions were little better than in the other camp. 

SUBJECT 1: And this is where I started writing poetry. 

SUBJECT 2: Then he started writing poetry. 

SUBJECT 1: Which also saved me. You know, I wrote-- 

INTERVIEWER: You started writing poetry? 

SUBJECT 1: That's right. 

SUBJECT 2: Poetry-- in that camp. 

SUBJECT 1: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: On what? Did he have paper? Did they-- 

SUBJECT 1: Well, I always tied to keep my mind alert. So there was one thing that I always had, was a piece of paper and a small pencil that, you know, got smaller and smaller all time. And I would train my mind, you know. Write some things that I remembered. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you recite one of the poems that you wrote at that time? 

SUBJECT 1: They're all in Polish. But I have a copy of it because it was published. 

INTERVIEWER: How does is sound in Polish? Any poem, any one. 

SUBJECT 1: In Polish? 

SUBJECT 2: I have just the first, because we were getting-- 

SUBJECT 1: This was copied and sent to-- I'll tell you the story about resistance, what started with this poem. But you want to do it in Polish. 

SUBJECT 2: In Polish, because he was writing the poetry. So the hour that we had Sunday, he would write poetry for us and read it to us. For this we were giving him bread to keep his strength and mind going so he could write something for us. And the girls would sing and dance just for an hour, to keep us-- 

INTERVIEWER: You said that you sang to keep your spirits up. What songs did you sing? Can you sing one? 

SUBJECT 2: I will sing, but I don't know if I remember every verse. But I will try. [NON-ENGLISH SINGING] 

This is without a home and without a roof, we are traveling and traveling. 

SUBJECT 1: We are wandering through the world. 

SUBJECT 2: Through the-- we are wandering, not knowing where we go. We are praying to you, dear God. 

SUBJECT 1: That our redemption should come. 

SUBJECT 2: That our redemption should come. And when will it come? And when will it come? 

INTERVIEWER: Was this song composed in the-- 

SUBJECT 1: It was a, was a camp song. 

SUBJECT 2: A camp song. I don't know where it came from, but-- 

SUBJECT 1: We were singing it quite often. 

SUBJECT 2: And then was another one 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, there was a, there was a group of girls that helped me out also, after I wrote the poem. And they were singing a song about a bird. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did that go? 

SUBJECT 2: Wen ich wort gewene, faigale. Wenn ich wort gehort fliegale. Gefloygen wort ich zu dir. Gefloygen wort ich zu dir. Azoy ich hob kein faigale, ich hob kein fliegale. Leidich U'nashir, azoy ich bin kein faigale, ich hob kein fligale. Leidich U'nashir. 

This is, if I would be a bird, if I would have wings, I would fly to you. I would fly to you. But I am not a bird. And I don't have wings, so I cannot fly to you. I cannot fly to you. 

INTERVIEWER: And these were the songs that people sang in the camps. 

SUBJECT 1: I mean in our camp. 

SUBJECT 2: This is in our camp. 

SUBJECT 1: I mean, this was a-- as I said, it was an unusual period. It was a very short period. It was just before the rough stuff started. You see, because they needed-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was before the concentration camp started. 

SUBJECT 1: That's right. We were. 

SUBJECT 2: These were still working camps. 

SUBJECT 1: You see, we were, at that time, working in a factory. You see? And the conditions, although they were worse than most of the other workers, but they were tolerable. At least it was clean. You see? 

And, you know, I'd like to tell you about the state of the spirit in the camps. Because there were times, for example, in Ludwigsdorf, there was no such thing as spirit, because there was death all over. You know, there was-- even if somebody would be brave, or you would be a resistance fighter, over there he would be just like everybody else because these were the conditions of complete annihilation. In the camp where we were-- and although, at that time, I was already anhalt markstadt? 

BOTH SUBJECTS: Ludwigsdorf, Graditz. 

SUBJECT 1: That was my fifth camp, You see? But I kept alive. You know. My memory, I was reciting songs, prayers, and so forth. And there was a time, especially when-- you know, something has to trigger this thing in me. And I know what happened. They brought a small group of Dutch prisoners into the camp. Now these were prisoners who, up till that time, they were still living like free people. You know, Holland, Jews had a pretty good. They had friends and so forth. 

And when they came in, they looked like, you know, we looked, you know, three years before. They looked like nothing happened to them. They're normal people. We were skeletons, and they were, you know, pretty well, you know, kept. And there was a man who confided in me, although he didn't speak German and he didn't speak Yiddish. He's spoken in only Dutch. 

And in the evening, you know, he was sitting and crying. And he was a tall guy. And I went over to him, although, you see, people usually stick to their own. But I always was curious about other people. And I said, what bothers you? And then the way I understood it, it just happened to him. You know, they took away his wife, you know, and the children. And, and they started to deport Jews from Holland. You know. And that hit him like a rock, you know, because this was when they decided to clean out Western Europe also. You see? 

And he reminded me of what happened to me. You know, the way my emotions, when they took me to camp. You see? So I took the piece of paper. I just had to do something. And in the dark, you know, I scribbled notes. And in the morning, I got up earlier, and I continued because I just felt-- I never wrote poetry before, never wrote anything. You know. But I just had to write it. 

And we had a doctor, who was a prisoner in the camp, in the same barracks. And he saw that. And he said, what is it? And I said, forget it. It's just something that I wrote. But it's, you know, nothing for you. He says, show it to me anyway. And he grabbed it from my hand and read it. And he says, this is good. 

He says, you know, this is exactly what we need. We should start a Kameradschaftsabend, because the people need to get some encouragement, some hope. And he says, let's start it with that. So that Sunday night, you see, we'll leave-- we'll leave the food. You know, everybody will make a resolution that we're going to eat together at a-- you know, we'll gather around. And we'll start a Kameradschaftsabend, which is a friendship evening, culture evening, so to speak. 

And you read the poetry. I'll tell them something about medicine. And the engineer will tell them something about building bridges. You know, to keep their mind alert, because that's exactly what the Germans didn't want. You see. They didn't let us read even newspaper. You know. 

You couldn't have a pencil. It was contraband. You see, if they caught you with a pencil and a paper, you know, that means you're going to write simply. Anyway, I'll read it to you in English, because my son translated it. I think it will give you the idea. It's called Midwinter Night's Dream. And it was written in concentration camp Langenbielau December, 1943. 

(READING) Sometimes in the dark of the night, as the Angel of Death makes his worldly flight, 100 thoughts rush in to find the secret entrance to my mind. Some remind me of my work, the daily load I dare not shirk. While others bring a deeper pain that crush my spirit, numb my brain. 

Why do I suffer such anguish and grief? Did I murder or act like a thief? Did I betray a trust of the state that over me hangs this cloud of hate? Why do I bear this sign of shame? For this wretched life, whom do I blame? 

These questions keep pouring into my mind. But no answers come. No solace I find. But soon these thoughts fade into space. Like frightened birds, away they race. They take my weary bones at last. And in their place come thoughts of the past. 

Then all my troubles disappear. A peaceful, godly atmosphere engulfs me with its love of life. And slowly I forget all strife. In the dark of the night, I see my loved ones faces. I happily remind myself of all the times and the places. It's only a bad dream, a nightmare I realize. My mother didn't ask me the reasons for my cries. 

I'm relieved that my family is returning. I feel my blood pulsating, my brain tissue burning. My fingers count these few seconds of bliss. I would trade my whole life gladly for an hour of this. Then all of a sudden, my enchantment is shattered. I hear from an ear the anguished sobs of the battered. 

With horror in my heart I open my eyes wide. I feel worm gnawing within me deep inside. From out of the murmur, a voice calls to me, brother. I search through hunched bodies lying on top one another. Stumbling scared through the midst of the dying and the dead I find him, the man who called, sitting, holding his head. 

I saw my wife, he cried to me. I could feel his pain. Enemies trampling my baby's, gone wildly insane. She implored me to stop them. I wanted to, except I threw my hands up in defeat. My wife, she just wept. Why this suffering? 

Recalling the horrible sight, I beat my fists on my head-- and my head against the wall each night. I cry aloud. Bring back my children. Return my wife. If not, then please also take my life. 

In a blaze, the darkness fills with golden rays of light. Flapping wings of swallows of hope drive away the night. As they circle my head, tenderly kissing my brow, brightness surrounds me. The horror must be over now. 

At my feet, the torn fragments of barbed wire are strewn. Yellow badges fly around me. We'll live again soon. We'll get back what they took. Yes, it will all be returned. The cherished sense of the world freedom will be a relearned. Beauty , love, and happiness will fill our lives once more. 

The world will know eternal peace. There will never be war. And so, my friend, do as I do. You must keep your head up high. The woodchopper does not pay heed to the woods chips fly. 

Get up you bastards, the kapo screams of the door. One must face reality. The dream is no more. Climbing down from my bank, I silently pray. I have to work that I may live to see a better day. The SS trooper stands over me like a hawk and puts stumbling blocks before me as I walk. And when I stop to think what lurks for me in the dark, their hangs above my life a giant question mark. 

I had still to go a year and a half after that. That was the midpoint. But that started something that helped many people, because they were copying that and sending it to other camps. And the girls, actually, they saved it for me. You see? because they were-- many of the girls were saving these poems. And this was the first one I wrote. 

I wrote many others because every week, then, we did that. And we exchanged some information that we heard. You know, what was going on in the front. And this lasted until they took us to the SS concentration camp, which broke it all up. 

But that was a period of renewal. And I know that it saved some people's lives, because it gave them the spirit. It was, for the first time, you know, we were human, humans again. 

And so whenever there were conditions-- and this is not an isolated fact, because the same thing happened in other camps. You know that there are poems that were written, diaries kept. Most of them were burned in Auschwitz or in other camps. Because, you know, if I wouldn't be alive-- well, maybe somebody, you know, copies it. But there were many things that people wrote, and kept it on his body, and they just disappeared. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you manage to keep this poem? Or you Didn't When you went to Auschwitz, didn't they strip you of everything? 

SUBJECT 1: They stripped me of everything. Well, that wasn't Auschwitz. That was another. That was not a extermination camp. You, see that's another separation that you have to make. You see, the labor camps were for the purpose of exploiting people. When they couldn't get, extract anymore energy from, then they join the extermination camp. You see? 

But the majority of the people, the 6 million Jews, most of them went directly. They were rounded up. They didn't go through the labor phase of it. You see, we were lucky because at least some of us had a chance. They had no chance. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened in the last year and a half of your incarceration? Where were you? And what happened to each of you? 

SUBJECT 1: OK, the last year was in Sporschuler, where the SS regulations were in force. You see, before we were not under the SS. We were under different, you know, divisions, you know, of exploiting Jews. It was impossible, really, to survive. And we were told that we will never survive. 

I mean, they told us when we came into the camp, on the assembly, they said that don't ever think that you're going to escape. Because if you escape, you know, they'll shoot you. If they won't shoot you, they denounce you and will hang you. And the best thing for you to do is, as they said on the gate in Auschwitz, you know, Arbeit macht frei, you see, which has a connotation that if you work, it won't be as bad for you. That is, as long as you work. You see? 

People didn't understand it. As long as you work, you were, you still had your life. If you were not capable to work, that's the end of you. So that unless you had a belief, you know, religious people, you know, made it because they were praying. And, and, and you had to find something to, to keep your spirits up. 

And you asked me about the day-to-day work and, you know, that defense mechanism. I had this defense mechanism. And I think that will explain it. I always looked forward to something. In other words, when I got up in the morning, I wanted to go through marching, because that was a bad thing. You know, my legs didn't. So I said, well, once I'm through that, it's not going to be so bad. Because at work, maybe I, you know, if I march and I fall, they will shoot me. You see? 

At work there is more leeway. They don't keep an eye on you. And then you are, you, you psych yourself to the break. See? And I kept my breath for that break so that-- you see, I knew that halfway, you know, I am going to look for something, look forward to something. So the bread that I was getting in the evening with the soup, which is supposed to last for the whole following day, most people were so hungry that they had the soup, and they had the bread, and they were still very, very hungry. 

I disciplined myself not to eat the bread. So sometimes I would eat just a small piece of bread, because, you know, temptation. But the bulk of it, I would leave for lunchtime, for lunch break. Because at that time, people were falling like flies. You see? So I felt that this is going to be, you know, something to look forward to. 

And then after the break, of course, the eating the piece of bread was a pleasure in itself, you know, and resting a little bit. Then you look forward to go back, you see, and to get the soup. So you always looked forward. I mean, you didn't think about the bad things. You had to think about the good things. 

INTERVIEWER: And this is how you felt you survived. 

SUBJECT 1: This is the way I, I disciplined myself. And I think my wife did the same. 

SUBJECT 2: I did this. Others, like Sunday, Saturday night, we would get for the whole Sunday, we wouldn't get anything on Sunday till Monday. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing to eat, you mean? 

SUBJECT 2: They gave us the ration on a Saturday night to keep us through Monday. So we had to train ourselves to eat a little Saturday Night, to leave something for Sunday evening. Otherwise, you would starve. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you at this point? 

SUBJECT 2: At that time, I was in the camp in Langenbielau. 

SUBJECT 1: Langenbielau was the same. 

SUBJECT 2: So, I could control myself. I had a sister with me that she couldn't control. So she would eat up the whole thing right away, because she was hungry Saturday night. And Sunday afternoon, if I would sit, I would leave this piece of bread that I had leftover for Sunday. She would come next to me, and looked at me, and start crying. 

Now how could I eat my little piece of bread when my sister was standing next to me crying? So I had to take from the little thing I had to share with her. I couldn't see her cry. And that week-by-week, I would tell her, don't finish everything because you're going to cry again. She couldn't help it. 

So I always had-- having as little as I had, I still had to give to my sister to help her to survive, because she was younger. And my father left me with the message, help her. So I always try to keep together. 

Even when I-- after the liberation, when my husband approached me to get married, I was startled because I just met him one day. Next day-- 

SUBJECT 1: She didn't love me. 

SUBJECT 2: He asked me to marry him. And I says, how can I marry you? I was shocked. I don't love you. I just met you. I saw you through the-- I know who you are through the camp because you was so popular with writing all that poetry and going through all the troubles. When he burned down the factory, we were sorry because they were supposed to hang him. So he was the popular one in these circumstances. 

So he say, I'll take that chance. But will you love me after I marry you. I said, I promise I will do my best to love you. But I have my sister, and I cannot leave my sister. She has to go where I go. 

So he had to-- his uncle that made the wedding for us. And the uncle said to me, no you cannot get married with two women. I see to it that your sister will be taken care of. I said, no. So I'm not getting married. My sister has to go where I go. So if he had to smuggle out, we were liberated. And then Poland took over the part that we were liberated in. 

And so my sister lived with me. Then we were supposed to smuggle out. After a year, we decided that to live under the Russian regime wasn't any good. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you at liberation? What camp were you in? 

SUBJECT 2: Langenbielau. Langenbielau. And so, and the German-- near Breslau. So a few days later, me and her decided to go home to find if anybody is alive. There were no trains, no transportation. So we started walking. We were hitchhiking on wagons, horse and buggies, until we got home to Sosnowiec. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you find when you got back there? 

SUBJECT 2: Blackout-- I have a blackout because I came and I found that strangers lived in our home. Strangers took over our business. And I broke down crying. And there was already a center for returners home, a room that they formed, a Jewish community center like. I slept on the floor that night, lying down actually, weeping. And I just have a blackout. 

We decided next morning, just march back to the part where we were liberate. At least we had some friends there from the concentration camp, because we had nobody left. So that's the only time I went back home. But I didn't find anybody and disappointment. And I didn't want to go back. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever try to go back? 

SUBJECT 1: No. No, I couldn't. It was-- was something that I, I, I just couldn't face. Because we were a very close family. And I lived through the camp still thinking that somehow or other they escaped their fate. I knew that they were rounded up. But I knew that there were some who, who survived. And I was searching for them. 

I could never make peace with this idea that I am all alone, until after when I looked for their names and I couldn't find it. And, and then when I concentrated my entire energy to pursuing my-- 

SUBJECT 2: --dreams. 

SUBJECT 1: --dreams. I wanted to marry Mira. And so that, that was like a real substitute at that time for my energy, for my thoughts. And I went through the town. Because shortly after the war, she was ill. And I had to take her to Krakow. And we actually went by. And I never went, neither to Dombrowa nor to Pietkow. 

Now I hope if-- I'm hearing that people are going back. And we are on and off this though of facing it. Maybe some day we'll do it. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question-- have you ever come to terms, either of you, with the-- that you are alone, that you were alone insofar as your own family is concerned? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, as far as the family, this is something that is very difficult for Americans to understand. The pain of knowing that you are alone come on a holiday. See? 

SUBJECT 2: When the children were born-- 

SUBJECT 1: The holiday in a Jewish home, in Eastern Europe especially, was where family interactivity. You see, this is what the family was living for, Passover. Our first Passover, we spent in-- 

SUBJECT 2: We had a business in Battenberg at the time. 

SUBJECT 1: --in Battenberg. And we faced each other. And we started crying because that was the first time, you know, that the realization came that we're all alone, both of us. I mean, she had a sister. But, you know, she had a large family, uncles, and-- 

SUBJECT 2: --cousins. 

SUBJECT 1: --cousins. And, and this is still with us. I mean, that feeling that you are alone, although we have children and now I have a grandchild. And we hope that, you know, we will-- 

SUBJECT 2: --instill in them-- 

SUBJECT 1: You know, perpetuate, you know, the memory and so forth. And my children know everything about my parents. My son painted a picture of my mother. And they are alive in spirit. You see? Because, from memory, I-- since my children were young, I told them all about-- I never his anything. But I told it to them in a way that they don't feel different. You see? 

They are Americans. And both of my sons wrote thesis for their graduation about the Holocaust. And yet, they are not obsessed with it. They know this is part of their life. And that's all we can ask for. And-- 

SUBJECT 2: When they read the book, the children of survivors, they can't believe. They say, somehow you didn't bring us up like that, with that we have to do, that we have-- because you are survivor. We feel like every American child feels. Though there were times, when they were growing up, they kept on saying, oh, how come they're going to have grandmothers, grandfathers, aunts, and uncles. They're going on holidays. That was a very hard answer to give to them and constantly say, honey, but you have it. 

How can you explain to a child. They want a grandparent. They want a family. So that's the only time we had to keep on talking to them that they'd-- everything is wiped out. 

SUBJECT 1: We never make them feel that they have to compensate for something. 

SUBJECT 2: They don't owe us anything that we are survivors. 

SUBJECT 1: And for that matter, I don't ask from anybody pity or to feel sorry for me. What I'm asking is to understand and to learn about it. This is something, very, very important. Because if we won't do something about that, you know, it is being wiped out. I mean, the history is being completely whitewashed in Europe and even America. 

There is a resurgence of interest now. And I think this, if there's anything that we can do about it, is to-- so that generations that come after us will know the whole story, not as a legend, not as a diary of one person, or a interesting story. That's why I didn't want to tell my story for all these years, because I was lucky. And I don't want people to misunderstand that this is the way. The way of the Holocaust was the way of the six million, the way of my parents. That was the normal thing. This was abnormal. I was lucky. 

And I insisted that newspaper won't make it sensational. It is only part of the story. 

SUBJECT 2: And Europe, coming back to Europe, that student when you taught at the university, there was a from Belgium or Holland, a student. And he lived in Europe. And he was startled when he heard him, because somehow, even in Europe they-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, yes, I-- a few weeks ago, I was asked to speak at Bentley college. And they have a course on the Holocaust. And two professors, and they are quite knowledgeable about it. And, you know, I told them the story. And they asked me questions. And there were two boys from Holland whose parents were-- 

SUBJECT 2: --survivors. 

SUBJECT 1: --survivors. That is, they escaped by not telling that they are Jews. That they had to arrange that. And they were, they were in Europe. And they didn't-- this was news to them. You see? I mean in Holland, or-- they-- people don't talk about it. They don't teach it in schools. And I think if we leave it, I'm sad that we are committing a crime. Because certainly the 6 million Jews and the Gentiles that perished, that at least they want to be remembered so that it won't happen again. 

INTERVIEWER: I had to stop it on that because it was just so perfect. It was just so perfect. 