DORI LAUB: Hit the light. Just go ahead. 

SUBJECT: You make me. 

DORI LAUB: There's nothing that I can make you do from there. 

SUBJECT: But, uh, my grandson is probably gone because he has to go to work. 

DORI LAUB: No problem. He will get you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He will get-- you will get a tape. 

SUBJECT: That's-- the oral tape. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: All right. May I know your name, doctor? 

DORI LAUB: Dori Laub, L-A-U-B. 

SUBJECT: Do you have any sister who is Polish too? 

DORI LAUB: I was born in Romania in Cernauti. 

SUBJECT: Bukovina 

DORI LAUB: Not terribly far. 

SUBJECT: Right. in Bukovina, I think they were, uh, speaking Polish? 

DORI LAUB: Romanian-- it was once Poland before the first World War. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

DORI LAUB: And also Hungarian. And I don't-- and then it became Romanian and then became Russian and Romanian and Russian again. So it's changed. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

DORI LAUB: Just leave it on after the-- you mentioned the consequences today. So I did it. And I bear the consequences. If you say something, not-- not in the midst of your account but after when-- Did you say something about a consequence of today? 

SUBJECT: No. 

DORI LAUB: No, no. After you've told the-- the narrative. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

DORI LAUB: I would like a-- give me a water. Mm-hmm. Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Where are we at? 

DORI LAUB: We are at the end of the uprising-- liquidation of-- the ghetto, Warsaw, and during the Warsaw uprising with the child-- and the children there, too. 

SUBJECT: Yes. That wonderful person took my children home, washed them, combed them from-- I don't know how to say about-- all kinds of purities, impurities. And brought them herself to that convent, where there was an-- an orphanage. And nobody knew who my children were, just that the children were, uh, children of a-- an officer who-- who is lost in the war. 

DORI LAUB: Of a Polish officer-- 

SUBJECT: Polish, of course. Except that the mother superior knew, and she accepted. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your other girl was already 11, 12, 13? 

SUBJECT: In '43, she was 10-- she was 11 years old already. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you tell to her? You remember? 

SUBJECT: To my daughter? Oh, she knew everything. She understood everything. 

DORI LAUB: She understood she was a Jewish girl in hiding. 

SUBJECT: Yes, that nobody is to know. And nobody is to know that she has a father. And, uh, and that they are in hiding there. There were other Jewish children in that orphanage, too. Had Jewish looks, really. And, uh, it was a wonderful thing his sisters did. 

I was praying because I was business woman and had-- could and wanted to pray. And sister would say, this is another superior that leaves something for after the war. Don't-- don't do it now. And I was coming every Sunday to see them. Bring them food because the orphanage didn't have, uh, butter or, uh, ham or things that-- nutritious especially. 

But they were-- they were-- they felt free. They were together with the other children. And, uh, they went to school. And they-- and I could be-- I did not have to worry soon. My daughter became very ill and has had to be taken to the hospital to Warsaw. But somehow got better and brought her back to the orphanage. 

DORI LAUB: Sophia, in the midst of all this, you had parents, brothers, sisters. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

DORI LAUB: You-- you might have thought about them. 

SUBJECT: Right. My parents and my family was deported from these little towns. First were deported to people from Kielce already. And then my family, except for one sister, who has been saved by neighbors, too, my parents also. You had no way of communicating with them. 

And then we were so preoccupied with the-- with the feeling of-- of-- of danger at any moment-- moment. There was no place, really, for singing abroad and that. We did. But it wouldn't do anything. 

In Warsaw, a-- a friend of my family was the head of an organization to help Jews. We didn't know about that. We met him in Warsaw. And he gave us better passports, better papers from people who have died and had-- so we had original birth certificates. 

And he asked, what did you do for your parents? We had no contact anymore. We didn't know what was going on. And we never learned. I mean, we learned after the war. We learned after the war because we came to that [INAUDIBLE] after the war. 

DORI LAUB: But throughout, you thought what? 

SUBJECT: We knew that an end, they-- that an end was done with the Jews everywhere. And we could not-- we could not do anything about it. We could not-- part of the family was deported to camps. Ah, this was just right into the-- we learned that later on. 

It is-- it is very hard on the conscience to think about it. It wanted alive, but-- but our dearest are gone. But this-- most people, and I myself, felt that for terrible happened to-- to others will happen to us. I didn't feel that I should try to save my skin. 

But my husband had a very strong instinct of survival. And really in every circumstances, even though he couldn't show-- be around too much himself. But he had initiative. And he had that stamina. He had that push that we are to live and not to give up. 

And might be-- and he was right because dying, unnecessarily dying is-- we have time. There were the children also. That was a tremendous-- I can't-- 

DORI LAUB: A reason to live? 

SUBJECT: Of course. 

DORI LAUB: For the children. 

SUBJECT: To keep them alive. 

DORI LAUB: To keep them alive. 

SUBJECT: And there was no time to think, really. When we were just at the situation already, we had to-- to act, act in as much as possible. And later on, not to think about them. But we are in danger or not? I-- we had-- we said we had our verdict-- deaths were verdict in our pocket all the time. 

DORI LAUB: During Warsaw, in the summer of 1943. 

SUBJECT: 1943 to 1944, the Polish uprising. So I was going on doing the salesmanship. 

DORI LAUB: No Jews anymore. 

SUBJECT: I had known one person who had a child in the same orphanage who is Jewish. And she kept away from me, but because we must-- might be she was right because if they see two Jews together, it look more like Jews than one. But no Jews. 

And, uh, what one has heard wasn't pleasant about sometimes an expression that are still around. Not the-- not the-- not all of them are killed or things like that. And, of course, my husband being attacked many times and taken away everything what he had on-- on him. So he finally had to go into hiding. 

We had four rooms, four different places to live. So he was going from one to another. 

DORI LAUB: How did you know there was danger and moved? How did you realize it was dangerous and moved to another? What were the signals? 

SUBJECT: In the places where we lived-- first in the country, I had, uh, I was-- I was attacked. So I had to go out. But later on, I haven't had any such situation. But my husband had while he was asked to not to come to move out. So he had to go to another place. 

And, uh, he was brave enough to find for himself the rooms. And, uh, also, I had an apartment where I did not live in the bombed out house, uh, where on the fifth floor, I rented an apartment, a room in the kitchen. 

It had no-- it had no stove. It didn't-- windows were covered with wood. But he could go there for a week or so when he did not have any other place to stay. So we maneuvered as we could. 

DORI LAUB: Were you ever, for an evening or a day, together as a family? 

SUBJECT: Oh, not of as a family because a family's never-- he hasn't seen the children in all the time. And the children, uh, I was meeting him every day. We have gone-- been going to places where we had dinner together and to many places. 

In the one place where we met, somebody denounced my husband. As he left the ghetto, he had left wearing a nice suit. He had a very good one. Was a gray flannel suit. 

And they came, the gestapo, and they said-- we had the gestapo come in. Like here, the fire sirens come. And the gentleman in the house said-- he understood probably that my husband was Jewish. And he said, is Mr. [INAUDIBLE] around? Uh, the gestapo's around here. So he ran off to the bathroom. 

And the girl who lived there opened the door. And they said, here came in a man in a gray suit, a Jew. She said, I don't know about him. There is none in the house. And they left. They went on the roof. And they looked in the whole of the house. 

They didn't find him. That was the last time we were in that terrible at that-- that terrible moment of being-- of almost being caught. 

DORI LAUB: When you met him alone, and during the little-- the few hours of quiet, what did you say to each other? What did you talk about? 

SUBJECT: Oh, about everyday-- I had been having an active life, met people. He was liked in one place. He was told in the other place to not to come or things like that and what I sold and what I bought. I had met on this-- on the bus, I-- when I was carrying these loads of luck and cork, I met-- met two young men. 

And they said, what are you doing for yourself? This is too heavy for you to-- uh, come to us. We will give you merchandise to sell. And it won't be that heavy. And it will be better. bringing in our money. And they were giving me every day a load, a package of silverware, locks, little things, scissors, cosmetics. 

And I would bring him the money next day. And they would give me again. Somehow I had confidence in me. And I had made a very good living this way. And then meeting business people, I had some connections already. And I was telling him we-- telling him we wouldn't stay together long. But we have seen each other every day. 

DORI LAUB: Did you talk of the past or of the future? 

SUBJECT: No. 

DORI LAUB: Never. 

SUBJECT: No. 

DORI LAUB: Just-- 

SUBJECT: No, about the children eventually, what I've seen. I was going there every Sunday. When-- in 1944, we heard that the Russians were coming. We were-- I think we did vocation already of the English in Yep. 

We were becoming very hopeful. We saw they will come in soon and liberate us. But it wasn't so. We came, as you know probably, as student at the Vistula at the other side of-- of Warsaw. Here, the Germans were already cleaned. We saw this in the end. But they heard the Russians stop and did not-- and the Germans did not leave Poland. 

But then, seeing that the Germans are weaker and the Russians are behind us, the Poles started an uprising. It was in 1944. I found myself with my husband at the dinner when around us, the houses were burning already. And somehow, the uprising has been almost to an end. 

They took us. We had to go first to the cellars. And they took us out from the cellars, the Ukrainians and the Germans, to bring us, to deport us as Poles. We, uh, were marching out. They, of course, took off-- I don't wear any because I don't have any anymore. My, uh, wedding ring. 

And they were pulling these off. And people were-- women were taking off from the ears. And we were brought to a place that was like a-- like the-- like the ghetto was. But this was a place where so-called [? [NON-ENGLISH]-- ?] the Warsaw vegetable market took-- was taking place. And it was closed up with a high wall. 

There, they brought all-- we were, as Poles, we were to be deported to Germany to work. We, uh, stayed there overnight. There were many, many people. And a family of people whom I was supplying with my kind of merchandise hardware store-- they saw my husband through the next day the morning. And he wasn't shaved. And they understood the situation well. 

And the lady tells me, uh, you know, we know the conductor, the driver of the train that is going to take us. And he said that he would want to help us. Two people can stand next to him in the train as he is, uh, driving his train. And we are six. And we don't want to separate. Go and take-- take a chance yourself. 

And so when they came to take us out and run to the train, we went next to that man. At the first station, he-- he said he will tell us where to get off. At the first station, he said, no. At the second, no. At the third one, he-- he started to slow down the movement. And he said, go. 

And we jumped off. And he went to this train of-- the Germans started to shoot. But-- but the-- the-- what's it called? Went-- it went into another direction. 

DORI LAUB: The bullets? 

SUBJECT: The bullets went into another direction or we went over to a hut of a peasant. And we started to-- from there again. My husband could have been examined. And as he was circumcised, this would have been the end. 

We were very fortunate that he could escape. So from there, we started by foot to go back. My husband said, let's go to Czestochowa. That was near where my husb-- father used to live near Kornice. And on the way, we were stopping by a peasant's house, staying in-- they kept us for the night until they would recognizes us. And they would go on. But nobody cared-- gave us out. We went by foot to-- 

DORI LAUB: Those are peasant you knew from before? 

SUBJECT: No. We were coming-- it was known. It was an exodus from Warsaw, that, uh, Warsaw has been and that people are leaving and taking it to work to Germany. And then we escaped from-- 

DORI LAUB: So they would recognize you as what? 

SUBJECT: My husband as a Jew. 

DORI LAUB: Because? 

SUBJECT: There is something in our spee-- in our language that our language is too literary, perhaps, and not so much as the simple language of the people. Uh, and my husband had Jewish looks more than I did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What would they tell you? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Uh, that they have no place, that they should go or so. And we were going. We were going towards Czestochowa. And we arrived. There was a stop point. Uh, we stopped at the factory where I had imagined I was from. And the men received us-- very beautiful. 

But we couldn't [COUGHS] stay long. The factory wasn't functioning. But the director was very nice to us, not knowing us. There was a lack of sympathy for the Poles from Poles to Poles, not Jewish. And then we came to Czestochowa. We joined the crowd of the people who were out from-- coming out from Warsaw. 

And they were an organized help. Cheap food-- families take me in-- people to stay. And so we got our places, where to stay. My husband had to go from place to place as he had to hide. 

DORI LAUB: Was it-- 

SUBJECT: But I stayed in the same place all the time. 

DORI LAUB: Was it clear that it's coming to an end now? 

SUBJECT: It looked like. It looked like. And the Poles were preoccupied very much with their own problem, political problem. They only hoped that after the Germans, America's going to fight the-- the-- the Russians. And since that didn't come, that was a big disappointment. 

So from there, we went to-- to Kornice in my father's estate where we would have stayed had it not been that it became dangerous to Jews even in a Polish village after the war. 

DORI LAUB: You become what? 

SUBJECT: Dangerous to us to live there because there were certain guests. I think this is no more of the program. 

DORI LAUB: Yeah, what is the liberation? Where were you liberated? 

SUBJECT: In Czestochowa. 

DORI LAUB: Can you-- can you describe the liberation? 

SUBJECT: The liberation-- my husband came to me in the morning at 6 o'clock in the morning. And he says, there are [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] and people in the hou-- in the street. And we are free. They came out from the ghettos from-- not from the ghettos-- from the camps. 

There was a camp in-- 

DORI LAUB: Czesto-- 

SUBJECT: --in Czestochowa. And let's get out from here. 

DORI LAUB: You didn't know it was hap-- going to happen next, did you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, let me tell you. I was doing business in Czestochowa, too. I had-- um, we have found a friend in a-- who had a store. And he hep-- helped my husband to stay-- let him stay in that store and sell for him. 

And, uh, I started to supply the store with things, uh, candy. It was a candy store. And I started with candy. And then I-- a-- I found a clandestine factory of chocolate. And so I started to make a living again on that. 

And on that day, I was going with two big bags of candy in the street. And the Russians were coming in. And the Germans started to run away and to run close to the walls of the houses. And the Russians came on the ta-- on the tanks with the guns and were shooting right and-- and left. 

And that was a wonderful feeling because here you've seen the Germans fleeing. They were frightened and leaving everything. And I put down my candies. And I said, now I can die. I just wanted to live the moment when we will be liberated. 

But, uh, it was extreme exhilarating. And we really accepted the Russians with the greatest benefactors, the greatest help that could be any to us. Because until the last moment, our life was at stake. 

DORI LAUB: And that morning, that your husband came, was after that? 

SUBJECT: The next day. 

DORI LAUB: The next day. 

SUBJECT: I didn't know yet that we really were entirely free. 

DORI LAUB: What did you see when you walked out into a free city? Just-- 

SUBJECT: So many Jewish people, girls and men who came out from that camp. And, uh, Poles were taking away all the things that the Germans left. Uh, the Poles are taking over. And those even who were prosperous were just grabbing left and right, I still-- 

DORI LAUB: What did you feel seeing Jews again? How did you become a Jew again? 

SUBJECT: We became Jews right away again. We've been greeting strangers and embracing and not asking even for any names. But we have-- we-- we know well who is a Jew and who is not a Jew. And then it was very strange, very difficult, too because when we came back to-- to our home, my father's home, where there was a statue of-- of Hitler on-- on the desk in the office. 

It was difficult to take it over. The Russians helped us to take over again. And, uh, there were people coming from camps still in their-- in their camp uniforms. Terrible sights, terrible sights-- that was going on for several weeks or perhaps even months. I couldn't tell you. They were coming from Auschwitz them survivors-- and not many, not many. 

My own nephew, who was in Auschwitz, supposedly knew of the lib-- liberation. Went out from the camp but couldn't walk anymore and sat down in a ditch. And his friends-- he was very likable-- proposed that they are going to carry him on their shoulders. He didn't want to accept. 

But I know about him, about what happened. 

DORI LAUB: The consequences. 

SUBJECT: Consequences. Weak nerve, weak body. 

DORI LAUB: How? What? How in feeling soiled in clothes, what-- 

SUBJECT: Uh, my-- my back is such that I cannot carry it with my lower back. It hurts, and it's throbbing. And, uh, emotionally, I'm weak. 

DORI LAUB: What-- 

SUBJECT: I had a breakdown right after the war. 

DORI LAUB: What did you feel during it? 

SUBJECT: I don't know if it was a consequence of the war-- probably. Had to-- I was still frightened. I was frightened when there was no more-- when there was no more really serious reason. Couldn't-- we couldn't live anymore under the rations, either. 

DORI LAUB: Frightened-- what-- Do you remember the-- 

SUBJECT: Everything would cause reactions. Things, well, which are not of immediate danger, really. If I-- my husband had left for France. He was to go to America to-- he did not like to-- the idea of emigrating and not knowing the country. He said he's going to see what it is, what he could do here. 

And we had passports to leave already Poland. All he has been also once imprisoned by-- by the Polish [INAUDIBLE]. They found it as a passport where a niece of ours was put on the passport instead of having a separate passport. What it-- what they claim? They-- they imprisoned him. 

He finally got out. And then-- oh. He got out through-- through bribes. The bribes were detected later. And when he was in Paris, they were coming to see him to-- to-- to-- that he was giving the bribe. He wasn't here. 

And it-- this grew in my mind to such dimensions that I-- that I really became ill. I couldn't see anymore in the night. I couldn't-- I was telegraphing, telephoning that he shouldn't come back, things like that. And, uh, I-- I [INAUDIBLE]? 

DORI LAUB: You seem to have been very courageous during the war. But so afterwards, you began to-- 

SUBJECT: I couldn't-- 

DORI LAUB: --feel all this-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

DORI LAUB: --dread? 

SUBJECT: I believe so. Every single [INAUDIBLE] to-- two dimensions that, uh, were not anymore, uh, appropriate. 

DORI LAUB: Do you still sometimes fear-- fear in this way now? 

SUBJECT: I react to-- to-- easily to-- to situations that are not to my-- my convenience or liking. 

DORI LAUB: But how is life now different for you because of the-- how-- how is it shaped like-- 

SUBJECT: I couldn't tell you what is what. We don't know whether it is personal life or is it the war or is it all together. Uh, it is-- I think I'm too sensitive. And I don't know if this has been-- if this is a reaction to what I went through. Or is it my nature? Or is it both? 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: May we finish? 

DORI LAUB: Just one-- one other-- you know, it's so clear that you lived as to be as a couple. You made it-- 

SUBJECT: We made it together. 

DORI LAUB: The children you rescued, how-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, I didn't tell you how I got back my children. In that home of this-- that teacher where I lived-- and she had several refugees from Warsaw. I lived in the kitchen. I slept on her table, her kitchen table. 

One day, she was, uh, going to the trains that were passing to the railway station and helping out the refugees from Warsaw-- not Jewish-- after the uprising. And one day, she came. It was about, perhaps, a month or six weeks since I was there. And I didn't know anything about my children. 

And she says, on the one-- that truck stands a-- is standing a train. We say, lay director-- is director and children from an orphanage. And there is no place where to put them. 

So I went there not knowing whether these are my children. But I took us-- we had candy, as I had my merchandise, a lot of candy, and went there. And there I met-- this is the superior, the mother superior. And she said, the children are at the church. 

You know, Czestochowa-- Czestochowa is a town like in France is [INAUDIBLE]. It is a holy-- there a miraculous male, a black male, who supposedly has saved Poland from the Swedes. 

And so I waited until they came back. They came back. And my husband wanted to see them, too. So the children say, no, I don't have a father, to me. They were so used to the idea that there are to maintain-- 

DORI LAUB: The secret that Papa doesn't exist. 

SUBJECT: Yes, it has taken a long time. So but finally, he came there, saw the children, too-- seen the children, too. And, uh, they were placed in a school year by two not far from Czestochowa. 

And this lasted until the Russians came in. This was 1944. And in 19-- end of 1944 already. And in 1945-- I don't remember what month-- came the Russians and liberated us. 

DORI LAUB: So you were close to your children even before the end of it. 

SUBJECT: Right. Right. And soon, they could take-- take them back. 

DORI LAUB: When you finally took them back and for the first time the family was together, what did you say to each other? What did-- what was it like? 

SUBJECT: We were very happy. My children were very neglected. But we had-- what we said to each other, I couldn't tell you. I don't remember. I know that-- that we-- because tried to be in a decent house again. And a Russian officer has put my husband right away to work to make-- to-- to put the new-- in operation he needed flour for his army. 

And we had-- could send flour to the-- to the orphanage and so on. But in the family, we just had to bring them, the children, to clean their mess again and to regulate food. 

DORI LAUB: I see. 

SUBJECT: It was a nice time. We had-- we-- oh, we had no money at that time. We had 2,000 [INAUDIBLE] blooming in the-- in the garden. 

DORI LAUB: 2,000 [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: 2,000. Every day, my sister, who joined us, was in there-- was bringing every day to town the [INAUDIBLE] bring-- brought back the money from the florist. That was the beginning of our, uh, money supply. 

DORI LAUB: Raising flowers after the war. 

SUBJECT: We were not raising them. They were coming back, you know. In May, they come back by themselves. And they are planted. And the end of course, we started the business of [INAUDIBLE]. 

We couldn't stay there long, either, because finally, uh, the Poles threatened us. And the Russians said that we should get out from there because it was dangerous, it was. 

DORI LAUB: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: I've already done it too much? Much too much? 

DORI LAUB: No, no. No, just right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Terrific. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. I forgot myself. 

DORI LAUB: OK. 