CREW: Rolling. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, 1940, the whole year, we was walking, and every time, in a other place. And this was going on until 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, you were married? 

SUBJECT: I was married in 1939-- in '3-- and it 1939, in January. In-- not January, in December. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you-- 

SUBJECT: December 25-- 25. 1939, mine uh, wife's parents, they say, what-- what will happen to you, I want you to be married. When you want to go someplace, you want to hide in someplace, so then uh, it is better you-- you marry, both. 

INTERVIEWER: And then you had a child? 

SUBJECT: And then we-- 

INTERVIEWER: You had a child? 

SUBJECT: We got a child. 

INTERVIEWER: When? 

SUBJECT: In 19-- in 19-- uh, end of '40. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you th-- what did you think, having a child in the midst of the war? 

SUBJECT: We-- we was not thinking this can happen. We have to leave the town, and to-- then we clean up the whole town for judenrein. Never. This was 1942. Our child was, in this time, a year and a half. 

Then we was coming, 1942, in November, Rosh Hashanah. This was in September, I think. This time-- 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --is Rosh Hashanah, yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: A couple weeks before Rosh Hashanah. They was saying, before, the judenrat, they was ask, shall we give the gold? Shall we give them money, every time. Shall we give a-- the futters-- wie heisst die futter? 

INTERVIEWER: Lining. 

SUBJECT: The lining, the futter-- n-- not the lining, no, the-- the futters was more the-- you know, fur coats. 

INTERVIEWER: Fur. 

SUBJECT: Fur. Shall we give up this, everything? And when we want to stay in the town, shall we give u-- give them-- them, there, so much, a contribution. They ask for contributions. We give them. In September, 1942, was coming, our order. The town have to be judenrein, clean. 

INTERVIEWER: Clean up Jews? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I was, in this time, with my wife, and mine wife's parents, my wife's uh-- family, kids. We was living in the one section. And mine brothers, sister. We was crying like, Yom Kippur, this is the end. Because who knows what be tomorrow? 

Meantime, was coming mine-- uh, mine wife's mother. And she say to me, Max, entloyf mitten kind, Because first they're killing the kids. 

INTERVIEWER: Run away with the child. 

SUBJECT: Run away with the child. 

INTERVIEWER: Becomes they will kill the children. 

SUBJECT: They killed, first, the kids. . I say to my wife, I'm not proper yet, oh but first thing, you go with my mother. And go out from the town. 

And I was-- got over there one Polish man, what he-- I was with him, you know, very friendly. And I say, go over there. Wait until I come. This was in the evening, in a Thursday night. Around four o'clock, five o'clock. And I was uh, looking around, what's going on? What will happen? 

I was already stuck. And I cannot go out. And I was waiting till it gets darker. And I sneak out in the town. And I sneak out from the town. We went. I took my wife, my mother, and we went in-- out of there-- mm, not town, just uh, um, a-- a-- um, a place. A dorf, wie heisst dies-- 

INTERVIEWER: Village. 

SUBJECT: uh-- hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: Village. 

SUBJECT: A village. 

INTERVIEWER: A village. 

SUBJECT: A village. And over there in the village, nobody want to ask should we go over too, overnight? We was sneaking in, in our place where was the-- the food for the cows, you know? In a s-- in Polish they say, a stodola. How you say in English? You know, where they keep the-- the food for the cows. 

And we was until, the four of us, they coming. It was dayti-- daylight. we went out, back in the woods. And meantime, my wife and the child, the child was sick. 

He was crying. You know, got what to eat? And my mother got a lot of friends over there in the village. And she went. She bring something, you know. Oh, but they no let her go in, just to bring out. 

Because they was scare when they find out we give to Jewish people food, they come and they burn the houses. And they killing them in the village, the Polish people. They're making this. This was still-- this was Friday. 

And that Friday, in uh, 1942, this was about-- you know, September. September, October, between this. And uh-- for Saturday night, we cannot take it more-- Saturday, daytime, we cannot take it more. Because the child was sick. We no got where to go in. We no got what to eat. We was walking back to go in the town. 

On the way, we was walking. Not with the road. No, with the-- you know, on the um-- uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Fields. 

SUBJECT: Land, on the woods, on the land. On the land, you know, on the farm. It was farmers outside. It was a-- a girl. When she see us coming, she was coming and say to us, oh my-- God, my-- where you going? 

We say, we going in the town. Oh my god. So beautiful, the child, they killing us. They kill you. 

I said, we no got where to go. She say to me, you know, you go in-- in-- in there, a mile away from this place, is over there, holes. They call them, in Polish, dolys. 

And dolys means holes. And over there is a lot of Jewish people. And you'll find out over there what you have to doing, or to go in the town or not. I said, OK. And she mention me names, what I know him. And I went over there. And I find the neighbors. And we was over there. 

INTERVIEWER: Houses or woods? 

SUBJECT: This was in-- in the woods. In woods, in-- you know, holes. Like, was hills. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. 

SUBJECT: You know? 

INTERVIEWER: Caves? 

SUBJECT: Eh-- pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: Caves? 

SUBJECT: Caves. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Caves. And over there we was, until was dark, was coming, one farmer. And she see my child. And my wife, she's sitting, tired. She say-- he say to her, oh my god. Mine poor child. I take you. You-- you'll be sure I-- I keep you until after the war. Well, I was thinking maybe it's a moloch. Who knows? Maybe it's an angel. 

First thing, he bring a little milk and a piece of bread. And my wife feed the child. Later, when it was dark, he took me, say to my wife, you come with me. And he took uh, the wife, with my child. 

And they give to her food. And they tell her to stay overnight in the place where the cows-- you know, he make a place for the cows. In case that somebody comes, he got a backdoor, she can go out the back door. 

He tell her this. And I was hiding near this place, over there. And was uh-- the night was over. We was over there a few days. 

And he was coming, every time, with the news, what's gone on in the town. When-- who comes in the town, they taking right away and they kill them. They taking in the cemetery and they kill them. 

Because the first days, until Saturday, this was till Friday. Saturday, they tooking away who did come in the town. And they connected to other a transport in a other town to send away. After this, they no bother more. But then they took them-- they took the people and they kill right away. 

And still there was judenrein in uh, all towns. And this was in a-- a neigh-- a neighbor town, small town, where-- and this town, where I had been born, in Wilczyca. Still was over there mine's a sister and a brother. And one time in the night, was nothing in the door but this-- but this-- uh, farm-- farmer. And they ask for my name. 

And the farmer, he was scare. He was thinking somebody is coming, they know me, and they find out we-- he hide the Jewish. Jew-- Juden. And I heard the voice from my sister. I walk out from the-- from the cage where I was hiding over there. 

And I say, OK, this is my sister. And she was coming from the neighbor town with-- you know, two horses, and a horse, a wagon. And we went in this town. Over there. And over there, still there was Judenrein. And we was over there a few days. 

And we find out they open up back the town. We came back-- we can come in back in the town, Dzialoszyce. I went with the other people, with my's brother and other two people. And we walk in the night. 

And we went in. Before, I want to make um-- a point. Before when we went, in this um, village, to this town, in the night, we was stopping a lot of people. They wasn't watching. The watchmens was not stopping in the night. And they wanted to kill us. He was say, you spies. Until we identified, we're not spies. We're Jews. 

And he leave us go. In the town we was coming. We was over there about two, three days. We was coming over there. This was before-- yeah, this was between Rosh Hashanah, a couple-- a few days after Rosh Hashanah and uh, Yom Kippur. 

Yom Kippur was-- we went-- after Yom Kipper, we went back to this town, I and my brother, and other two neighbors. And I still left my wife over there. Because I hear over there, can come in back the people. I say, maybe who gets-- uh, survive who survive. And who-- now as knowing what they can doing. 

We went, we come over there in the morning. In the town was already Jewish people. And was a committeed. Jewish committeed. And they organize. We cannot go away in our-- in our rooms where we was living. We cannot go in. Just we was in um-- in uh, one place, where was a few families. 

Because everything was um-- tooken out. Was um-- wie heisst es-- der-- 

INTERVIEWER: Looted? 

SUBJECT: Um-- some gegambet, um geraubt, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Looted. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They steal our everything. And no one's secure too. Because we were scared. Somebody can come in the night and-- and kill us. 

Then we was a few groups, was over there. We was a week, and they ask again, for a walk. I-- my wife was coming with my child. In-- in this t-- in this town we find out my wife's mother, she went over there with her neighbor, and she come back with us. 

My mother, she no come back. Because she went over there in this-- uh-- in this town, in Wieliczka. I'm born. With the aussiedlung with the-- wie heisst es in English? Die aussiedlung? It was-- 

INTERVIEWER: The tr-- transports? 

SUBJECT: It was-- they-- they-- they make judenrein. 

INTERVIEWER: She was taken away. 

SUBJECT: She's taken away from over there. Because she say, what I have to go over there? This happened over there a couple day-- a few days later. And this what's happened. 

And we was over there about a week. And was coming, a order. Who will go walking, them can be saved. I went the first, to walk. This were just a few days. 

And-- you know, so reingenahlt, reingenaht, wie heisst es, reingenaht, they sneak u-- they sneak us so we no be taked attention, shall this be a clean up again. And this what's happened. This was in a Thursday. I went and I took-- I went to the same place where I was the first time by the guy-- by the Polish man, what he took my wife to stay overnight. 

And he come, and we putted on everything, what we got, over there. And he took it. My wife, my child, and my some-- sister-in-law was coming from the other town. She runned away from the transport. From the judenrein. 

And they went over there. And I was still in the town because Friday-- this was Thursday. And Friday, this-- the-- I-- uh, I-- I went to walk. Saturday morning, they say, Sunday, it be a clean up, Judenrein, again, in the town. 

Then I went uh, Saturday, to see my wife, with the child. And I walk out from the town. Still was uh, not a danger to the-- to go out. And I went out over there, come to the guy over there, what first time he get us, um, a place to stay, to my wife. Will you help with English? He-- um-- was a ihr konnt dort nachtigen, ihr konnt nicht rein. 

INTERVIEWER: He-- he gave a place to stay-- 

SUBJECT: To stay overnight. In the daytime, to go out. Not to be in the house in the daytime. OK. Then I was coming. Saturday, I come. My wife is hi-- is hiding outside. My sister-in-law and mine uh, mother-in-law, the-- in uh-- outside, and they crying. Because he-- he chase them out. Because he's scare. He hear who-- where they find a Jewish people, they kill them right away and they burning up the place. 

I was starting to talking. Mr. Juszczyk, I give to you, uh, so much, everything what I got. And you promise me, you-- you'll give me a passage to stay here, to hide until I can survive. He said, I'm scare. I was talking to him so much. And we were staying overnight. 

In the morning, I see, coming, Jewish people, neighbors, what he was, the president from the Jewish committee in the town. I recognize him. He did come. We were stopping, because he want to chase out us in this place, to take the-- you know, the president from the Jewish committee over there. 

Oh well, when he wasn't coming, they say, you know, Mr. Roznik, nobody has a paper to live over. Ist nicht garantiert, wer wird uberleben. Who knows? And I went, and I was talking to them. I was crying. I say, OK. Listen, want to be with us, we with you. He was the president from the committee, from the Jewish committee. 

He say, I no push you out. Because he promised us he make place for us. in meantime, we find you here, with a family. Oh well, you stay, but we have nothing. In meantime, I walk out. I cannot-- I no got the patient to stay in the house. I was staying the hallway hours, you know? Maybe some-- this was a house. Out the-- out the um-- village. Near-- near a woods. 

In case that something happened, we runned away right away in the woods. You know? OK. I was staying in-- I heard the-- was coming, he's our nephew, The farmer's. He say to him, [? POLISH. ?] [? POLISH ?] is, uh, in Polish, um-- uh, how you say this? Feter, feter. 

INTERVIEWER: Un-- uncle. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, uncle. Uncle. Um-- why-- what do you have to keep the-- these people here? Throw them out. We-- we take away from them everything. These are rich people. 

Because they're-- he was the president from the Jewish committee. And he was very rich man. And he say, we take away everything from them. And we kill them. And I heard this. And I went in, and I tell them. 

I say to them, uh, Mr. [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] and was other two, [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] I say that I heard he talks to his uncle, his nephew. Because he-- he is prepared to kill us in the night. Mr.-- Mr-- um, [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] he was very nervous man. 

And he right away went in. He say, you sick. You going to kill me? You going to kill us? He say, no, my nephew ta-- ta-- say this. OK. We no want to stay more overnight. And we went in a other town. 

In this town still was not judenrein. Still was coming, they give-- in every town, when they making judenrein, they give a-- a week, two weeks. And they say, the-- the Jewish, they can come in free. Because they no want to run after the Jewish in the woods. 

In the contrary, just they come in. And they catch them in one place. You know? And we went. And right away, we took to uh-- the people with the horses, with the wagons. And then we was about 10, 12 in the-- you know, over there. Because the-- the [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] he is-- is named the president from the committee, from the Jewish committee was [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] 

And there was [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] and was um-- uh-- his brother-in-law, with the wife, with kids. And we went in the small town. And over there, in the small-- because we no want to trust anymore, this farmer. Because we were scare he comes in the night and he kill us. And we went, in the same night, away from over there, in this place. We went in this town. We was coming in the town. 

And we was a few-- when-- when we was in the town, they was coming. The SS wasn't coming. The German police and the Polish police, and they make [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] You know what's-- you know [? NON-ENGLISH? ?] The-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Surrounded. 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Surrounded. 

SUBJECT: Surrounded. And they tooking away, the people. Every time we went there, we runned out from the town. They just looking for mens. 

Not for woman with her kids. Because they know the kids, they can run away. And the woman-- the woman, the kids, the-- all the time, they cannot catch them. Just the mens. Beyond where we're hiding, on the cemetery, we were camped over there. We was a few days in this small town. 

And they say, that we-- in the next couple days, we judenrein. Nobody be over there. One-- one day was coming, mine-- mine uh-- the neighbor, what we was together and but then in-- with this bauer, in Poland. With a farmer. 

And he say to me, you know, I hear your uncle-- and you are neph-- and your uncles-- uh-- the sons, they-- they rented a truck. And they going away in the other town. Because in the other town, they can then still stay-- Jews can-- can-- can still stay over there-- over there. The truck is out of town. 

I went, and I took my wife with-- with the child. And we went to this place, where the truck is. Over there, where the truck-- the truck place have to be, it was one truck. And was maybe about 250, 300 people, waiting for this truck. Who can go in? 

This truck see there's so many people here, went far away. And we went-- we runned after him. We was coming. I put on my wife, my child and mine mother-in-law. It was our sister-in-law, mines, with her child. Right there was coming, other Jew. 

And he say, we give you more money. Why you have to take these people? Take us. Take other people. He took the truck, and he dumped us over in a river, you know, near the road. It was to make a river, pond, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Not water, just high. he dumped out everything. I say then, with this truck I am not going more. Because it's a Jewish tradition, when something cuts you off the way, well then don't go. Stop. 

I went back in the town. I took my wife with my child. I rented a small uh-- man with the holes, with a small garden. And I put down in the hole luggage, mines. And we went back in the town. In that town I find over there-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you finally taken? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- this was-- this was the town-- the name for the town, [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] And over there was a neighbor, mines and he got the connection with a guy, what he got a small truck. And I say, I want to go in the ghetto. What will happen in the ghetto in Krakow, what happened with other will happen with me. What I can't-- I no have more strength to runned away more. in-- in middle of the night, we was but three families. 

He took us to Krakow. And we was-- already we was talking with him. He-- to take us in the ghetto, in the truck, out the ghetto. The Krakow ghetto. Then he was scared to go to the ghetto, because the ghetto was surrounded from Germans and Polish police. 

Inside, in the ghetto, was Jewish police. Orde-- this was the name, Ordemens. And he no bring us to the town-- to the ghetto, just to our camp. You know, before then, camp. Before the camp was a house, a empty house, out windows. And this was in 19-- in 1943, beginning. In January-- in January. 

It was very cold. And-- we cannot make it uh-- uh, the child. What I got, you know, I bundle up. And why I make it with the other guy, I exercise should we keep a little more warm, not to freeze up to death. 

In the same-- and near this place was a camp, a working camp. He-- the camp, its name was Strauss. Well, this was a company what the-- the Germans give to the-- to this company, Jewish people, should we be working for them. You know? 

And they taken care with food. And they give the-- the-- the-- the-- wachmanner to-- watch, the watchmens. And over there was too mine two brother-in-laws. One from my sister, um, uh, husband. And one from my wife's sister husband. 

And I sent somebody over there from the Ordemens, from the Jewish police. And it was from our town, a lot of people, on this place was coming. And he say to me, listen, you cannot go in, in this camp, with a child. 

You can go in with your wife. Oh but your mother-in-law and your child, the-- the demonstration from the-- from the camp, no are allowed to go in, old people and kids. That your mother-in-law, and with the child, have to go to the ghetto. To the Kra-- Krakow in the ghetto. I say, this is the solution for you? 

He say, yes. And I don't want to separated myselves from my child and my wife. We say, how long we lived, and we want to be together. The child was already, at this time, 18 months old. 

There was one watchman, one alderman, the-- from the police, and the Jewish police. And that-- from the our town. His name was Reisfeld. And he say-- to-- a few families was over there-- you know-- he suggest open up a open place to working. 

Maybe you can go over there. I say, OK. How long I can be with my child? Then I st-- I go anyplace. I went over there. This was a open camp. The company was Strauss. Strauss company. 

And we went. We work over there, not too long, about two months. We went to working to make a drainage rivers, to plaster the river, should the water go straight, and the water no stay on the-- the land, the land can dry up the water. 

We was over there 2 months, 2 and 1/2 months. Was coming over there from the Krakow, from the ghetto. So everybody have to go in the ghetto. and concentration camp cannot be open. This was a open camp. No was the-- eh-- 

INTERVIEWER: No wire. 

SUBJECT: The wires. With the wires, no-- was-- just was open. Was a big house. And we were staying in this house. They don't give us food. We was-- 

INTERVIEWER: So you got into the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: We went to the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Was coming, the Germans. And we say, listen. We know we run after you. You want to run away? You can't run away. You no have a place, where to go. 

To America is too far away. To Russian, no way to go. Just better you go with us in-- in peace way, in the ghetto. And you stay with the Jewish people. And all Jewish, in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Reznik, were the Germans so polite? 

SUBJECT: They-- this what they talking to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Without threats? Without any? 

SUBJECT: Without threats. No. They say, you want to run away? Run away. Some people runned away from over there. He say, we find everybody who runs away. 

INTERVIEWER: Those are German s-- soldiers, uh-- uh-- civilians? 

SUBJECT: This was-- this was Ukraini, Ukraini. They wasn't dressed up in the-- in the black um-- um mundur. 

INTERVIEWER: Uniforms. 

SUBJECT: Uniforms. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: This was Ukraini. And he was a German too. One German. He say, he was talking to us. He say, you no have place, where to go. To America is too far away. To Russian, no way to go. And where you-- you go, we find you. 

We no got where to go. Where I go? I no got place where to hide anymore. In the country, nobody want to take us. In the woods, I cannot be with a child. It's the one way I give up. 

I give up, and I want in the ghetto. What will happen me-- to me will happen. What I can do it? They took us in the ghetto. In the ghetto, they separated us. Me and my wife, they took us another place. 

My mother-in-law and my child, they took in ghetto B. And we was in ghetto A. They took us in a place, in to clean up, to-- to dump the clothes. But everything was, you know, with the-- with the louse, with the [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] you know? Not clean. 

And they took us in a concentration camp. Over there we was walking. We build the-- the camp. This was on a Jewish cemetery. We have to knocking down all the stones, the old pomnikis, The-- 

INTERVIEWER: [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] 

SUBJECT: The [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] Then to clean up everything, and to build the barracks. Because they tooking from ghetto-- from Krakow, our ghetto, they tooking people to work over there. And latter we got-- they got built up a few barracks. And they bring, already, people to stay steady over there. 

Then we was the first people to stay over there overnight, already. Not to go back in the ghetto, but to stay over there. This was in Krakow, in after Yasolimsky, in concentra-- a KL, concentration camp. And we was building. We put it in the poles. And we put in the druts, you know? And they putted the director on-- 

INTERVIEWER: Put in your own barbed wire? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We put them up by ourselves. We put-- there was already a few hundred people. We putted the wires. We putted the poles. We make for ourselves, the-- to tie, to close up this place. And was watchmans already put their arm on the poles. On the-- and they wasn't watching us. 

We no got no other choice. We cannot run away. Because it was uh, who runs away, right away, they shoot them from the top. You know? How you say in English, the-- the edges. 

INTERVIEWER: That word's fine. 

SUBJECT: Uh-huh. This was in a couple months, this was. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were separated from your child? 

SUBJECT: From my wife. I was uh, separated. 

INTERVIEWER: From your wife? 

SUBJECT: Yes. When they bring us in the-- in the working camp, men's separated and woman's separated. The woman in the other place, other barrack, and the men's in other barrack. 

INTERVIEWER: And your child was in the ghetto, in Krakow. 

SUBJECT: My child-- with mine mother-in-law, was in the ghetto, back. This was tooking, maybe, a couple months. Between a month-- we was a month in this place-- was coming a order. No, before. It was two-- uh-- two weeks. I want to go to visit mine child. A week-- a week or a couple weeks, I don't remember, to visit-- m-- my-- my child and my mother-in-law. 

We was coming, my child was already separated from my mother-in-law. They took the child in a place where they keeping all childs. And the older people, in the ghetto there. And I want to see my child. I no recognize any of the child. The child recognized me and start to cry. 

This time, I cannot forget. This-- this is [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] when I see my child. Cries. And I say, I cannot take it more. They took me by force. They took me by force, out. 

INTERVIEWER: Who did? 

SUBJECT: The-- the police. The Jewish police. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm. 

SUBJECT: Polish police. And my mother-in-law, I see. Sh-- she separated, cannot see more. This is the one last time when I see mine-- mine child. They took me back in the concentration camp. And was took maybe about two weeks later. They clean up. They make judenrein, the whole ghetto. They bring-- was a mineshaft. You know, what they working for the Germans. 

The brought the people before. While-- while they liquidate the ghetto, then they say, a lot of people runned away from the place, from the concentration camp. Then they took the chief, what he was from the-- from the place, Katz and Goldberg, this was the names from the two people, what they run the-- the place. 

INTERVIEWER: The ghetto? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No? 

SUBJECT: No. They-- they-- the KL. This was the concentration camp, the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And the-- the-- they say, that Goldberg and Katz, they wasn't covering the people in the ghetto should be not coming ever as steady, in the camp. So they can stay overnight in the ghetto. And the Germans, they don't want to have the people stay in the ghetto. Just they want to have in the camp. From the-- they make appel. Tooken us out. They count. And they tooking Goldberg and Katz. 

And they shoot them on the place. Because no was the amount people what should be registerate, and what they wasn't-- wasn't registered in them camp, and we know wasn't on the place. 

INTERVIEWER: Some of them were in the-- 

SUBJECT: In the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: The ghetto. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They should be on the-- on the-- in the concentration camp, not in the ghetto. And they know wasn't over there. They shoot them on the place. 

INTERVIEWER: In front of the-- 

SUBJECT: And in front of all the people. They was-- you know, uh, one and the-- they beg them. And they runned after them, you know? And they say, please, please, don't shoot me. Don't shoot me. And they say, no way. They shoot them on the place, in the-- um-- where we see them, we were staying all and watching, when they shoot-- shoot the first couple people. The-- the aldermans. This was the aldermans, the police from the-- from the concentration camp. 

Well, we went the-- we went back in the barracks. And a couple days, and a few days later, they liquidate the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know that? What did you see about the liquidation on the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Well, the liquidation of the ghetto? We was working by Barrakenbau. We was-- we tooking-- we put around the drut, around, we put the poles. We put around the druts, around in the camp. And we was Barrakenbau. The name was our group, to work in Barrakenbau. This was the name-- 

INTERVIEWER: The building of barracks. 

SUBJECT: For building the barracks. When they liquidate the ghetto, they took us-- they took us from the job to make the Barrakenbau. And he tooken us to digging out big holes. The holes, and it wasn't so big, like you say, 200 feet by 50 feet. And how deep we can go? 

And the next day, they bring-- shoot people on the-- on trucks. And they took us to bury the people. Then we was bury in one hole, maybe, about 50, 60, 100 people. How much we can. With this, we was walking on the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: In meantime. I w-- I went, myselves, to go to bury the people. Because I was looking to finding my son, my child. And I cannot recognize. I no recognize him. 

INTERVIEWER: You were looking-- 

SUBJECT: I was-- I was thinking, maybe I can recognize my child, between the-- between the dead people. Because they tooken the ghetto, bare. All kids, and all the old people, and they shoot them. From ghetto A, they took in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Because was already build up, barracks, to make place for them. And over there we was bury, until the half the night, people. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they shot the people during the day? 

SUBJECT: They shot in the ghetto. They bring back the dead people on the trucks. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: They shoot them in the ghetto. This time. And it was big holes, make. This was-- the camp was built on a ceme-- a Jewish cemetery. We knock out-- knock out the-- the [? NON-ENGLISH, ?] the-- the steine, the stones. And we build barracks on the place. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened next? 

SUBJECT: Next, it'd be-- it'd be-- this was very big cemetery. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And we-- bui-- we-- when we bring-- they shoot the dead people, we dig out. Was bigger place. Dig out-- dig out over there, the holes. And we bury the people. 

You know, brung over there, the people. Because we bury-- we bury them, eh, like they bring from the ghetto. With trucks, you know, platforms, what, horse wagons, and what they can. And I was walking until the half the night. Later we went, they took other people to bury-- you know, to bury the people from the camp. Because they bring a lot of-- quite a few in, dead people from the ghetto, dead people. 

In the next days, we was walking over there on the barrack wall. After we build, this was until May, 1943. And in May, 1943, they took us to a factory. They took me and other people. They ask, who knows, uh, carpenter work. And I know carpenter work. 

And then they took me in in factory. They build up a small camp in Krakow. And we went to work over there, in the factory, to-- to make barracks. The-- the parts. 

INTERVIEWER: What came-- happened next? 

SUBJECT: Eh, yeah. This was the-- we was over there about-- well, about six months. This time-- was six months. This wasn't the time when they-- when they-- in Warsaw, the ghetto, was um-- the revolution in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Then they took us back to the concentration camp. He was working over there. And they say, it's not enough. It's short. We can run away from this place where we was working, right in the barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know about the Warsaw ghetto? 

SUBJECT: We know. 

INTERVIEWER: How? What did you hear? 

SUBJECT: We know because we was in contact with the people, what they wasn't working in the factory, what we make the barracks. We got um-- uh-- men, a Polish man, what he was, the foreman there. And he tell us, every news, what's going on. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you about Warsaw? 

SUBJECT: He tell us about the Warsaw ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT: The-- it's um-- it's um, a revolution over there. And goes up, and they-- they kill people. And they shooting, and the this and this, you know? And then count this, it's not enough, and shoot. Over there, this place, you have to liquidate and to bring us back in the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel when you heard that there is a revolution in the Warsaw ghetto? 

SUBJECT: What I feel? I feel, what I can doing? I can nothing, help. I was like a-- you-- you-- you see a man and his-- he can-- he cannot, his wife, he cannot do her help. This what I got the feeling. 

INTERVIEWER: How come? 

SUBJECT: The-- the-- so the-- so the-- the-- the Jewish people in the Warsaw-- the Warsaw ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you wanted to help them. 

SUBJECT: I want to help, but what I-- what I can help? I was myselfs-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: --in concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I was in the-- in the-- in the Krakow, in concentration camp. What I can help? This was in one-- OK-- world. And this was another uh, world. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: I was in-- they took us-- they liquidate this place. They took us back to the-- to the concentration camp in-- uh, after Yasolimsky. After Yasolimsky, we was, again, working outside. We was building. We was knocking down the-- the um-- the stones in the cemetery. And we was making roads. You know? We break the stones and we make roads. We plastered the roads. And when this was, in 19-- um-- 1943. By the end, 1944. 

1944. We-- they bring us, 1944, to the-- back to the concentration camp. To Yasolimsky. We was over there a few months. And-- and later, in April, they took us, 500 people. 

INTERVIEWER: Now your wife was in the same-- 

SUBJECT: My wife was in the-- separated from me right when we was tooken to the concentration camp in Krakow. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. Did-- 

SUBJECT: I-- I see her once in a while when I was over there. Over-- over-- not when I was in uh-- we no was together. Was separated. 

INTERVIEWER: And? 

SUBJECT: When I was in the-- in the-- mm-- Barrakenbau, in the camp, after Zablocie, then uh, she was in concentration camp, and after Yasolimsky. Then there, we got there a good um, former-- the owner from the factory. He was very good man. He say, the bread-- because we got the food from over there, coming. Then he say, what you can help? You are family. Then you can leave the bread over there, not to bring here, the bread. 

Every day, a quarter from the bread, you know? This is about, say, about 250 gram. You know. Then we sign it up, the bread, to give to-- to the family in the-- in the concentrate-- in Krakow, in Plaszow. And I-- I got enough food over there when I was working. 

The people, we work with civil people. The people bring us bread. And the former, he-- we got enough the bread-- food enough over there, in this place. Although this doesn't took long. This took six months, to dig for that. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see your wife again? 

SUBJECT: When-- when they liquidate they Zablocie-- this was the name from the place, Zablocie, in Krakow. When they liquidate Zablocie, they took us back to the Yasolimsky. Then we was walking over there. Then I see my wife. Before, I no see. And I see her not often. It's very-- not legal too. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me, when you saw your wife. 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you mention the child? 

SUBJECT: Well, I know they-- they-- they kill. They kill the child. They kill my-- mine uh, mother-in-law. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you mention it to her? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I mention to her. 

INTERVIEWER: You told her. 

SUBJECT: I mention to her, and she knows, and what you can do? You can nothing, help. I cannot fight with-- with the-- with the German army. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: What you can doing? It was very bitter. It was very, very bitter, this situation. No. 

He they took-- when they took me back in 1944, back to the concentration camp, because they was scare we can run away from the Zablocie in Krakow, where we was working on the Barrakenbau. We make the barracks over there. We was over there about three months. And they took us, a transport, 500 people. To Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Your wife was on that transport? 

SUBJECT: No. Just mens. This was mens. My wife-- uh, was going to the Jewish police. And she was talking with them. Maybe they can help, should they take me out from this transport, so I can working over there, because I'm-- from mine-- I'm a baker. You know? 

And I can work. And over there was a bakery, and I want to work with the bakery. He said-- he was one-- one Ordemen. He said he tried to make it. Just he wanted money. And my wife give to him what she got, money. You know? She gived him, I think, 500 zloties. This what she got. And she give to him. And he promise he take me out and over there. 

Oh, but nothing held. They took me away to Germany. That place was Gross-Rosen. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to your wife? 

SUBJECT: My wife, she left over there. In Krakow, in KL, in the concentration camp, in-- in Krakow. 

INTERVIEWER: And? 

SUBJECT: After this, I don't know what will happen with her. I don't know. I no got connections. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't see-- 

SUBJECT: This was the last time when I see her. When they send me away to Germany, to Gross-Rosen. The name, Gross-Rosen. He was 500 people. They took us with the train. And we was coming on the train. It was the watchmans. Wasn't the Ukraine, the Russian. The Russian, what that went with the Germans, with the black [? NON-ENGLISH. ?] 

And they-- they check us on the train, who has money, who has something available, the gold or something? And they took away, they beat us on the train. This was a trains, you know, uh, close trains with-- with uh-- for-- feed for-- 

INTERVIEWER: Cattle cars. 

SUBJECT: --cows, from, you know, klaus. We was pack up, maybe about 50, 60 in the-- in one uh, barn. Took a few days until we came-- come to Gross-Rosen. 

We walk out over there. And we walk in, in the camp was staying uh, music. They was playing music. And one side was music, and the other side was uh-- the-- the kapos, the German kapos. You know what kapos is, with Poles. And they start us to beating. They start out all sorts of beating, from the all 500 people. 