INTERVIEWER: I want to finish Bronia. Unfortunately the-- 

Short? 

Yes, because the tape is going to, that's it. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER: And the crew is working-- 

SUBJECT: Now will be-- it's all right. 

INTERVIEWER: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Now, when we came from the Patria, how we came to the harbor to Haifa. My son-- was an old Jew, very old Jew. They put him on the neck, to hand down, and they put him in i-- shtrik. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A rope? 

SUBJECT 2: It's the way I got down off the Patria. There was an old Jew, he went down on a rope, from the ship, the ship capsized, and they put me on his back, and I went down together with him. 

SUBJECT 1: After the same, I. 

SUBJECT 2: And mother went down the rope as well. 

SUBJECT 1: So I was together with my children, thanks God. And this time, my daughter said to me, mommy, now we have to thank God. You remember, Mommy, how Daddy said to us when we left Danzig, thanks God. Wir haben uns gerettet das nackte Leben. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He saved all of their lives. 

SUBJECT 1: After they sent us, in the evening, To Atlit-- I want to make little bit short-- to Atlit. We came to Atlit, Sonia, they took from Haifa, harbor to the hospital, because she has got fever. I went only with an ambulance with my son. Because I had got fever, and my child had got fever. 

I came to Atlit, they put us in a barrack. 65 people. No sheets, rack, stroy matras. 

SUBJECT 2: Just a straw mattress. 

SUBJECT 1: And a blanket. The rats was very big. I took my children to get on me, save them from this. When they give me just a little bit of bread, I want safe. I didn't know they give out us every day a little bit bread, because I remember the sheet. I put in a small sack. In the morning time, there was nothing, because the rat eat. So I suffer 11 months. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 11 months you were in a camp in Israel itself. 

SUBJECT 2: In Atlit. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Palestine. 

SUBJECT 2: In Atlit, that's right. Just near Haifa. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's beyond words. 

SUBJECT 1: I don't want to blame our government, only I must blame them. After six weeks, kemtchert to our camp. 

SUBJECT 2: Mutti? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: Mutti? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened, Natanya? What-- what happened when you left the ship? You-- 

SUBJECT 2: We were taken-- we were taken into Atlit, where the conditions were very bad, and people didn't know exactly who was alive, and who wasn't alive. We didn't have any connection with our father. And there were all kind of stories about people who had remained in Cyprus, whether we're alive or dead. And we actually thought that our father died. 

SUBJECT 1: Just a moment. This what I want to tell. Came from the government, un Sheret... Sherteko? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Moshe Sharet. 

SUBJECT 1: Moshe Sharet. And we was in wires. 

SUBJECT 2: They were behind the barbed wires. 

SUBJECT 1: So the commandant from the camp come to me and he said, Bronia, come outside. Some people want to talk to you. The people want-- what they want is-- had something, from the outside. He could help us. So I came out with my two children, and they ask me what I want. I say, I don't know, or my husband dead, or he's alive. I want you will send him-- please send him to the government of Cyprus, to the hospital, government hospital, a telegram. 

What has happened? He said to me, have you got a watch? I didn't know what he means, a watch. I haven't got anything. So he says, you cannot send a telegram. Our best friend, this was the commandant of-- of the ship. He was together with my husband, sick. Coleman, he was a Czech, from Czechoslovakia. 

And he say, Bronia, don't cry, I will arrange this. And he wrote to the-- to his-- Czechoslovakia, and they send a telegram. The telegram came from the government, Cyprus, only he has recovered a little bit, my husband. Only I didn't know what this-- I didn't know English. 

And everybody knew what has happened with my husband. Everybody say, nebekh, poor children. Their father died. I didn't know this. And I couldn't understand when somebody told me, Ms. Lantzman, listen, he has written. Your husband is much better now. So I said, no, this is not true. 

After six-- few months, I receive a letter from my husband. A friend of my sister came to me, I was with my child, I watched them. And she said, Bronia, you have got a letter here. You recognize the reading from your husband? 

SUBJECT 2: Writing. 

SUBJECT 1: And the reading from my husband is the same as his brother, here. So I start to-- maybe he's not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had doubts that it really was. 

SUBJECT 1: No. After a few months, when the-- emigrate from Cyprus to Israel, my husband came to the camp, and they told me a doctor. I suffered a lot. Not only I suffered in the camp, because the doctor told me-- Sonia [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] Ah, this, I can sit all night. Not important. 

SUBJECT 2: Well, I think at this point, we'd better summarize the rest, yeah? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, please. 

SUBJECT 2: What happened after that was that when my father arrived with the group from Cyprus, stayed another few days, and from here, we went through Egypt. We went to Nyasaland. 

SUBJECT 1: We took a... 

SUBJECT 2: I don't think the route is very important, exact route. Through Egypt via the Suez, we went to Durban. And we finally got to Nyasaland, which is now Malawi. 

SUBJECT 1: Eight days we went. All right 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT 1: There was a camp. 

SUBJECT 2: Ntondwe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You stayed in the camp, that time, there? 

SUBJECT 2: We were put into a camp there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who put you-- 

SUBJECT 1: The jungle. 

SUBJECT 2: The British. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The British put you in a camp. 

SUBJECT 2: Put us in a camp, where we were for a certain period. And then the people who had come. They went into different towns which were in Nyasaland, and started putting up their existence. We went to Blantyre, where my father put up a tailoring shop. My sister and myself, we went to a convent, where we started learning. Then my sister went to Rhodesia, she continued her studies there. 

And anyway, we were in Nyasaland till about 1946, after the war. When the British evacuated all of the Jews they had brought from Cyprus, the Cypriot Jews, they sent them back to Cyprus. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were rounded up by the British and sent back to Cyprus. 

SUBJECT 2: Everybody. The British knew exactly where everybody was-- we weren't there permanently. And we were sent back to Cyprus, through Egypt, and we were there from 1946 till the end of 1948, when the first possibility actually came up for us to come here to Israel. And then December 27th, my father's birthday, we made it back to Israel. From where, we-- from when on, we are here. That is more or less the round story. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So how long did this journey take you? 

SUBJECT 2: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: From Danzig to Israel. 

SUBJECT 2: From 1940 to 1948, eight years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are you left with? What do you feel about what happened to you, to your family? 

SUBJECT 1: I haven't got a home, really. Tell, tell. 

SUBJECT 2: I think that goes much more into personal questions, because let's say, I think that-- just for myself, or for the other children, or people of my age who went through more or less this journey-- didn't get what you'd call a normal life, or a normal growing up of a child. Or a childhood, or a normal way of going into life through the normal channels of schooling, and all the rest. So you can come to the conclusion from that. What we've got to do now is give our children a better-- 

SUBJECT 1: Life. 

SUBJECT 2: Life, and existence, and way of growing up than we had. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mrs. Lanceman, what did it leave you with? What feeling did it leave you with, this whole experience? You did survive. 

SUBJECT 1: What you expect. I lost my whole family in Treblinka, seven sisters and brothers-- my whole family. You have got the book. No one of them, and now my husband. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did they not leave with you? They couldn't? 

SUBJECT 1: Ah, this is another question. My family was in Danzig. In 193-- 38, the Nazis told them-- or they came in the last years. They came to Danzig in 1934. We went to Poland with my husband, and we brought the family to us, to Danzig. In 1931-- in 193-- in 1938, the Nazis told the newcomers-- this was newcomers. They had to leave. And-- and they went to Poland. And there, they-- 

[SOFT WHISTLING SOUND] 

They went to Treblinka from Pinsk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were in Pinsk, and they went to Treblinka. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, yes, all of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never heard from them again? 

SUBJECT 1: I wrote to-- by Red Cross, from Nyasaland-- a letter to them. And I receive-- I wrote them-- I didn't know what has happened in Poland. I don't-- I didn't want to believe what has happened. So I wrote to them, to write me every sign-- everybody has to sign their names. And my mother sent me, I've got at home. 

When I can-- when I will see you and my grandchildren grow up? 1943, I received this letter. Only-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in Nyasaland? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the letter was delivered to you? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. Only they had die-- I think in 1944, or 1943, I don't know. Anyhow, they left in fourth or October, 1942, to Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did anyone you know see them there? 

SUBJECT 1: I have got a friend. And her, she told me everything, because she was saved. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She was in Treblinka, but she survived? 

SUBJECT 1: No, no one is saved from Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of your family, how many survived, and came to Israel or the United States? 

SUBJECT 1: My sister's here, one sister, who have nine children. My sisters here. And in the United States, I've got a few. There's Max Rosenberg, the son, Leon Ze'ev from the camps, And Jenny, four of them. No more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. I need-- 

SUBJECT 1: I think this enough. 

