CREW: --the camera right off the recorder. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

CREW: All right, I could eliminate one plug. 

CREW: Oh, that's good. 

CREW: Huh. 

CREW: Also do you have enough plug? 

CREW: Well, since I've got it hooked up, I'll use it. But under normal circumstances-- I forgot about that-- I can power that right off-- power that right off. 

CREW: Good, so all you need is that source. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: OK, we're going to roll and-- and Laurel, and any time you-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Mr. Sobotka can you start by giving us, as clearly and as much as you want, a picture of your life in Poland before this all happened? 

SUBJECT: Before we start, I would like to make one thing clear. It causes any of us who lived through the Holocaust, survivors, a lot of pain to talk about it, about our personal experiences, as well as the total picture of the Holocaust. The only reason I consented to do it is for future generations. 

Me, as an eyewitness, to give my account of what I lived through and the way I saw it, especially at a time when they're even trying to whitewash the whole thing and say that it never happened, that 6 million Jews didn't even perish. To me, it's just like they're killing the 6 million once over again. 

And for that reason, I believe it is the obligation of every survivor to give his personal account for, like I said, for the future-- future generations-- to tell them that it did happen, unfortunately, that human beings turned into beasts. And that's the purpose of this presentation. 

I was born on June 21, 1914, in a small town called Łęczyca It was a small town by comparison and-- but quite Jewish in character. The population-- about 40% of the population was Jewish. 

At a very early age, about six or seven years old, I don't exactly recall, we moved to the-- a large city called Lodz, L-O-D-Z. Now Lodz is the second-largest city in Poland. It's about 100 kilometers from Warsaw, which is the capital city of Poland. Lodz was a striving city with about 45% to 50% population Jewish. It was a highly industrialized city. It was called the Manchester of Poland for its industrial output. 

Most of the Jewish people were merchants. As is well known, the Jewish people in Poland had no access to certain professions. They had a very tight quota to universities and colleges. I, for my part, my family was very religious. My father was a very religious man, a very pious man. Of course, at the age of three, I was sent off to Hebrew school, called Cheder. 

Now in those days, it was still a little primitive. We didn't have any electricity. When I went to Cheder, when I went to school, I had to take with me a piece of coal to heat up the place in the wintertime, and of course, a candle as well. And the school was more or less in a room where the rabbi, as they're called, the teacher, lived with six of his kids. It was very uncomfortable, to say the least. 

Later on, in the larger city, I went to schools which would be probably termed like a gymnasium, called a yeshiva. And from there, I, up to age almost 18, I received a very extensive Judaistic education, even as far as qualifying me to be a rabbi, which I never practiced. But I had the equivalent of it in education. 

At age 21, or just about at age 18, I turned from religion, and I started to see another world. And, uh,-- and then I went in-- went-- I received secular-- at the time when we got the Jewish education, we also received secular education. But later on, I went to what would be probably equivalent to a high school. And I received enough secular education, including accounting. 

At age 21, I became independent. I formed a little company, and I manufactured stockings. This happened until-- worked very hard and was very prosperous until 1939 came. On the September 1, 1939, the Germans came in. Our city was right way annexed to become part of the Reich, part of Germany, contrary to a large part of Poland, which was under protectorate, which was-- in other words, it was under-- they had their own autonomy. They had a puppet government which, of course, collaborated with the Germans. But they had their own autonomy. 

In November of 1939, I was walking on the street with a younger brother of mine, which unfortunately did not survive. And I'll get to that later. And the Germans were catching people. And all they did-- what they tried to do is take away our human dignity, from the very beginning. 

They took me into a barber shop. I was young. I had very bushy hair. I had enormously bushy hair. As a matter of fact, the barber always hated to cut my hair. 

And what they did, they told the barber to make what they called a Lause Strasse. This was a partition with a razor blade about an inch wide, all the way through your head. It's hard to describe. But really, when you're not used to it, with the first look, you look like a monkey. You know, the hair on both sides here and here partitioned off, you know, with a razor blade. 

I felt my dignity is hurt. To resist, obviously, doesn't make sense. We knew already what the Germans are made of. But I decided, I'm going to run away. 

Well, getting back just when the-- when there are Germans who came close to our city, thousands-- hundreds of thousands of people fled towards Warsaw, towards the capital. But it didn't make sense, because the roads were so clogged up, even on foot, you could hardly squeeze by. So I decided that I'm not going to go, stay home. But then when this happened, I decided, I am going to go. 

My brother, he was much younger. He was about, oh, oh, about six years younger than I. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you at this time? 

SUBJECT: Well, this is 19-- I was born in 1914. This is '39. So I'm what? 20, 25-- 25 years old. My brother was about 19 at that time, a very healthy specimen, much taller than I am, about six feet tall, very bright, exceptionally bright young man. He also could see that-- the indignations that are starting to come in into, you know, our personal lives. So he decided, we'll go-- we're going to go to the Russian side. 

Now I'm going to come here with an episode about the Russians here. I don't know if this will fit in here at all. And we went to Warsaw, the capital city. And from there, there were smugglers who smuggled you through to the Russian side by crossing a river called Bug, B-U-G. 

This is November already. It turned very cold. And the deal was-- oh, before I went to Warsaw-- when I went to Warsaw, and I was going to go to a city on the other side which was at that time occupied by the Russians-- it's now Russia too-- called Bialystok. And the deal was, with the smugglers, that we're going to go to the river. At the river, a peasant is going to give us one of those proms It's an open, you know, platform like. And that's how they transported the people. 

The river, I would say, it was about half a mile wide, quite a wide river at that point. And on the other side, there will be another guy who was going to lead us to the railroad station. From there, we'll take a-- a train and go into Bialystok. 

Well, the only thing I did smart is that I didn't take the money with me. But I-- there were people, again, who you paid the men in Warsaw, and they would give you the money on the other side, in Bialystok, for a certain fee, obviously. 

We came to the Bug, to the river. And we, uh, well-- yeah, we came to the Bug and everything was fine. We waited till midnight. And then they took one of those open platforms, and they crossed-- they crossed the river. 

At that time, my younger brother got his water-- his foot in the water. So he thought that he caught a cold, you know? It was ice cold. But you don't really see the ice was forming on the river already. This is late in November already in Poland, you know, fall. November is already cold. Sometimes it's even winter already. 

We came on the other side. There's no guide on the other side. And we were about 45 people. Now there were two categories of people who crossed the river-- one, like me, running away from the Germans to seek refuge at the Russians, on the Russian side. The other group were Poles who were smuggling goods, gold. The difference in the prices between the German side on certain items and the Russian side were tremendous, sometimes 300%, 400% difference, gold or, you know, food and whatnot. 

Well, anyway, we had no guide. We started to walk. This is now in the middle of the night. And we walked and walked in circles until we came back again to the bank, to the river-- to the bank of the river. 

In the meantime, it started to dawn. It started to light up a little bit. And as we walk in the woods, a militiaman-- a Russian militiaman-- he says, where are you going? Now the Russians had a set-- if you said you're going to Russia, then they would send you back to Poland, to the German side. If you went the other way-- whatever you wanted, they did the opposite, OK? 

But it didn't help us much. They took us and incarcerated us in a place for a whole day. And in the meantime, more and more people came in and kept on coming and coming. There were several hundred people during the day. It was kind of a fenced off yard with a farm. 

And at night, they formed two groups-- people who had documents from the other side of the river, the German side, separately, and the ones on the Russian side, separately. And then we walked. 

There were three soldiers. And I said, where are we going? They wouldn't answer. You know, they had the bayonets on their rifles, you know? They led us, and they lead us back to the river. They were going to send us back to the German side. 

Now when you were sent back to the German side, where the Russians stood, they would throw rackets to the other side, indicating to the Russians that they're sending a group of people. First of all, people sometimes drowned. They fell off these open platforms. And secondly, if I, as a Jew, came back on the other side to the Germans, I don't think-- it's needless to say what would happen. At best, I would get a good beating. At worst, I would be shot. 

Well, I started to talk to a Russian soldier. I said, look, I said, I'm a Jew. I'm not a smuggler. I came-- I just want to survive. I'm going to the Russian side. And I said, you're going to send me back to the Germans? You're going to kill me. Well, he doesn't want to listen. 

I said, look, I said, we are a group of people here. I know that they are corrupt. I said, we're going to give you some, you know, something to make it worthwhile for you. At first, he took off his rifle. He was going to shoot me. I said, go ahead. I said, at least I will know that I was killed by a tovarish which means a-- you know, my friend, rather than the Germans. 

Well, later on, he said, how much? Well, to make a long story short, we got enough valuables that people had. Everybody contributed-- women. There were a lot of women there too. Bracelets, earrings, rings, money-- we gave them a very nice contribution. And they let us go. They told us how to get to the railroad station. 

I got to Bialystok with my brother. I was lucky that I found a place to live. Now the place to live was just a little bunk for the two of us. I had a friend of mine move from this city to another city. And he made a contribution to me. He gave me the privilege of taking over his bunk. And it's with a elderly couple, for a fee. 

There on the Russian side, we tried to survive. I worked different jobs until February of 1940, the end of January, rather, 1940. I decided, what good is it I'm going to survive? I left my whole family. I left my father, my mother, brothers, another brother, sisters. I said, I'm going to go back. 

My younger brother didn't want to go back. At that time, we had already to register in Russia to go to work. And most of the people were sent to Siberia at that time. I didn't know this. But we registered to go to work in a factory. But I took off again to smuggle through back to the German side. 

By the time that I came, I didn't need anybody, because the river was frozen solid, and I walked just past the river, walked the river, the ice. I came on the other side. Now the Polish people could recognize a Jew from a mile away. The Germans were not that sophisticated in recognizing our physiognomy, so to speak, you know, how we look. 

On the border there, I met a German patrol. And he asked me, where are you going in German. And I pretended that I don't understand what he's talking to me. I answered him in Polish. And he let me go, somehow. Then I came to Warsaw. And then, from Warsaw, I decided I'm going to go back by train to Lodz and join with my family. 

In the meantime, my father went from our home city, Lodz, to Warsaw, to stay with a sister of mine, an older sister who was married at that time already. And he ran away, because they caught him. They cut off his beard. And he, again, felt very, you know, indignant about it. So he went to live-- in Warsaw, the Jews at that time had a little more freedom than in Lodz, because we-- this was protectorate, like I said before. 

So-- but the Jews had to wear a white band, a white armband with the Star of David on it, imprinted. I somehow, even so I look very much Jewish, you know, in the eyes of Poles and whatnot, I decided to take the risk. I'll-- I'll go on the train without the armband. I hid in a corner at the rail station. And I got off on the train. And everything was fine. 

There's only one thing I didn't know. At a certain point, where the protectorate ended, all people had to depart from the train. And then they had to go through a check where German SS stayed with dogs, the German shepherds, this big. And there was an overpass. You had to go through the overpass and then go on the other side. And then on the other side, you could mount the train again and go into the right, because the other side was already Reich. 

This was about 25 kilometers outside of my home city, Lodz. I was not aware of it. If I was aware of it, I probably wouldn't dare. 

Now here, I'm getting very emotional about this, because this is up-to-date. I never figured out what really happened. But it happened. It happened to me. It's not fantasy. Believe me, this happened in real life. And I can't explain it. 

CREW: OK, excuse me one second. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, thank god. 

CREW: Yeah, I had to stop him right here, because-- 