[BEEP] SUBJECT: Whatever it was, in the beginning, they let them come home in the evenings to their house yet. But we already started to have an idea of what this all was all about. And we-- yeah, in the meantime, they were left [INAUDIBLE] the rest of the party. We were here alone, my wife and I. 

So they couldn't go over, just come over the bridge and be already there. They had to go all the way to a place, a ferry-- where they could get a ferry and go and come to all these villages. And there's another story, which I know, not myself, I know from what they told me what they went through, so I don't think that this is really relevant. 

But they were there several times down to be killed, to be shot. And when they finally came to a village, Babyn, which is at the border of Galicia with [INAUDIBLE]. They, the peasants, yes, the kid, Dr. Rauch's kid started to cry. She wanted something to drink, a little milk, and they wouldn't give. 

So one man, one peasant came out, and he says, This Dr. Gottesman saved my wife's life or something like that, because I used to deliver their babies, whatever. And I'm not going to let this kid die. And he, with all this shouting for all of the peasants, he brought out and gave milk to this kid in Babyn. And not only this, he says, I'm going to take-- I'm going to bring you over, help you go before they come after you and again and shoot you. 

So anyways, they emptied all they had, probably, of course, because, you know, and they finally arrived the next day-- or two days later. We didn't know what happened. We were afraid that they killed her. In a terrible situation. Terrible barefoot, and, somebody, well, how they looked. 

So then, they moved into our house, the doctor also, so that we'd be together because there were really no Jews. And we were there, more or less protected, by their gendarme. You know, he really didn't know what to do with us, with the two doctors. Then, I told them, here, take all my furniture. I had a very beautiful, furnished apartment. And let us go over. Let us get out of here. 

And one afternoon, he came over running, this gendarme, and he says to me, don't ask me anything. This was the day when they killed all the Jews at the border. What they did, they took the Jews to the border between Horodenka, which is on the Polish side and the Romanian side. And they told them, go over. On the other side, the Ukrainian military shooting them if they came over on that side. On this side, the Romanian gendarme would shoot them. 

And this is how they killed the whole thing there on that day. So he was afraid, what are his superiors going to say? He left two Jews alive. He was more afraid than we were. So he came around, and he told me, he says, please, get-- I don't want to know anything. Just get out of here. I can't even tell you what happened. But get out of here. 

So we, we got a guy with a horse and carriage. And he took us to the next town, called Lastalna, which was a more or less big city, a big city, yeah, a town, where they had the Jews, there were still Jews living. These were, I don't know, 500, 600 Jewish families at least in this town. 

And we came in. He took us there. He said, go there. There are other Jews, and you will-- you will be there safer. So we went there. And as soon as we walked into the city, we had some friends there-- friends. We had a family. He was my assistant. He had part-time medical school. So he took us to his house. And they were afraid to hold-- to keep us even for a minute there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were Jews? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They were afraid to keep-- you know, they already were scared enough because and then, in the meantime, the gendarmes in this city would collect all the men, all the Jews into a casernes-- you know where the army lives, the soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Barracks. 

SUBJECT: In the barracks, and keep them there, or work, and then send them home eventually for the evening. So they were afraid to keep us. But we had some, you know, we always-- it's good to have some friends there. My mother-in-law really had a man who knew his way, and he knew how to give money to the, to the chief of police. 

But it didn't help us. He put us in. We had to go in, into the barracks. The women would stay. They stayed with some woman and mother my mother-in-law knew. Very poor people, they had a little-- and they were not afraid to take them-- to take us in. 

But my-- the other doctor and I, we were there. And we were kept there, and-- ah, yes. We were there alone that, they, the other people from the city, the other Jews in the city were home. They had to report in the morning. But they didn't get-- while we were there, we witnessed terrible things, which we didn't know. They took the Jews and tied them with wire and threw them into the Dniester. So they were floating, dead people on the Dniester. 

And the ones, one or two young people who survived, came to tell the story. Oh, that's true? Send them back again to the same thing. And we witnessed this. So we, we knew what was going on. You know, Dr. Rauch and I, we were in one room. And this afternoon, that day was a rainy day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had seen this, or you had been told this? 

SUBJECT: No, we saw the guy with the wire. Now, he talked to us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-huh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why were you and Dr. Rauch spared? 

SUBJECT: We were-- why we were spared? No, we were waiting that they're going to send us back. It's going to be the same thing. And we both had with us morphine and injectables to kill ourselves if this would happen, instead of going back and being thrown into the-- we knew we were ready. But miracles are miracles. [CHUCKLES] 

So Dr. Rauch looks out of the window. And he sees the lieutenant in charge of the gendarmerie. He says to me, you know, I know this guy. I think he was in the army with me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, these are, these are Hungarians, these are Romanians? 

SUBJECT: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These are-- 

SUBJECT: These are Romanians. This is Romanians. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Romanians. 

SUBJECT: 100% Romanians. They were barbarians enough. No, this is Romanians. Romanian gendarme, gendarme. So he comes up, this lieutenant, and he recognizes him. And he says to us, he says, why are you alone here in these barracks, and all the other Jews are free? He says, I know, I know you. You were in the army with me. You're not a communist. 

Anyway, he said, he went over to the [INAUDIBLE], whatever, who were in charge of doing this. And he says, either you let them also go out and stay with their families like the other Jews, or everybody goes in into the barracks. So anyway, because it was of our fault or not, we know that, next day, everybody was in the barracks. I mean, the men, that's what they did. And we stayed there. And the women would come and bring us something to eat. It would take around several hours a day to clean the streets with the brooms-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You worked. 

SUBJECT: --like that. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were the work crew. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. There were several hundred of us. And then, they let us go back home. This was too much for them. And the report in the morning, why should they keep us in the barracks and if they can have us come every 6 o'clock in the morning, line up like soldiers, and then, we are there, and then work a little, then send us back home. 

So we went-- I went back to this Jewish, this mother and daughter that-- hut where she lives there. We stayed there a few days. And we, we wanted to go back to Czernowitz. We kept on telling them, the police, that we are really not, we don't belong here. Somehow, we got-- we saw what happened in Lastalna, in that village. And we knew that it was going to happen here, too sooner or later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: So we wanted to get out of there. And the best excuse we could use was, we are not here. We are strangers. Let us go back to our home in Czernowitz. It wasn't so simple. We gave money, whatever, we gave to the police chief or the gendarme. And he made papers, but, which we didn't know what was written in these papers. He gave us a sergeant with a horse, you know, carriage to bring us back to Czernowitz. 

So this is how we left Lastalna, and we left in time, because several weeks later, they deported everybody from there also from that city. But the papers, this sergeant had was that these are communists, and he sends them to Czernowitz. [TISKS] 

Or whatever it was. So the guy, instead of letting us come home, took us right away to the prison. There was a prison, [INAUDIBLE] at Czernowitz, you know, for political things. So we ended up-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Czernowitz in jail. 

SUBJECT: --in Czernowitz. That was our beginning. All of us. This already was with the women. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This includes your mother-in-law and your-- 

SUBJECT: Everybody. And all the doctors. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --and your cousin. 

SUBJECT: There was already more because there were-- most of the doctors in the Lastalna were Czernowitz not from there. Dr. Glanz, who is in Israel now, and his wife was eight months pregnant already. You know, she, she used to sleep on the table in that. There were no beds, nothing. So we slept on the floor and these things in this place. 

And we met there also peasants who were, you know, mayors during the Russian occupation that they were suspicious. They brought them into this place there, you know? Just take us down. Also clean the thing, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were dangerous then-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --because you were a communist, not a Jew, or is that a double? 

SUBJECT: This is, of course, a double. They didn't say they were communist, but we stayed-- you know, it was the Russians, so this was enough, and, as a Jew, of course. It was then because that, for instance, they would take and pull the hair from that Raus, her father, you know, and kind of joke, you know, in the courtyard, soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who controlled the prison? Who controlled the prison in Czerno-- Czernowitz, then? 

SUBJECT: We really didn't see any more than, than soldiers or a sergeant, something like that. That's all we saw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But what, what na-- what nationality? 

SUBJECT: No, these were-- no, these were Romanians. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it German? 

SUBJECT: No, no. The Germans had already, by that time, they were there administering and doing what they had in Czernowitz, but they did not interfere because they were allies. They did not interfere in the day-to-day Czernowitz came back to the Romanians. 

It was Romania before. They let them administer. But everybody in charge, you know, was already party, you know, part Nazi at that time, you know, because they were their allies. But this was really the police station. This was the police prison. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. 

SUBJECT: Next to it was the police building. But not really policemen administered this. They were gendarmes. And, you know, the difference between police and gendarme is like having a cop in the city and having a state trooper-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --just to give you an idea of when I say gendarmes. They're more-- it's the suburb with the villagers, with the others and-- than with the big cities. Not-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Czernowitz was a municipal. Anyway, we, we had people outside, you know? My sister and her family working together sort of there. And it took, I think, 10 days or 2 weeks-- yeah, she had to go out and have the baby, so they had to take her out, Dr. Glanz. He was a doctor. And they let us out. They let us out the day my third sister, Riga, got married. 

So from the prison, we went to the wedding. And it was, you know, not such a happy wedding. And the same day, they started to organize the ghetto in Czernowitz. The day we came out of prison was the wedding and so when they started the ghetto, that meant that all the Jews had to move in into a certain area. 

We were lucky in the beginning. Our house, where we lived, was part of the ghetto, was still included, so we didn't have to move. And we-- so a lot of people came to stay with us, and my parents. And we stay-- stayed there. Then, they real-- and they started to deport. They started deportation. 

This was the idea. Now, we get them concentrated in one place. And then, make, you know, every, every weekend, every Saturday night, they will-- the gendarme would come around with lists, pick up people, and send them away to Transnistria. This is on the other side, occupied, between, you know, Romania and Germany, but it was Russian, Ukrainian territory. 

And after a few days doing this, they decided that this was too big of a territory. Imagine to compress 80,000 to 100,000 Jews into 30. So they took part away, and we had to move out again from there. This was not our ghetto anymore. 

And we moved in, in the Judengrasse called that street, near the Jewish hospital to friends who had a house there. But they didn't have anything else, so they let us take the roof. And, uh, I'll never forgot that because it was winter, or it started to snow. And there was no roof. And we were covering ourselves with a big blanket, and the snow would just come in to the-- and we stayed there. 

In the meantime, they started to give out permits for people who were allowed to stay in Czernowitz, not to be deported. So everybody tried to give money, to do-- and, somehow, that I was not all this time in Czernowitz, I lost contact with all these people, how to get around. They passed and by they passed, and every time we'd run to the Jewish hospital, the lists were put up, who was allowed to stay, and I was not on the list. 

In the meantime, my oldest sister-- we talked about her this morning-- Dora, and her husband and her child, who was not a child, was already eight years old, had friends of theirs went, people thought, they're going for a vacation. They decided. And I was so with myself that I didn't have even enough time to advise them not to, stay, you know, hide, stay. But he was stupid. So she went away, never came back. She died right-- soon after in [INAUDIBLE], she, the child, and her husband. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is that-- that's a camp? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. In [INAUDIBLE]. As a matter of fact, I send money, and he was already dead. [CLEARS THROAT] And this is a Jewish woman, took the money without ever giving it another thought. And so, um, I started to be very desperate. What to do? 

So luck wanted it that a cousin of mine, who still lives in Israel, a lawyer. But a lawyer in Europe is also a doctor. Here, only a medical doctor now. Dr. Leo Gottesman got, by mistake, two permits. So he came over to me, he says, I have two permits. All you have to do is get somebody to change from Leo to Jonah. 

So we found somebody, with the commandant to do it. And this is how I got a permit. Not on my name. With the permit, which covered my wife, and my mother-in-law, and [INAUDIBLE] not my sisters or my parents, we moved back to that house, to that apartment. We could move back. Once you had it, you could-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't have to be in the ghetto. 

SUBJECT: No. You could move back to where you were because you had a working certificate, like-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And, and my parents stayed. Yeah, my sister got also, I think, a certificate. They went also back to another with my sister. By that time, my other sister married. The middle one, Sima, who died since then, and she is-- her husband was drafted by the Russians and went with the Russians, the army, when they retreated in 1941. So she stayed alone in that apartment. 

And, and my other sister was married, who lives in Sweden now, stayed with her. So my parents gave up their apartment-- it was like in the suburbs-- and moved in also with them. And we had to go and verify this permit. It was a very difficult thing to do. We had to go to a commission, to the governor. 

There also, I think, we gave some money. And anyway, we got it done. And we got back. I started to work like in the Jewish hospital. That is the only way you can get because here, a thing that you are Jewish and that your permit-- no, you had a white [INAUDIBLE] here, a yellow thing there. But being that I was a doctor, I got a permit to instead of going, being home at 6:00 in the afternoon, I could be a little bit later home because I was a doctor working in a hospital. So I had with me this thing. 

And they started to-- yeah, in the meantime, my mother-in-law was a born businesswoman, Bela's mother. She's always been in business. So she thought, we have to live on something. We kept on selling things, what we had, the market, you know. And then, even this was going to come to an end. 

We-- she found a Romanian guy. You know, the Romanians however came into the city. It's a rich city, makes business. She said to him, give me your name because Jews are not allowed to have stores or any business at all. And I'll open up a business with old clothes and things like this in the city. And you will be a partner, 50/50. 

So, why not? He got the permit, and she opened up this little, this store. So in the morning, I would take her because I was a doctor, like, I would be her escort. And in the evening, I would take her home from the store. And she, she was able to support us because I had no income from the hospital. I would get sometimes from somebody a few lei there. But who had money to pay? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: I was happy just to work in the hospital. And in the meantime, they started to deport more and more. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year are we in now? Around '40-- 

SUBJECT: We are in now, in, we are in-- the Russians retreated in '41 and '42. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When the deportations really begin. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they started-- 

--on every weekend. And so I was afraid that my parents and my sisters had no permit. And, and I had a cousin from the village staying in our-- and they had their partner. So every time, Saturday, we would, um, get a, uh, we were-- we had a-- we knew somebody who was German, a woman. She was a, you know, seamstress. 

And we would pay her so she would lock them up in their apar-- in her apartment over the weekend, my parents and my sisters. And Sunday evening, when they-- when everything was safe, she would let them out. This went on like this several weeks. 

Then, she-- I don't remember what happened. She probably changed her mind. You know, she also was afraid to do it all the time. We used to lock up people in our store-- in our store-- in store there over the weekend. Anyway, somehow, I got the idea or somebody told me that this is going to be a very bad weekend. They're going to really deport. And I said to myself, what can be safer than putting in my parents in the hospital? 

My cousin, by the way, was the administrator of the hospital. Now, he's a cousin. His mother, his father, my mother, brother, and sisters-- as a matter of fact, I met him in Bucharest right now. He's 81 years old now. So I, uh, Saturday afternoon, I knew that the night was going to be, you know, bad. I really ran around like, you know, like, like mad. I didn't know what to do. 

So I called my father. My mother was already in the hospital. I thought he would protect them, my cousin. I said to my father, you know, let me put you into the hospital. So I put him in the hospital. And to make sure, I gave him a milk injection to get fever, to get high fever. 

And to make the story short, by 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning, somebody knocks in the window. And it's my sister, the other sister who says to me, they took father from the bed with the fever away. So I ran over, and I said to my cousin, why couldn't you protect him? What, why, you're administrator. What? Anyway, I still can't forgive him it. 

We couldn't do anything. I sent him down money to the, to the meeting place. And that's the last I saw of my father. He wrote once or twice postcards, which I got through the post office somehow. And he was killed in-- [CLEARS THROAT] --on the Bug by the Germans in Tulchnic. It was called cariera de piatra. In other words, they made him work stones, carry stones. He probably couldn't carry them anymore. So they shot him. 

Um, I'm going back a little bit. I told you, while we were in that roof, there was no room for all of us on the roof. So he would-- my father and I would sleep in the hospital. But the hospital, we didn't know where to sleep. So one evening, one night, we came in. It was dark already. And there was some, a ladder to go up, some, you know, in a place there. So we went up there. We, we slept. Get up in the morning. It was a morgue. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. 

SUBJECT: [SIGHS] All these dead kids and people on the floor. And we were sleeping. And we didn't know. It was dark when we came up. So this was the last I saw of my father. My mother then came out of the hospital. And then, they stopped. After they finished their job, they stopped deporting. It went on for several months, went on like-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you feel safe at that time? 

SUBJECT: As long as you behaved, yes. They, they followed orders. Either it was outside intervention. We were told that the people, the [INAUDIBLE], the rich people, the rich Jews in Bucharest put on pressure on the government, even if it was, you know, hard to leave and let the few Jews, say, you will need them. 

After all, what was left? They had all these factories, such an industry. They had to have somebody to work it. They had no-- their own doctor. They didn't have their own nobody, or their own tailors or plumbers. They had to have people stay there. 

And these were really these problems. These were these people who were left and left there. And, uh, so, safe. This was, it was not easy to live because you had to-- everybody was very poor. And people were just selling. That was very hard. Unless they had some business. Otherwise, most of the people lived from what they-- they were selling their own clothes or whatever they had, furniture. 

And this is-- it went on like-- yeah. Then, they started to-- yeah, when they stopped deporting, they, uh-- like, my sister, she had her, her husband was-- or is, he survived. It was watches, you know? So he had leftover a few watches. So he would sell a watch and live on that a few days, something like that. She would because he was in Russia. But he left her. 

And then, they started to recruit doctors to send them in the occupied territories. [INAUDIBLE] the Romanians. All this is Romanians. And, uh, yeah, I'm going to go back and tell you a little incident. After we went out to the prison, a few days later, all of a sudden, a detective comes in into the house, and he says to me to come over to the police station. So I said, that's all I need. 

So I came over to police station. And the guy tells me, you know, I have a paper here that you, uh, you killed a policeman during [INAUDIBLE] before the Russians came. I said, how could I? It was made up, a story. Anyways, a very nasty story. But somehow, the, uh, like, you have your all the people there was a guy called Popescu who was-- his brother went to school with me. 

So he, luckily, he was there. And he really said, no. You have a mistake, he told the guy there, the police. He said, this must be another Gottesman. He didn't-- he couldn't have done this. [CHUCKLES] So, you know, you had to-- it was, you know, this gives you an idea that people who survived had somehow, at this moment, somebody there saved them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: For instance, I'll give you another example. When the war broke out, the Russians called us all into the stalna-- I was still in the village there, in [INAUDIBLE]-- to be on duty there, you know, for bombardments, help. So we were eating. In the morning, there was only one place where you ate with the Russians. You know, in the morning, in that little restaurant, whatever it was. 

I had a pair of-- well, I brought them from Vienna with me-- you know, what do you call these roll-up pants with the long-- uh, uh, Pumphosen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Knickers. 

SUBJECT: Pumpho-- Knickers. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Knickers. 

SUBJECT: So one in ___ there was a guy was sitting there. And he was sure that the guy sitting here with knickers is a German spy. So I walk out with another doctor out of the back because all of a sudden, I feel a gun behind my back. He says to me in Russian, you better go. Don't move. This is the war. You know, my family is, is, is in [INAUDIBLE]. So I said, that's the end of me. 

So you walk down into that KGB, come in, sit down. As I sit down and to realize what's happening, a Russian comissar-- you know, this Polish comissar, so he was a Jew, who, who used to tattle around with me to the villages to draft. So we got quite friendly. 

He walks in, and he sees me sitting there. He comes over to me, he says, Gottes, what are you doing here? So I tell him, I don't know. Here I am. I sat that, had breakfast. He walked in, and he came over after a few minutes. He says, come with me. Get out of here. [CHUCKLES] In other words-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So this happened to you over and over again. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In other words-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --had he not come in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's right. 

SUBJECT: --I mean, this shows you how many times-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The same thing. 

SUBJECT: --you just-- so then, the Romanians started-- they needed doctors for the, their gendarmes, for the occupation army, for the population. They had no doctors in all this-- they occupied all to the Bug, between Dniester and the Bug. The Ukraine, or that part of Ukraine, it was Romanian territory. Down from there was German. 

Although, in the big cities, the Germans really had to say, like, Odessa, or [INAUDIBLE], the Romanians were-- the Germans had their-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --they didn't leave it to the Romanians. So then, they called us-- we were 18 or 20 doctors-- to the draft board, that they gave us papers, we have to go for three months to the Ukraine and be there, work there as doctors to the, for the population or whatever. 

So we traveled. We went there, which was not easy as a Jew to travel at that time. There were no Jews. And we were in one wagon there, one going through Yas into, to Odessa, to [INAUDIBLE]. And, um, it was a very sad trip because we really didn't know that we, we were going to come back or whatever. 

I thought, maybe I'll find my father yet alive, you know, and be able to save him. So we, uh, came to, uh-- our point was to report to the government and to the Romanian in, in Odessa. And there, they gave us different kind of papers. We had to go. They divided us. And they sent me to, um, a village called Pokrovka, which is not far from the Bug. 

Then, I had to report first to another little city, where I got my papers, Pokrovka. And I had to report first to another district office, where the doctor who was there before me-- I wanted to also from Czernowitz, a very nice guy, internist-- was killed by a German who just passed by. You know, they would come and go. After all, it was the road. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So that's-- 

SUBJECT: And he doesn't like it. This was already as a doctor sent officially. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Again, what do you say when you have, when you have like a little bit of luck? So when I reported to that town where I had to get my papers or some kind of transportation-- because it was 40 kilometers further to go-- the district, uh, whatever he was-- Petor, Prefect, it was to call him there, the real manager, the authority for this area-- was a Romanian guy who came from the Bukovina. 

He was born in Gura Humorului, which is part of the Bukovina. The Bukovina always kept itself different than the real Romanian. More civilized, they thought, or something. So when he found out that I was a Bukovina, he said to me, don't worry, I'll protect you. Nothing is going to happen to you. And that man would send every week a messenger into that Pokrovka, make sure that I had food, that I had straw to heat the house, and so on, that I had flour. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So that in addition to the story of knowing someone at that moment-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --or someone coming in, you were really always with either Romanians or Russians-- 

SUBJECT: Romanians. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --but not Germans. 

SUBJECT: This-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But not Germans. 

SUBJECT: --no, the Russians, forgot about the Russians. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you had no-- well, this polit man, whatever. 

SUBJECT: Now, that this was before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I went back, you know. I went back to Lastalna when the war broke out. But I'm now already sent from Czernowitz to the occupied territory, Romanian, German, Romanian, Germany-occupied territory. The Russians already-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the Germans-- 

SUBJECT: --the war was all the way-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you did not encounter, or didn't you, or-- 

SUBJECT: I did. I did socially, more or less. I had to, you know. When you're a doctor in a village like this, they come along, you tell them a joke, you speak German. But they didn't bother me. They, I mean, they knew I was a Jew. But they really, I-- everybody could kill me at any moment, I want you to know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: I was free for everybody. Regardless with every sign, every, every soldier. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: So I had to really find-- feel my way through because I was getting around and everyday living in the village, you know, with all these gendarmes there. I used to give them sulfur, you know, they used to get gonorrhea. And, you know, give them. And it was a situation there. But, you know, they were really king, you know. Don't think that the Romanian occupation army and Russia was such a sweet thing. They did enough. 

So anyway, I survived there. I was, I lived in a family where, the Ukrainian woman, she had, she was a pharmacist and had two kids. And being that I brought in food, so she-- and she would make the medications, you know. Not like you going here to a drugstore, you get digitalis ready or anything. She was, really knew her business. 

She had a few things and would prepare them, make them, and weigh them. And we developed-- we made a real ambulatory hospital. People would come from all over. And they didn't have a doctor or a doctor who knew some medicine probably for a long time because there was a big, open courtyard there in front of her house. 

And I remember, used to come, like, Saturday night, you would hear the whole night, you know, carriages coming in and waiting for me to see them in the morning. And I was to get practically crazy. I didn't know what to say because people, you know, yeah, they would come like to a saint, you know? 

People with crutches, people with, you know, a limp. And oh, they heard of a doctor. I didn't have training, didn't have what to do. This was the situation there. And I would go from village to village and inspect the school, and things like this, and write my report back to that to that little hospital, to that doctor. 

After three months, I, uh, I got papers that I-- it was for three months-- that I can go back home. And I, uh, I mean, it was not so easy, the trip back, but I came to Odessa, back through the [INAUDIBLE]. And I came home, back to Czernowitz, and started the same routine again-- working in the hospital, helping out my mother-in-law with the store. 

Then, I was home only a short time. They called me again, drafted me again to go back, this time, to the northern part Transnistria, which is where they had political prisoners, political-- I mean, from the occupied terr-- from Czernowitz, and from the whole country of Romania. Everybody who was suspicious of being communist, or collaborator, or whatever it was, they sent to that camp. Vapniarka it's called. [INAUDIBLE] 

And a whole unit of gendarmerie with a captain or-- were watching this fortification like-- most of these prisoners or inmates, whatever you want to call them, were intellectuals. The elite of Czernowitz was there. Dr. Kessler, you know, has a brother now, Dr. ---, and another doctor, you know. You know, the best what they had. 

The Romanians thought that they were this, and, and I was supposed to be the doctor of the, uh, for the gendarmes. Now, it had nothing to do with the-- I was not allowed to see them or visit them even, the ones in the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: --in the prison in that camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [COUGHS] 

SUBJECT: I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Excuse me. 

SUBJECT: Should I go on? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, please. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I just have to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: I was supposed to be the doctor for the gendarmes. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not to have contact necessarily with the prisoners. 

SUBJECT: No. We had indirectly contact because they knew there was a doctor from Czernowitz. They would send out notes. They would, for instance, they had the dentist, they had several dentists to take them out to take care of the gendarme, so the officers. You know, it was a little bit. I was never in. Once, I think it was an emergency. They would not let in anybody from outside. 

But I had an idea, you know. Somehow, we got an idea of who was in and what was-- so I was there in Vapniarka. And then, we-- they, they decided to send me to, to Zhmerynka. They had another doctor there and in Vapniarka. So they wanted me to go. Zhmerynka was a big city. It's a big railroad junction point. All the laborers from the Ukraine and all this would go by, travel this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. What year is this now? 

SUBJECT: This was '40-- uh, this was already before the Russians came back. This was the beginning of '40-- this was end of '42 or beginning of '43. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: And so in Zhmerynka, I lived in that compound, compound where the prisoners were. They had prisoners of war, Russians who lived there in their thing. But we were not, we were not in that they took them out every morning to work and brought them back in the evening. I had to take care of the gendarmes. 

I was not treated bad there. I would eat with the officers there. And I was able to move around. They used me also as an interpreter with the Germans. You see, the Germans would pay them every week for using their, these prisoners who were under Romanian control. 

So every Friday, the captain would take me along for the Germans, which I hate this. My worst part was they knew I was Jewish. I was afraid for, they can always say, leave that Jew here because nearby was [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you wearing your star? 

SUBJECT: No, no. This was-- no, I was an official sent from the government there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Anyways some doctors, when they came from Bucharest, they wore the uniform even [INAUDIBLE]. So but there, I was able to visit the ghetto, Zhmerynka had a big ghetto. And I was able to make contact with some people from Czernowitz who were there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. 

SUBJECT: When I went to Zhmerynka, a family in Czernowitz came over to me and says, you know, I have an idea that my two daughters who went with the Russians, but on their way stopped and survived, somehow, they saved themselves, telling, you know, girls, running away, saying that they are not Jewish, and they are somewhere in Zhmerynka hidden. 

So when I came to Zhmerynka, I went down to the center of the city. And I was told by an officer to look into the beauty parlor there in Zhmerynka. So I looked in, and I saw that, uh, very known Jewish activists was there and some others, you know, from the ghetto, sent into the city to work. 

And so I went over to her, and I said to her, I was told that the two, these two girls are here. She says, yes, they are. They're a different name, and so and so, and so on. They live alone. So this is where there were some Jews, you know, existing there under different names. 

As a matter of fact, one of these girls lived with a guy who was dressed up and acted like a Gestapo. And when I was leaving already Zhmerynka, she called me and, this girl, and says, I want you to talk to Franz or whatever his name was. So Franz confessed that he's a Jew. [CHUCKLES] 

I'm telling you. And, you know, to tell the parents when I come back to Czernowitz. So we stayed in Zhmery-- I stayed in Zhmery-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: He was wearing a costume of the Gestapo. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, he worked with them together. They never found out he was a Jew. As a matter of fact he ended up not-- the Germans let him go. I mean, they used him. He was working for them. He was a good-- I mean, he wore uniform as a Germ-- but when he came back to Russia after the Russians came back in '43, he took along-- he was so stupid to bring along his rifle. So the Russians took him away to Siberia where-- because they found the rifle, not because he, he was hidden as a Jew. 

Anyway, I was in Zhmerynka a short time, a couple months, probably more than that. I stayed longer this time than three months. Somehow, they forgot to take me back. And it already started-- the Russians started to come closer, and closer, and closer. They closed in. You know, this was the Russian advance already. 

So we pulled out of Zhmerynka, went back to Vapniarka, where the center was. Came back to Vapniarka. And the Germans already, the German army, part of it, was there already with their helicopters. And they took over. They came to prepare, and they told our unit-- first of all, they wanted to kill all these inmates. 

He told to the captain, what you keep in here communists, and you keep them alive? But somehow, they, the Romanian authorities, whoever was in charge, had to bring them back alive. There were big people involved in this camp there. I don't know all the names. 

I know of one guy who was from Transylvania. Transylvania is a part of Romania, you know, Hungary, who when I went back home, he gave me a letter, he says you walk into this and this colonel in Czernowitz, a Romanian colonel, and give him this letter, and he will give, I don't know, 100,000 lei, 80,000, a fortune, just by my signature. 

So Jews had connections even with these camps. He wanted me to shop for him something in Czernowitz and send it back with that sergeant who brought me up. So we came back. I came back with another doctor to Vapniarka, yes, and another doctor, who died, yes. And we, the Germans here started-- gave the Romanians there, three days or five days, pack, and get away from here. We need this part. This is excellent for us, you know, to come over here and take over. 

So we took all these prisoners, everything, and we went down south in the Ukraine, and we went down near [INAUDIBLE] near [INAUDIBLE] in the city. And we stayed there. They put them up there. And there, I stayed outside the camp already. They gave me some woman there who gave me, had a room where I stayed. And I would eat with them in the canteen. 

And work was not far, across the street was the-- they had their own gendarme station, this city. But we had our own unit taking care of these prisoners. And the place where I stayed with this other doctor was, she kept food under the tables. 

And there were such big rats that I slept with the light on, you know, with a candle and I was afraid to fall asleep. They would really make such a noise. And if anything is frightening me and disgusting me, it's a mouse or a rat. And a cockroach might be also, but to this I'm used. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [LAUGH] 

SUBJECT: So it was a terrible thing. But I had no choice. I would practically not sleep during the night. I was afraid to fall asleep, especially, I had a patient there a few days before that who fell asleep in one of these grain things there, and a rat ate his ear. He had a hole in the ear. So that's all I needed-- [CHUCKLES] --to have the rats here. 

So I stayed in this city, and it came my time to go home. I, a guy who came over from the, from the, from this inmate camp, one of these political tents, and he says to me, Gottesman you're going home. You have a bundle here of little notes, you know, for you take home. Take it home to our parents or to our friends. So I couldn't say no. 

So I said to myself, where am I going to hide this so that nobody can find it? So I had a pair of slippers. And I put in socks. I had a lot of socks. I put in all these letters. And when I left the garrison, I, I didn't go 100 feet, gendarme stops me. 

Come in for inspection. He went right to this shoe and to this sock and took out these letters. So I have an idea, I don't want to say names, that somebody who stayed with me reported me to the, to the gendarme. Nobody else-- unless the same people who brought it out did it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Planted. 

SUBJECT: Which I don't thinks so. But this was something. So here I was. [CHUCKLES] Saw myself right away, you know, taken to a martial, and martially being shot. He said, you take note. There was really-- I didn't read these letters. What was there? 

But again, you know, when you have years to live-- [CHUCKLES] --you live. The captain who was in charge across the street became very friendly with me, who was in charge of the unit that I belonged to. He found out. He came over. And he said to this officer, he says, he belongs to me. He's under my jurisdiction. 

First of all, they found a picture from a girl from [INAUDIBLE] who was Russian already who was there, a Jewish girl hidden away. And they found that. So they called her, and they beat her up. And I was listening to her as she screamed. Anyways, they-- so he says, pack and took me over. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Excuse me. I don't understand. This woman who was beaten up, why was she beaten up? 

SUBJECT: She was beaten up because they-- they found her address and her name from [INAUDIBLE]. That means I did some-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In your-- in the letter. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yeah, they looked in my things. So he took me over. He couldn't let me go, the captain. But he says, you stay here until we see what's going on. [INAUDIBLE] was his name, from the, from a part of Romania where they, they had very few Jews. It's called Oltenia, that part of Romania. 

And the, the people there were nicer. They, their behavior towards Jews were different a little bit than the other ones. He kept me there isolated in the infirmary. I lived there. I stayed there. I would eat. Until, one day, a general came from Odessa to decide what's going to happen to me. 

And I said, [INAUDIBLE] had promised me, this captain, that should I have to go to Odessa to a martial court, he would give me his revolver, and I could kill myself. And he would have kept his word. So he, he came in. They had a dinner, you know, and they, these officers meet. 

He took out all these notes. And he told me that, [INAUDIBLE]. He took out all these notes. And he read nothing in it, he says, and the date was given to a date when the other guy was leaving. This is why I think that the other guy put me in. 

He says, you see that he was put into a trap. And anyway, the general said, OK. Let him go, and send him home, but not by himself. This time, make sure that nobody stops him. Send him home with a sergeant from the gendarmerie up to his house in Czernowitz. 

So this is how I finally let, was let go. And we-- this was already the retreat. The Romanians were losing. This was passed, after that they had in Stalingrad, is was terrible. The trains-- and this was winter-- and the trains were so-- people were holding onto the icy railroads. And I was there with my, with that sergeant. And we finally went onto a train. 

No, we didn't, couldn't get a train. But we went on a freight train-- freight, freight train-- which went only to the border. There was always when you had to cross, even if it was the same territory, but the other one was not occupied territory, it was really Romania. so everybody, every train was inspected for papers, who was crossing really into the Dniester into Romania. 

So this was a train where we were supposed to go over at night into the other side, which was part, part of us arrived. So we, he and I were hiding there, not talking for hours and hours, the sergeant, who was a nice guy, until we finally, the whistle blew, and we crossed that bridge into the other side, and we waited for the regular train to take us to Yas over to, or to Kishinev or to Bessarabia. 

And we were going, he and I were going. Then we come to Kishinev, just to show you what the situation was at that time, and the train stops there for a few minutes. We looked through the window and we got some food. That guy, the gendarme there in charge, walks in. He says to me, you're a Jew. I say, yes. What are you doing? How are you traveling like this? 

So the gendarme says, I have papers. He's a doctor. He worked for us, and I have to bring him back there, there. He says, no, you ain't going to bring him back. Come down. So he took us both down into the gendarmerie. And he again started to-- in the meantime, the train went away. And he started to clean up, what have we found, I took. 

Then, finally, that, probably that sergeant who went with me says, please, let him go because I'm going to be-- he didn't care about me-- he says, I'm going to be in trouble. You know, this is my duty. I have to bring him back. So I was lucky that they gave me a sergeant with me. If I had gone alone, I would have never made it. 

So anyway, after three, four hours, he made up his mind. He say, all right. Go. Go? We didn't have a train anymore. So the same thing. We climbed on a one of these freight trains, and we waited, waited, till finally, we made it to Yas in the middle of the night. And we made it back to Czernowitz. 

And it already started in Czernowitz, too. They already started, the Romanians there saw that it's near, that the Russians are coming nearer and closer and closer, and they started to clean up and starting to leave the city. And soon after, really, I think this was, we came back in winter. In the spring, the Russians came back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year are we in now? 

SUBJECT: This was in '43. They came back, the Russians. And when they came back, we, we had an experience, you know, that the Russians, all right, at least they didn't kill us. But they were not much happy about it. But this was, get rid of the Germ-- we got rid of the Germans and everything. 

So when the Russians came back, I started to do everything possible not to go out of the city because they, there were, the Ukrainian partisans were killing. They were mad at the Russians. They couldn't do anything to us but kill the Jews who came back, poor people who came back from, you know, from that concentration camp, so from Transnistria, they killed them. My, my cousin's husband and so on. So I got work in, at the [INAUDIBLE], the municipal hospital of the city. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was a reunion for you with, who was left in your family at this time when you got back there? 

SUBJECT: This was how-- oh, from the family? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Yes, this was a reunion for me. Yeah, I mean, there were-- I mean, my, my father was not alive anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

SUBJECT: And my brother-in-law was away in Russia. But I had my Bela, and her brother, and my mother-in-law. We stayed in one apartment. My sister, and my other sister married with her husband, and my mother stayed in another apartment not far. They were protected more or less. 

And so we, uh, I start to work in this hospital. And, uh, we more or less waited because it started to already talk about fear. And I became the-- it was a lot of epidemic of typhus was-- and I was sent to a village in Bessarabia. I became all of a sudden a specialist in typhus, you know, how to cure typhus. I set up a hospital in, in [INAUDIBLE]. It's a village in Bessarabia not far from there. 

And I got myself typhus there. I got brought back to Czernowitz. And I was in the hospital quite a while. And there were no doctors to treat me. And I still have a [INAUDIBLE]. I had, you know, typhus, today, you give antibiotics. It's not the disease 

There I was with 104, 105 fever for 10, 12 days. And when the crisis came, I all of a sudden from not moving, you know-- today, we tell them to sit up, the patients, we tell them, move, move your legs. It's an old story. I didn't, and all of a sudden I got a clot, and my leg got like this. And it's still-- you can see the difference from the two legs. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. 

SUBJECT: When it comes evening, and this is already good. So I got out of the hospital work. And I started to work in a Pasteur Institute. In Russian, they call it [? [SPEAKING RUSSIAN]. ?] We made vaccine against rabies. And we had a laboratory. We had our own rabbits. And we had our own things. We did it. 

And so I was able to give work to my wife because they would round up all the women, the Russians, and send them to, to work in the mines in Russia, you know? They had a name, but I forgot already, in Russian, that that mine is calling you, come and go and work. 

So I would hide them. And when we knew that the Russians were going to round them up, I would hide them in that hospital. And then, I was able to give her, to [? Bela, ?] some work and some other-- I think my sister worked for a while. 

And then, we-- this is, we worked until we started to-- they started already. Then, was that Harriman Pact-- Harriman from here was the ambassador in Russia-- to repatriate people who were born on the other side of the, of Romania. And I was born, I was just on the other side, which, which stayed Romania. It's Romania today. 

Of course, visit a lot of people gave money and got their papers. And so we stayed with the Russians two years. This was '43 until '45. In '45, we finally, to a dentist, we got a one of that big, big Russian polit. You know, generals, whatever he was, and, and, and this border passing. We gave him quite a bit of money. And he arranged so I could take my mother along. And my brother-in-law at that time had gone. Yeah. 

While I was working in that Pasteur [INAUDIBLE], we were the only ones making vaccine enough. Going all the way to Kiev we were sending. They didn't have such a thing there. You know, a vaccine for rabies, to the, all the way to Russia. I met people who were coming from the border to our city, peasants, and be bitten by dogs. So we'd keep them a few days there. 

And I had a connection to pass, to get people over to the Romanian side from Russia. No, people wanted to get away by this time from Russia. And why people wanted to go away? I'll give an example, that my cousin and his sister, who were taken to Transnistria with their parents, lost their parents right away, and he was, TB and his sister, and they were left, oh, I mean, they were orphans, not too young. They were in their 20s. 

And they came finally back. They survived this and came back to Czernowitz in 1943. And the first night they stayed over in my sister's home, the Russians came and picked him up for their army. That guy couldn't walk from the house three blocks, that's how he looked. Really starved, dehydrated. 

So I had that connection already made. And I just tell you this little story because it's very interesting. I was working in the hospital that day when my sister comes running to me. She says, Boobie, it's his name. You know, it's really not Boobie. His name is Alba. I mean, Boobie is the way we call. 

