LEO GERECHTER: The-- it seems that I forget-- seem to have forgotten a lot of my German experience as a young fellow to the time of my emigration. I often try to remember, and I wonder why I can't remember things that are very, very, very dear, very close. I can't remember names of people that were close friends of ours. 

I can't remember street names I was that I grow up, friends of mine. And I sometimes think that I should get myself hypnotized and tried to get a total recall to try to remember. But I think it's probably-- probably unconsciously, I tried to shut this particular part of my life out. And that's probably the reason. 

We-- where did we-- we stop? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You enlisted in the army. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, OK. I-- I-- I-- I enlisted in the United States Army in the 19-- well, the first time I enlist-- I signed up shortly after Pearl Harbor in 1941. Uh, but I was not able to join the service for some reason or the other. I was not called till the middle of 19-- towards the late summer of 1942. So how-- so I was-- I was-- and I was called down there and they told me what-- that I have a right to stay out of the service since I'm not a citizen, et cetera, et cetera. But I choose to volunteer for the service. 

Uh, I was given, I think, two months or so to-- since I was all by myself there, I was able to close up my-- I don't know, my job or something like that. Anyway, I left for the-- for Camp Meade in Pennsylvania. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think it's in Maryland. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, Maryland-- Camp Meade, Maryland-- you're absolutely right. I was drafted-- I mean, I was-- I enlisted in Pittsburgh. Right. I went to Camp Meade. I took a lot of tests there, like everybody else. 

And again, I was asked if I would be willing to do some behind the line work. I was young, and I thought it would be a very, very good idea. So uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Behind the German lines? 

LEO GERECHTER: --behind the German lines. I was told it would have been a very dangerous job and chances of survival were very, very slim. Especially for me, as a Jew-- we were told that. I thought we had to learn how to parachute out of airplanes, et cetera, et cetera. And we had to learn judo, and we had to learn how to kill silently, et cetera, et cetera. 

I thought it was a good idea, then. There was another fellow with me there. And we thought it was a good idea, especially since we were sent to a camp Ritchie, and then also in Maryland, which was a recreation of a German village. In other words, the soldiers were walking around. There was two different armies in this particular town. 

It was a German army with German uniforms, German-speaking, everything was done-- we were all speaking German. There was no English spoken at all. And they had little stores there. And they had a little German-- and we went to school there. 

And we learned a lot of things, which I don't recall. I learned some judo. I learned some-- how to sneak up to a sentry and a certain spot in the back where to send the knive, et cetera. It was all practical work. 

And we were taking-- we were learning how to parachute. They had a big tower there where they taught you how to-- uh, this was one of the first thing they taught you, really. The reason for that was is because you-- you cannot freeze at any time. 

And I guess they felt-- the first thing-- you would freeze when you stand in that door there. And as you looked down, it's a long step down to-- you know. So they took us up in an airplane, and I couldn't do it. I just couldn't jump. And I had the right to go out. 

And then I was trained some more. And we went to the-- to-- I was sent-- from there I was sent to-- the next interesting thing is I went, sent back. I don't know where I went. Meade, I think it was. 

Uh, I think Camp Kilmer was the next stop in New Jersey. But I was only there a couple of weeks. We were waiting for reassignment. 

And we were-- we were sent to-- to Salt Lake City, Utah. And we were taught-- a few of us were sent to become de-Nazification experts. It was our job eventually to go in-- we-- I was-- happened to be attached to the 2nd Armored Division-- and it was our job to go in-- later on I was attached. At that time, I was unattached. 

It was our job to go in, to learn how to drive armored vehicles. And it was our job to go into a town as soon as we possibly can, try to capture the-- the-- the Nazi functionaries, and try to get out all the information, as much as we can, and send them back to the rear. That was mostly in Germany, though. 

We went from there, after that, went-- from there, we went to England. I was stationed in Manchester, England. I was there about three or four months. From there, we went to Southampton in-- around the 5th or 6th of June. We all packed up-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1944? 

LEO GERECHTER: 1944. We all packed up, and we went on a troop transport with our vehicles. And we didn't know where we were going. The idea was everybody-- the rumor had it we are going to Africa. That was the great thing, you know? Must go into Africa or maybe to Italy, because nobody knew about. 

So it was about-- no, it was-- it was long-- it was before. It was about the fourth or fifth of June. And then about-- this-- and then one morning, it was about 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning, we hear there's all this commotion going over, going on. 

And we were outside Southampton harbor there. And we see, oh, God, thought I would say, literally, thousands and thousands of airplanes flying over. And then we knew, of course, something was up. We are not going to-- the sky was actually black with airplanes. 

It was a blur. You couldn't see anything. You couldn't see anything. They were just going. And then we saw airplanes pulling gliders. And then we started moving. 

And then I think it was about eight or nine o'clock in the morning. General Eisenhower made the announcement. We were all listening on a speaker. 

You're just about to embark on the biggest thing of your life, you know. And we're going ready for the invasion. Well, it seems that our ve-- our vehicles could not get off the boat. Why I don't know, you know? I wasn't a general. 

They couldn't get off the boat. And we had to lie right outside Normandy Beach. I would say, maybe, oh, maybe a mile outside. And we had to wait. We had to wait for about four or five days on that ship, which wasn't very pleasurable. 

And finally, orders were given to-- to get down. And we had to go over the side of the ship on the cargo nets and into little landing craft. And we went home on the beach. But on the ship, you could see many many dogfights going on cross-- and we saw airplanes being shot down. We couldn't make out who was which and which was what. 

And-- and then finally, oh, then we came to the beach. There was, oh, God, it was a big mess. It was a very big mix up. Everything was lying around. And we didn't-- we had to go up a steep hill to bivouac area, where we are met. And then the vehicles came, et cetera, et cetera. 

And we went into-- into a town by the name of Sainte-Mere-Eglise. That was the first time I personally came into contact. I saw war from far away, because we were-- we were shelled. We were bombed. 

But they didn't-- they weren't-- their aim wasn't that good. They didn't hit our particular ship. But I saw, in the water, of course, we saw bodies floating. And they picked them up as they could, et cetera, et cetera. 

To-- to-- we-- we went into Sainte-Mere-Eglise. And Sainte-Mere-Eglise was taken by the American paratroopers. And there the first time I saw people hanging from trees. 

You know, the Germans-- and the Germans weren't very nice. I don't know if you-- it was the-- those boys were just helpless, you know. They coming down, and they were just-- and they were just taking their bayonets and cutting them open, et cetera. 

INTERVIEWER 1: American paratroopers? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes, American paratroopers-- but the Germans were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cut open? 

LEO GERECHTER: They were caught. They were caught in the trees, you know. It was a very gruesome sight, by the way. That was a very, very gruesome sight. 

That was the first time I came in contact, and all I-- we could-- not only me, but everybody. A great hatred, great hatred-- if I had any hatred before, I now had-- now it was hitting really close to home. And I came in direct contact. And it was a-- it was a great feeling of revenge. 

Just to go back-- just to-- while we were stationed in Manchester, I had occasion to go to London and to go to other places in England. And a couple of times, they had the buzz bombs going over, which were-- well, which were bombs which were pilotless airplanes, I guess you could call them. And they just-- they just went, and they landed indiscriminately, anywheres and everywheres. 

And those were really the things that-- but eventually, you could tell exactly by the noise of the motor, when they cut out, where they going to land. You learn those things. But to come back, now we go back to France. 

We went then into-- uh, from there on in, that was the first time. And we were taken over-- we stayed over-- we stayed overnight in a little town-- I don't recall the name-- outside of Sainte-Mere-Eglise. And we stayed over there and we took-- there was one farmhouse standing, which we requisitioned for ourselves. 

That was the second time I came in contact with-- with war. And evidently, that was the German headquarters, this particular-- because there was a-- there was a wheelbarrow standing there. And it was our job, you know, we had to stand guard every three or four hours. 

And there was a German soldier draped over that particular wheelbarrow. And sorry to say now, I'm-- he was-- he was still alive then. But we were such hatred for him that we did not give him any help. And he died through the night then. 

I just want to point out by bringing that out is there was such hatred for Germans. That ordinarily, we would help people, because the American soldier wasn't that way. We could have called the medics. And that was the second time I came in contact with war with the Germans. 

Well, we went, and we went up to Saint-Lo. That was the next important step. We went into Saint-Lo. And it took us about a couple weeks there before we could break through. Finally, we broke through. 

And we kept on going. It was just a continuous fighting there. We-- one interesting thing is there was somewhere in town, we captured a town in-- in France. We were trying to find the-- the French-- the French Nazi that was there. 

But it wasn't necessary. We had not much to do there, because already the French underground got to them long before, and they did a much better job than we did with them. And we found-- and then they had the girls that were fraternizing with German soldiers, they shaved their heads, and they had to walk around, you know, et cetera. Then we went, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember encounters with German prisoners of war? 

LEO GERECHTER: Not yet, not yet-- we-- the first time we encountered the German prisoners of war, no, we did not have any yet. The only thing we saw them being brought back. We did not do any fighting yet. We were just moving. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw them passing by? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, oh, yes. There was one time, a very, very interesting story, we were in a town. And there was about-- oh, it must have been about three, four tanks. We were in the couple weapons carriers, a couple Jeeps. 

And we were in the town. We were on the side of the road, resting. And all of a sudden, we see a German-- oh, about 30 or 40 German soldiers coming by on bicycles. And they were going into the-- into the-- they were going towards Germany. 

And then all of a sudden, and we couldn't do anything, because we were resting and we had no equipment to do anything, capture them and we-- we let them go. There was very-- it was a lot of confusion there. 

And then all of a sudden, we see an American column coming by, going the same directions. I just want to point out how mixed up everything was. And then the third column came by about 15 minutes later. It was again a German column. They were chasing each other, but they didn't see each other. 

Then later on, I understand, they made a stand somewhere in there. I mean, there was great confusion in the beginning, in the first two or three weeks of-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel as a Jew, seeing the Germans, through-- your first encounter with Germans-- 

LEO GERECHTER: The first encounter with Germans was with the German army. It was not with the German SS. It was the-- it was the Wehrmacht. And the first German encounter with the German Wehrmacht was, when in-- for me, was in Belgium, near Maastricht. Maastricht., I think, was the name of the town, in Belgium. 

There we made a stand. And we were fighting, and we captured German soldiers. Actually, there was no time for me to think that I'm-- there was no feeling at all, as far as I'm a Jew or this or that. There was just-- we were just going. 

And it was more of a survival thing. And we were-- we were at-- we were bringing those-- we were taking those Germans. They were riding. We-- we-- we were-- it must have been about a half a dozen. 

And we captured them. I-- it was my job to interview them to find out. They gave some information about how many people were in this particular-- in this particular company, and where they were going, and where they were coming. And we sent them back to the-- to the rear. And they-- the-- we turned them over to the MPs. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel talking to these Germans? You spoke to them in German? 

LEO GERECHTER: No, no particular feeling at that time yet. Like I said before, we were too busy. We were fighting. It was a survival. If you don't get them, they'll get you. 

And there was no time to think, you see. You know? You're-- you're talking about a very, very busy, busy, busy situation. 

Later on, as things get more organized, and our lines got more drawn, it was a little bit different. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But Mr. Gerechter, this is 1944 and the late summer. You-- 

LEO GERECHTER: No, that's in '45 already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '40-- 

LEO GERECHTER: '40. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's the-- 

LEO GERECHTER: That's late summer '44. That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This information about concentration camp and extermination camps, this-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Was not-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not available? 

LEO GERECHTER: --was not-- that we knew that there were concentration camp. We know that they were doing something. But it was not-- it came-- it became known-- it became known once we hit Holland. 

There-- and not from the Germans themselves-- but from the Dutch underground it was mentioned-- from the Dutch underground. We-- we were fighting. We were, uh-- we were-- I-- later on, after Holland, I think I got used to the idea of being in-- no, after Belgium, really. 

In Belgium, it started. That's where I really had my first contact with German. And where Germans were surrendering to us. That was-- I was I was asking them certain questions. 

And then I made damn sure that they knew that I was a German that had to leave Germany. I mentioned that to them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was their response, their reaction? 

LEO GERECHTER: Their response-- first, their response-- there were not any great surprise. The only surprise was that I was in the American army. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the moment, Interview, or encounter with one German? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, sure, sure. I-- I-- we-- we came by a-- a pill box. And there was a-- they were shooting at us. And we finally were dropping in a couple hand grenades. 

And two or three Germans came out. This is an interesting story, by the way, OK. We heard that they were German soldiers. 

But they were young people. They were very, very young. They were about 18, 19 years old. And they were-- and we were-- we were asking them where the rest of the troops were, where the-- how many people were in their company, where they-- they were. But they are rearguard action? 

Were they fighting a rearguard action? Were they fighting a delaying action? Was anything in front of us, you know? How many people? What kind of vehicles did they have? 

Well, they refused to give us any information. All they gave us is name, rank, and serial number. That was right in the beginning. And they didn't know-- we told them that the war is lost. You know, we are already here, there, and there. 

And they didn't believe it anyway. Because Hitler said, you know, they're going to make their last stand in here, and there, the first stand. And this is just a lot of propaganda. Just a couple troops get through, we just lucky. 

And because we were a little, little unit, you know. We must have been, maybe, about 14, 15 people ourselves. And sometimes we encountered 1,000 Germans, or vise versa, too. You know? 

It isn't, you know, it's not like you see in the movies, that you're evenly matched. You're not. You know? It doesn't work that way. 

But anyway, so-- so we decided we're going to give them their own medicine. We said, OK, you don't want to talk. You don't want to say anything. So you-- uh, I'll tell you what you do. You dig a hole. You dig a hole-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In German, you spoke? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, yes, of course. So, in German, dig a hole. We made them about six foot deep, made him dig. They knew exactly what we were trying to say. 

And we called the-- we called the-- we set up a machine gun. And said, OK, you don't tell us-- what's going to happen to you? We are going to shoot you, and that's it. 

Well, they called our bluff, the Germans. They called our bluff. They did not-- they did not-- they did not talk. 

So we backed down. We turned them over to the MPs. And whatever they did with them, I don't know. But that was a story that I thought then it was very great. Today, I don't think it was so great. 

But anyway, so uh-- actually, the more interesting thing is, you see, except for-- you see, I was never in hand-to-hand combat where I was fighting. You know, I never saw people I was shooting at. In other words, it, uh, you know, I wasn't infantry. 

Actually, my-- my-- my-- my-- really-- my really direct-- direct contact with Germans came when I was transferred to military government after we hit Berlin, after we hit Aachen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You went to Berlin? 

LEO GERECHTER: No, I-- no, I'm sorry. I-- I'm-- did I say Berlin? Aachen, I meant. I'm thinking. I was never in Berlin. I was-- I never got back to Berlin. When we went into-- we went into Aachen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That is what year now? 

LEO GERECHTER: That's still-- that's still '44. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, and was it after Holland? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah. From Holland, we went into Aachen, into the Rhineland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: By now, you knew what the fate of Jews were. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes, by now we knew. By now, we knew already. Because it came already back. Not from our army, but it came back from Patton's army that they found a-- a different concentration camp. There was one in Altdorf. In-- And there was one we knew already. We-- but I did not see any concentration camps yet. I saw, though, forced labor. That we did see. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, what did you see? 

LEO GERECHTER: We saw Russian, Ukrainians, Poles-- forced labor camps, we saw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like? Can you describe it? 

LEO GERECHTER: These forced labor camps-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

LEO GERECHTER: Just a big, big camp with barracks. People were not that badly treated, evidently. They did not look that bad. 

They had sort of a-- like a denim type, like a stripe type uniforms on. And they went to work in the different factories. And they looked very thin, very emaciated. 

But not-- and we talked to them, and they told us-- they told us stories, of course, that you know, if people didn't, you know, when they get sick, they wouldn't want to get sick. Because if they did get sick-- of course, there was a language problem, now. Because they talked Russian, and we had to have somebody that spoke a little English. And-- but they told us there-- one-- one person told us that once you got sick and you couldn't go to work, forget it. They took you and they just shipped you-- you out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, they didn't know where they shipped them to. They were just-- in other words, the people just disappeared, and they were-- that was the end of them. So they went to work, and they were sick, and people were covering for each other. 

And the people were, uh-- they were living in big, big barracks, and they took them, they marched them, let's say, maybe a mile or two miles away to-- to a factory where they were making-- I don't know what they were making. We didn't have the time, see we didn't stay long enough anywheres in any particular-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: As you began to find out from Patton's army-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And from the labor camps, what was happening to prisoners and to Jews? 

LEO GERECHTER: I was very, very scared about what happened to my-- what happened to my family. I started to realize that the chances of their survival was very, very slim, very slim. Because of-- of-- I knew my mother wouldn't survive. My mother was very, very nearsighted. You know? 

My sister-- I didn't know what happened. I knew one of them was in Poland. Two of them were still in Germany. 

My oldest and my youngest sister-- I don't know what happened. All I know is that my older sister wrote me just shortly before my-- before my correspondence stopped that she is going to go to Israel on the Sonder Hachsharah, on this particular legal transport. So evidently, it was even still going throughout the war, that thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm. 

LEO GERECHTER: The Germans-- for some reason or the other, they didn't stop anybody from leaving. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When-- when you began-- well, so you were hoping that maybe they left? 

LEO GERECHTER: Right. Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you began to wonder, did your feelings for the Germans change? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. I-- now I never had any love for them. I still don't have any today. I-- I-- the thing is, we took-- I was very, very happy if somebody else did something to the Germans, when they were beaten, when they were-- you know, lost a battle, or I saw German soldiers. 

It made me-- I had no-- no sad feeling at all, entirely different than when we saw an American soldier that was hurt or anything. I never stopped and I never stopped that, at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were happy when somebody else did something? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about you yourself? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, yeah, I did not stop it. I did not stop it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But how about you yourself? 

LEO GERECHTER: I can-- I did not. I did not do anything physically to anybody. But I saw other people doing something, and I was in position to stop it, and I did not because of rank. And I did not stop it. 

There was a case later on where we went that was already after I worked as a de-Nazification expert. I went into a town-- I forgot the name, a small village. And there was this German young fellow. He must've been about 23, 24. And we knew. And he had a German Wehrmacht uniform on. And we knew that he must have been, you know, but it was already-- it was already late in the war. And it was already complete chaos in Germany, and he surrendered to us. 

And we-- and they we-- we had orders to look for Waffen-SS men. And this particular fellow, and he knew, once you were, you know, those were the people they were looking for. The Russians were looking for them. We were looking for them. Everybody was looking for them. 

And they denied that they were. But they have a certain mark on their-- I think it was their left arm. They have a little tattoo they had, identification mark. 

Well, this fellow, we asked him. He was on a bicycle. He had a bicycle. He must have stolen it from somebody. He had a bicycle. 

And he came in, and he said he wants to give up. He doesn't want to go back fighting. He is not a official. We were wondering what he was doing in the town-- nothing. He just happened to come through, and he heard the war is lost anyway, et cetera. 

We asked him, do you belong to the SS? And he said no. So we ask him again, you're sure? Yeah. We said, take off your shirt. 

And there was a long, long warehouse room, like long room. And there was another fellow with me. He was from Brooklyn. 

I can't think of his name. He was a Jewish fellow. He was a butcher by trade, I-- was a redheaded fellow. And lo and behold, he took off his shirt, and there was that-- there was that sign. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To do with the Waffen-SS. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, that little-- little-- well, I don't know what you call those, arrows like-- like a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Insignia. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, it's like a-- you know, like a-- yeah, they have the double, two of them next together. Well, this guy, he had an M1 rifle. Well, he took that rifle, and he just smashed that rifle into that Nazi's face. This fellow was flying about-- uh, and we were given orders, by the way-- no-- no abuse. 

Except when we crossed the Rhine, there was orders given-- no prisoners taken. This is not well-known, but anybody that crossed the Rhine will tell you that. Uh, uh, anyway, so this guy, he lost all his teeth. I'll never forget that, either. 

But I had no feeling for sadness for the man. As a matter of fact, it was just just great joy that somebody, at least, that he got his-- his comeuppance, you know? So-- so anyway, we went, and we went into towns. And it was our job to go-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Aachen-- You're-- 

LEO GERECHTER: In Aachen, yes. We were in Aachen-- And Aachen was a-- was a very, very-- it was one of the first German big cities to be captured by the American troops. It was a very, very-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Actually, that was crossing-- the after crossing the Rhine? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, that was yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And was there anything special in crossing the Rhine for you? 

LEO GERECHTER: Not for us. The-- the-- the bridge was already-- the bridge was already-- the Remagen bridge was captured already. And we already went-- we didn't go over the bridge. We already had the platoons on the-- on the river, and we were going across. 

And the-- after Aachen they-- Aachen was on the bottom of a hill. And there was on top of the hill-- there was a-- there was a-- there was a street-- streetcar barn. So somebody had the great idea they're going to load this thing with dynamite and send it down the hill. 

And as it heads downtown, it's going to make a shambles of it. That was our revenge, like. In other words, you know, we couldn't-- we-- we-- we weren't able to do anything direct. 

But indirectly, we didn't care, you know? We were shooting into, you know, any, anything we saw. We were shooting at. 

But nothing where you take somebody, and-- you know that-- you have to be a certain-- certain type of a person. That's got to be born into you. I don't think that can be taught. Maybe it can. I don't know. 

But anyway, so there, that was the experience in Aachen. From there on, we went into-- we went on. We did some fighting in the Hürtgen Forest, which we-- which we finally captured. 

We took some prisoners there. And they were interviewed again and sent back to the rear. And then, I don't know what happened to them really. 

Basically, that was-- but the interesting part starts when I was transferred to military government. There I felt now I can pull my weight around. Now I'm the boss. 

We came into a town. We had to-- we had to come in first to-- to go. We had a list. A list was given to us to-- to look for this and this person, this and this person, this and this person. 

And that has to be done real, real fast. The town sometimes was not completely secured by us. We had to-- we had maps. We had to find those places and get the so-called Gauleiter German officials, Bürgermeister, et cetera, et cetera. 

And then find out who they were and why. So one time-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And those were the Nazi? 

LEO GERECHTER: Those were the Nazis? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's the official. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. That's the official. But those things usually happened at three or four o'clock in the morning, for some-- or five o'clock in the morning. We started out usually at three or four o'clock in the morning. By the time we got to the place, it was five o'clock, 5:30. 

So one time, we go into a-- we come into a place. And we always, you know, great precautions were taken. Somebody knocked on the door, and somebody was standing there with this-- with the Thompson submachine gun at the ready in case somebody was giving us any problems. 

Well, we knock on the door, and there was this three people sitting, having breakfast. A woman-- oh, I would say about middle age. Of course, then I was 19, 20 years old, so everybody was middle age. [LAUGHS] 

But-- so there was a woman and a man sitting there. And a-- and a young fellow about my age, about 18, 19. I forgot the name. At this point, it escapes me what his name was. 

We ask, are you mm-- heir so and so-- and you know they saw us, and they knew already what we were there for. And-- and right away, the father said, it's him you want. 

And the son said, no, you don't want me. You want him. So in other words, they were, you know, saving their own skin. 

That was the great German hero. You know, when-- when the chips were down, all of a sudden. We didn't know what to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The father? 

LEO GERECHTER: The father said he was the head Nazi, the head honcho. And the son said, you were the-- you know. So we didn't know what to do. So we took them both just to be sure. We shipped them back, and I don't know what happened there. 

The next great thing is what we-- we came in. We were told there's a German general hiding. And I never forget, a German general von Kleist. Not a particularly famous general, just a-- and he was hiding in a farm house. And he was the-- he was about the biggest fish I captured myself, with other people, of course. 

And we-- he had a very nice car. I remember that he had a Mercedes Benz, which we, of course, took over. And I took away his-- he had a diamond-studded pistol. 

I don't think it was diamonds. I think it was rhinestones, but I thought it was diamond. I took that from him. He didn't need it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you capture him? Do you-- 

LEO GERECHTER: He was hiding in a farmhouse. And we surrounded the farmhouse. And we were hollering, you know, for him to come out. And he came out, him and two aides came out, no fight. 

But as I said before, it was already-- then it was already '45. You know? And '45 was already maybe March, April '45 the war was already-- you spoke German to those-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --Germans? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you said you-- you let them know? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, the-- the-- some of them ask how come you speak German so well? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did-- 

LEO GERECHTER: I told them. I was born in Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you say? 

LEO GERECHTER: You threw me out. And now I'm coming back to get even with you. Well, then the first answer was, I didn't do anything. I didn't know anything. I didn't do this. I didn't do this. 

We were-- interesting story was-- we were near-- near Dachau. There was a-- I go back now a few, maybe a few weeks or a few months. Again, timing is a little bit off. 

We were there. We-- Dachau was already captured. I think Patton's army captured it. But we-- we were-- we came by maybe two or three days later-- no, a week later, a week later. 

And when you were away from there about 10 or so miles, you could smell the odor of burnt-- burnt flesh has a very distinct smell. This is the thing that you learn when you're in the service. I wished I would have to learn. But it had a very distinct smell. And we were talking, I was talking to Germans there. And nobody's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the town of Dachau? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, outside of Dachau, maybe, I don't know what the name of it was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The town is named Dachau. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, yeah, but there, we was outside of Dachau-- not even Dachau, but outside of Dachau, you could smell it. Like I said, you know, a few miles away. It must have been a suburb of Dachau, maybe. 

And then nobody knew what was going on. A matter of fact, I remember asking them. Didn't you see the poor people, you know? When they brought them, you know, because they brought them into town, they had to work. Couldn't you see? 

No, we didn't see anything. That their excuse was they didn't know anything. They didn't hear anything. They didn't know anything. 

Nothing was known to them. So-- so-- but I didn't have anything to do with them. I didn't do anything. We went into Dachau, and that was a-- was a-- quite a-- that was quite a experience. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, I saw people walking around then already. They took over. Because there was no-- very few Germans were left. But they took the townspeople, and they made them clean up. 

And the only ones, the ones I saw, was the-- the strong people. The ones that either weren't there that long yet, or somehow they were able to manage to get some extra rations or whatever it was. But you could see that they were-- mal-- what do you call it? Undernourished. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Malnutrition? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, you could see that. Because you know, you get a distinct pallor. You get a distinct look. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the beginning, you said you were too busy. You couldn't think about what your family might have encountered? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, I was-- no, no, no, I did-- I-- we were too busy to particular think how I would think as a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about now? 

LEO GERECHTER: I was thinking as an American. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about now? 

LEO GERECHTER: Now was it-- like I said, now the thing was a little different. We were already-- we were already more organized. We were-- it was our job to-- to get a government going in a particular town. It was our job to get a-- to get civil authority back, to give them-- to give them so they can buy food, you see. It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: But how about you and your family? What were you thinking about now with your family? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, my family-- I did not know what happened. Once I was settled in a town permanently, which was Bogen in Bavaria, that was my town that was assigned to me as the military governor. OK? Once I was settled there, then I tried to find out what happened to my family. 

I asked-- I heard that all the Jews from Berlin are going to be in Theresien. They're in Theresienstadt, which is a-- which was a very, very showplace. I-- so it wasn't captured by us, but it was captured by the Russians. And I-- I got special permission from the commanding general to go into-- because we were only maybe 75 miles away from there or so, but two, three hour ride by Jeep. 

And I got a special Jeep. I was issued a Jeep. And I was issued gas. I was granted permission to go into Theresienstadt. It was-- I went in and two other fellows, Lieutenant [? [GERMAN] ?] and a fellow by the name of [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your rank? 

LEO GERECHTER: My rank was staff sergeant. I was able to-- and because we heard this, and I mentioned that to the commanding general-- I can't think of his name now, but it doesn't matter. And he was very, very sympathetic. And I had a special pass. 

And the Russians gave us permission to go through their lines. And that days, we were very friendly with them anyway. And I went into Theresienstadt. 

Well, what I found in Theresienstadt was very, very interesting. The-- were-- the Germans are very precise. They keep records of everything. 

They had big, big books of all the people that were there, that all the people that came from here, that all the people that came from there. Needless to say, I could not find my family's name there. But I found my name, my last name there. 

I found-- in other words it turned out to be-- it was my father's brother. He came from Breslau. And he was in a concentration camp, and he went from-- from Dachau to Theresienstadt. Also he heard that the Berlin Jews are going to be-- most of them were sent to Theresienstadt and there's a chance that his relatives, you know, maybe, would be there. 

And he entered his name. You know, everybody had to enter their name. And they kept the books. No, that's the-- the-- the concentration camp was still run by Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At this point? 

LEO GERECHTER: At this point. But it was under the supervision of the Russian. But I guess they felt that-- them-- probably most of the people that ran it were Jews, I would imagine. They were former inmates. They ran it. 

Because I saw the-- the-- the-- the guards. They were doing the work there now, the manual labor. So I imagined. I did not ask. 

I asked and they told me and they showed me. Yes, he was here. He entered his name. But my particular uncle left a couple days before I was there. So I did not meet him. But it was an interesting thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He came there after the liberation? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Looking? Where was he during-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Everybody was going. In those-- in those days, when the war was almost over or it was over already, practically, everybody was looking. Everybody was looking. I can tell you an interesting story in Bogen. 

I was, you know, I mentioned it before. I was the-- I was in charge. I was the military governor of Bogen. 

And we were the military government of Bogen. And there-- and we were-- there was no other American soldier around. We were four soldiers holding a town of about oh, 15, 20,000 people. 

And there was nobody around. So one day, we-- this just shows that the confusion-- the war was almost over. It was already now-- now it was already May, April, May. All of a sudden, a-- of a-- a car pulls up. It was-- it was a German staff car. 

A German colonel comes out with a white flag. He comes out. He wants to talk to the commanding officer. Well, all we had was me and a Second Lieutenant. But he was a-- he was a Colonel. 

So I said, what-- what do you want? Well, he says, about five miles down the line, there's a German Panzer division ready to surrender. Now mind you, there was a division with maybe 30 tanks, 50 weapon carriers, maybe about five, 6,000 men. 

They wanted to surrender. But he will not surrender to us. He will only surrender to a-- to an officer of equal rank. Well, that's all I needed. 

That's all, as it happened, this-- the lieutenant that was also now was also Jewish, Lieutenant [? [GERMAN]. ?] Well, that's all he needed to say. We told him that if he doesn't surrender, white flag or not, he's not going back to his people. 

He said he's not looking for a fight. He says, well, we're only four men here. But we got about 1,000 men outside in the woods there. But we didn't have them. And he knew that, too. I mean, don't let, you know. But we thought at that time, that was the right thing to say. 

Well, he-- he-- that-- they happened to be SS. And they were running from the Russians. They did not want to surrender to the Russians, because the Russians were looking for this particular division. They did something to the Russians in Stalingrad, which we later on found out. 

Well, we didn't know what to do. We called headquarters. And they told us-- probably some person there, I don't know who it was-- told us take the surrender. So how do you-- how do you-- how take four people take a surrender of maybe about six, 7,000 men? 

Well, just to bring back-- well, we told them to bring their division into-- there was a big, big market square-- to bring their division into the market square. And they have to police themselves. The-- the-- the-- their cannons have to be turned around. But they're noncommissioned officers can keep their weapons. And everything else has to be turned over. 

Which they came in-- they came in very quietly. They stayed in the town. But then the next day, a couple of MPs came, maybe 50 or 100 MPs and they pulled them out and they took them back. 

The reason why I mention that, it was very interesting that, you know, the war-- the-- the-- the war was almost over, and they realized it now. That so many people-- and I want to point out is the confusion, that so many people could surrender to four people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To four American soldiers, two of whom were Jews? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, right exactly, exactly. Two were Jews. One of was Polish, [? Blazak. ?] And [INAUDIBLE] I don't know what he was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now you describe entering two concentration camps, Dachau and Theresienstadt. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah. There was a big difference between Dachau and concentration camp. Dachau-- Dachau was a camp-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you feel? 

LEO GERECHTER: It was a camp that you-- it's like you see on television. I mean, Theresienstadt was a-- actually, it was a ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel entering Dachau? 

LEO GERECHTER: Oh, what I felt? Oh, I-- very sad, very sad, very, very sick, extremely sick. Again, that you know, if I would get a hold of a German, any German, don't make any difference, I would just kill them, just do something to get your-- because there was nothing we could do. Because we talk to people. We-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You talked to whom? 

LEO GERECHTER: To inmates. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you say? 

LEO GERECHTER: Well, I told them who I was. And that, you know, and the first thing they ask, you know, how come you speak German? I told them right away that I was Jewish. We made it very, very clear. 

As a matter of fact, we-- we had a-- somehow I had a little, you know, the star, like. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The star that they sewed to their clothes? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, I had that. I pinned that on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You picked that up? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, I picked it up. They-- they-- once somebody gave it to me. I don't remember anymore who did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your yellow star? 

LEO GERECHTER: I think I gave it to you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, I have it. 

LEO GERECHTER: That little yellow-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Someone in your travels gave you the yellow star? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, somewhere in my travels. I don't remember any more where it was. It might have been in France. It might have been-- somebody gave it to me, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you put it on? 

LEO GERECHTER: And I carried that with me for some reason or the other. Because I thought it was a very smart thing to wear when I talked to Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, you would put it on. 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, I put it on my uniform. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You put on a Jewish star while you interviewed-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, it says-- it's a Jewish yellow star that said Jude on there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: God. 

INTERVIEWER 2: While you interrogated the Germans? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yes. Yes, sure. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they-- how did they respond to that? 

LEO GERECHTER: Uh, sort of-- they didn't-- they didn't see it. They didn't notice it. They didn't notice it. So little things like this we did. 

That was my way of getting-- getting, you know, my way of taking a revenge. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Getting the message across? 

LEO GERECHTER: Ya, right. So anyway, we wore that. I wore that there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You wore that in the camp-- in the Dachau camp? 

LEO GERECHTER: Yeah, yeah. And then they say, oh, why do you wear this? I said, I'm a I'm a Jew. Oh, well, then, of course, you know? It was very good. 

Some of them spoke German. Some of them didn't speak German. We took people that spoke-- spoke Yiddish only. We had people there that spoke other languages, Ukrainian, whatever it is. 

And then they told us, of course, stories. That-- an interesting story they told us-- a lot of the guards in the concentration camps were not Germans, which people shouldn't forget that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the German camps? 

LEO GERECHTER: They were-- in the German-- they were Ukrainians, an awful, awful lot. This is very important to remember. And they weren't forced to be guards, like they-- because I just recently read some trial there of some Ukrainian. 

I couldn't believe what this person said about him. That he was a guard. He said he was forced or whatever it was. Don't anybody ever believe that. They were volunteers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did a Jew in Dachau say to you come again and you-- 

LEO GERECHTER: Great love. And you know, great-- great gratitude, great gratitude, great, great love, great-- you know, they didn't know. And of course, they were-- all they wanted to was to get out of there. Can we go, and you know, can we get out of here? 

And those-- everybody wanted to go to Israel, Palestine then. There was a great desire to go to Palestine and America. But I think it was, almost, I would say more people wanted to go then to Palestine than to anywheres else. They called it Palestine then. And if it wasn't greater desire, it was about a 50-50 desire. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you enter any other camps? 

LEO GERECHTER: No. I did not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what went through your mind crossing the gate about-- 

LEO GERECHTER: What I remember is I was crying when I went through. It was just-- it was a feeling of-- of-- of your heart pounding, of your-- not-- of-- of great disbelief, actually. That can't be, you know? You always went around pinching yourself, saying that can't be. You heard those stories. You know, you hear things. But that can't be. The Germans were supposed to be civilized. They didn't do that. They didn't do things like that. They were a civilized people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know, in all you mentioned, there was not one time of an encounter, face-to-face-- 

[BANGING NOISE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: We have to change reels. --with an SS man. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, there was. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I I know-- 

