JACOB FLASHENBURG: --thank you people. So, what have I from my life? That man is in East Germany free. You know, that killer. His name was Rokita, Untersturmfuhrer Rokita. He was a pianist. You know, he killed Jews like-- I couldn't-- you wouldn't believe it. When somebody has cockroaches he wants to kill them out, he can't kill so quick like he was killing the people. Terrible. Therefore, I decide to throw me on the wires, you know. What will I stay here? For what? They took away my children. Haven't got anyone. 

I got a cousin over there. His name-- his mother married a man, his name was Schreiber. You know, before 60, 70 years ago when a girl was married to someone, such a rabbi gave the blessing, you know, and says a few words and that's all. And this was not good, you know, because she has her maiden name. And her children got her maiden name, you know. And my father's sister was married that way. 

And her son-- her sons-- you know, one is in Israel. He lived through-- the youngest. He lived through in Russia. 'Cause they draft him, the Russians draft him. 1941, they took him away to Russia. He's in Israel. But his brother, an older brother, his name was like my name, Jacob Flashenburg. You know? Because otherwise, he should have a name Schreiber, you know? Because her husband's name was Chaim Schreiber. And he didn't-- he couldn't use his father's name, because in the papers it was different. He used his mother's name. His mother's name was Bessie Flashenburg, you know? I mean, it was Bessie. 

So-- I saw when they kill him. And I was standing there. I was standing-- they pull-- they sent people to the Jewish cemetery to take out the stones, you know, all the granites. You know what means the granite stone. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. You know, a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. You don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: You know what means [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The headstone. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, I don't. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: A stone, when somebody dies, they put him a stone-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, the headstone. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: --with the name. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A headstone. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: The headstone, yeah. The headstone. = They took off from the Jewish cemetery the headstones, and they built a road from this. You know? So my cousin was in the middle. I have got two cousins. One was a wider cousin, you know, but. His mother was related to my father. Sorry, a third cousin, or a second cousin-- a second cousin, you know. And they was keeping each other-- holding together when I was-- when I came over there. 

Two or three days later, they sent them out. He was in another group, and I was in another group. You know? So they sent him out with a truck-- a full truck of people. And the truck hit, I think, a trolley car. Just a little bad. Nothing happened to them. To They took back the truck, back to the concentration camp. They tell the driver to slowly to pick up the truck-- the people has to come down on the floor. You know how they open the truck, they lift it. 

This Rokita took a machine gun. He killed them out and that's all. I saw when they kill him. I couldn't do anything. What can I do? I was crying. My heart was crying. Like today. He was 36 year old. 36 year old. Had a wife and two children, the same thing. Intelligent boy. I really used to love him. More than I loved my brother, believe me. Just-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are there any other Flashenburgs? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Yeah. I have a brother here in the United States. But he was here in the United-- he went way in 1932. He married a girl. A girl-- she-- she was from our country, but from another town, by Lemberg. Drohobych. And she came over. She was in America five years when she got citizenship. She decided to go back to find a boy. So she find my brother. 

INTERVIEWER 2: One of the-- we're not taping right now. I'll tell you when to begin, OK? One of the very big perplexities, questions in people's minds are how the person caught in the concentration camp situation could possibly have survived. You tell me when. Are you rolling? OK. The question is, in what way were people able to nourish, feed their souls, their hearts? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Some people were strong. Inside they hold the doubt. You know? No matter what, in some people-- even when they look at them, you see, you know he's a strong man, and he was weak. For hunger, he died. You know? That's all. And I will tell you, everything is a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. It means a destination. One has to live, and one has to die. And that's all. I believe in God. It's just a destination. 

[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 

That's all. This is in Jewish called. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you hear people singing songs to keep their spirits up? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Nobody-- nobody was singing over there in the concentration camps. Everyone was going-- I remember in 1944, I was already in Linz. On Yom Kippur, they brought food for us, you know. Because it was Yom Kippur, they want to break us, you know. 

Such pieces of meat, you know. And between the meat was pieces of, um, I don't know, like-- not noodles, but big pieces of something. A paste cooked inside with maybe that meat. Such a heavy soup that, uh, when you would put in a piece of wood, it wouldn't fell down. It would stay, you see? And this, um-- how you call it? Plums inside in between that soup. 

The soup probably so good. I never taste it. I knew it is Yom Kippur. I shouldn't eat. You know, I went hungry. I didn't took my coffee, I didn't took nothing. Just when they pour us-- everyone has a pan here, you know, on a string here. Took this pan and put down to give you a meal. Once a day they gave some soup. 

And this day, they give a heavy soup with meat, and with-- with, like, a lot of paste inside. Instant noodles, you know. And with plums. Such heavy plums, you know. Somewhere from Yugoslavia, brought from there. 

I put it away between-- I got such a stock room with, uh, this-- with boards, you know. Because I was working as a carpenter, you know. A carpenter I was work. I put it away. Somebody took it, and took-- took it away. I didn't eat. The next day in the morning, I got a black coffee. That's all. I was fasting. I was fasting, not 24 hours, 36 hours. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mean the Germans, the SS brought food on Yom Kippur-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: On Yom Kippur. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --to tempt you? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did many people resist the food? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Some people eat. Yeah. But I didn't eat. I believe it is Yom Kippur, an I knew it is Yom Kippur. And you know what? When we came over from work-- so one of this man of our people knows a little more. You know, praying outside. Yom Kippur prays, you know. He start to pray. We were sitting with him and pray with him together. But after him, we says the same words. We said the same words as he. I'm praying. I knew it is Yom Kippur. I didn't eat. I was fasting 36 hours. 

I'm not-- I was not so-- too religious, but Yom Kippur, I never ate. Since I was 10 years old, I got-- my father kept to me such a rabbi to teach me Hebrew. He wants me to know. He come to my house. I will show you [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] I have. Torah, Nevi'im, Ketuvim, Tanach. The whole history, the Jewish history, in Hebrew and in English. I will show you such a book. Such a heavy book. But I'm not from. I like to know it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think that your praying and your concern about your Jewishness was what helped you? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: It doesn't help me, but, listen, I believe in it and that's all. I believe in my Jewish religion , that's all. I'm not too from, I am not crazy, like some of the Hasidim, you know. But I'm praying. When the time comes, I'm going to pray. Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur. When I have the days of my parents-- when my parents die, so I'm going for Kaddish, you know. I'm giving for, you know, for the synagogue some money. It means tsedakah. Tsedakah, this is a Hebrew word. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mr. Flashenburg, some people who survived the concentration camps, as you did, don't believe in God anymore. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I know. It is a lot of them. Such. But I believe. And I believe that God saved me. My father-- I saw my father, I saw my mother when I was in the worst time. You see, I want to show you something. This is the bunker. You see? It has four corners. In all corners, fell a bomb and didn't touch the bunker. How could I not believe? And I saw my mother came to me. She says to me, don't worry. Nothing will happen to you. And I believe, and that's all. I believe it is a God who will save the Jewish people. I believe in Israel. He will be safe too. You will see. Nothing will happen to Israel. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said, I think, that one of the thoughts that sustained you was that you wanted to stay alive to see Hitler destroyed. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Yeah. That's all what I wish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is it you wished? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: So when I was liberated, a day later they told me that Hitler was-- killed-- his chauffeur killed him. And he burned him. That's all. That's what I saw. It is another thing here. When I would be a native American, I would fight in America for this. They have 200,000 illegal people here in the United States. SS people, Nazis. Why they keeping them here? Why they keeping them here? 

You see, a few weeks ago they find one. He was in Treblinka there in a concentration camp. They took him-- he's in jail already here. A few months ago-- a few months or a year or two-- two years ago, they took away a woman from here to Germany. She was married to an American man-- a gentleman, yeah? So she got there for life. She has the jail for life over there. The Germans gave them-- gave her. Why they keep here 200,000 SS people, Nazis? Why? It's not far from Chicago. 

But I cannot do anything. I am a United States citizen, but I'm naturalized. I can't do anything. I would be born here in this country, I would-- I would organize all the Jews to do it, to make demonstrations against these people. These people got to go out from here-- from the United States. They poisoned all the towns here. What they doing? They robbed the tourists from the synagogues. They do everything. 

Some day, I'm afraid, it will come the same thing with us in the time from Hitler in Germany. That's what I'm afraid. I wouldn't like to see it in my life. I would rather die today, you know, and not to see the Jewish people has to be hurt again. Six million people, they kill. Why? 'Cause they wanted to? The same thing they're doing now, a big thing with Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia wants to kill all the Jews in Israel. Why? When they kill the Jews in Israel, they would will here to kill them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you-- what do you feel now about the Germans? What do you feel about-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I don't feel anything. I don't feel-- I don't like to see them. I don't like German. I don't-- when I hear they speak German someone came in here tourists. I'm keeping away from them. I don't like them. I can't do anything because I'm a naturalized citizen. I'm an old man. What can I do? But the young generations have to do it. The young people. 

You should hear two days ago on Donahue's Hour between 9 and 10 o'clock how people were talking about this, about that Nazis. Even about Israel they were talking, what's going on in Israel. I don't want to give the-- Israel paid already for these-- for these airplanes. I don't want to give them because the PLO-- they want to help the PLO against the Jews. Why? It's the only democratic country over there. And this is a democratic country too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't-- you lived in a German territory. You didn't live in Poland, is that right? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I live in Poland, in Galicia. It was-- it was before Austria. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I see. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I was born an Austrian. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your brother had left the country. You knew what was happening in Europe. Why didn't you leave? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I didn't-- my brother left the country before the war, before Hitler came. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: You see, he married in 1929. You know? And she took him away, it was already 1932. And how could I go? I didn't need to go. He was the Depression. And I got prognosis of a-- I make $30,000 a year, and sometimes more, sometimes less. You know? I could live there for this money. My other child has my wife, you know, got the other child-- she got a cesarean. So I took her right away a woman who got the child for herself, you know, to feed this child, to gave it-- you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A wet nurse. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Yeah. So I got all this I made in the house. And I got the brother-in-law in the house. He came from the Austrian war. He was a little-- he was covered with soil, and he was not-- he was not healthy. What could I do? I didn't know she has a brother. When I-- she-- when I know her, when I-- you know, when they introduced me her, she says she has a brother. But she-- the brother is married. Later he divorce his wife. 

His child was coming to my house. Not to see him. Because I was supporting this child too, you know? She was playing with my children. It was so nice the little girl too. And I bought for my children this coats, or shoes, or dresses, I was buying for her too. Because he was doing nothing. He couldn't support his child. You know, it was-- I liked this child. Was a nice little kid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you felt you couldn't leave because-- you felt you couldn't leave because you had too much responsibility? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: Listen, a as long as my mother was living-- later I got a younger girl in my house, her sister. My brother got engaged with a girl, and later her father broke up with him. He took by him some money away, and later he says he don't want him. So he came to me again and was in my house. My youngest brother, he was already got a good job. He was a decorator, you know. But my sister, I met her with her husband. She was living in Poland, but in another part, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But did you know that things were getting very bad for Jews in Europe? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know that things-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I know and-- no. We don't know. We don't believe that Hitler will come in to us. When they start to send out people born in Poland, they send them back to Poland, then we know, but it was too late. We couldn't do anything. I would know in 1930 and 1932 that this will come, I could go away. You know where? I had a passport. To go away to Wellington, to New Zealand. You know? 

But you know how it is. When you have your income, you cannot leave everything like this and go away. I made a living over there, a beautiful living. For not the war, I would be in dollars a millionaire. You know, because I have it a part of mine too. Except this. But nobody's alive. This everything belongs to Russia now. That good Russia. They killed many people-- many Jewish people too. Don't worry. 

It's nothing good to talk about this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: I remember the time-- I remember-- oh, you want to make-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Keep going. I thought you had stopped. Go ahead. We'll continue till the tape runs. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: The time from Russia when I came into our country. They took away stores, they took away-- if somebody has nice furniture, they took away the furniture. God knows what they did. It was a lot of Jewish boys-- Russian Jewish boys between them. And nobody says for a Jewish man, not this way. Not nothing. 

I told you about I got a man who brought for me rocks to build a road, yeah? He got two horses of his own. So the Russians came in, they says, he don't pay tax to the Pollacks. He says, I paid the tax. No, you don't pay. Come on. They arrest him. And to make him on trial, took him away to Russia to jail. He's now in Israel. He was living in Montreal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So in a sense-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: His name was-- was Moishe Howard. A nice young man, believe me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So are you-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: A fine man. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you saying, Mr. Flashenburg, that in a way, the Jews of Poland, the Jews of Austria were used to having people hurt them? They were accustomed to a certain-- 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: In the time from Austria, the first amendment was the religion. You know, I remember, I'm going-- I was working in our house before it was no cars. You know. When I was a kid, before the First War, it was no cars. The people, business people, they have to go out from one town to the other, and it was no railroads some places-- some towns, you know. Have to go by horse. We got horses and a carriage, if somebody was working with his horses, yeah. 

And, you know, a pharmacist's son was working by us. And once he got drunk and came in on Sunday morning. He was Friday paid off. Monday he has to come to work. A Sunday he come home to-- to us. He wants money. He says, what kind of a money comes to you from me. I paid you Friday. He don't want to know. He wants his money. He was drunk a little. 

He says to my father, you know what? You got this wearing red pants. You know, the devil. My father went in the next day to a lawyer and made him a case. You know he got six months of this word? Six months in the time from Austria. 

We were free people in the time from Austria, you know? It was very good. My friend. Very good. There was not a difference. I go, I eat. It was not a difference. The same rights. It was a very good time. 90 years, you haven't got any wars in Austria. For 90 years. It's a free country, democratic. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But yet you had pogroms. 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: No, no-- not in-- not in-- not in Galicia, no. In Russia, they had pogroms by the czar. But not by us. They used to run away to come to us. You see? The Russian Jews. In our town was a few musicians who came over from Russia. Because they run away by the pogroms. But not by Austria. Oh, no. 

Listen, I'm not a youngster. I remember. Before the war, I was already almost 14 years old. I never heard. You see, sometimes, you know, when they draft people to the army. In the middle of the town, someone went and grabbed something from a stand. A Jew got a stand, you know. He got hit like hell for this. He couldn't grab anything. A goy got their heads for yeet, you know? You couldn't do anything to a Jew. 

Listen, high officer's a cousin of my first wife. It was was a general in the Austrian Army. You know, his name was Paul Schiffman. A general in the Austrian Army. But he was already an old man in this time. 

I can't complain of Austria before. What happened after the war, you know, I wasn't living anymore there. I was not-- then I was a Pollack, because the Polish-- a Polish general took over the part. Pilsudski was his name. And I was a Polish citizen. I was four times in the Polish army. In the war time, and after the war for basic two years, and then twice maneuvers I have to six weeks. 25 and 26. 

We haven't got any pogroms. No. Russia has pogroms. I heard it. Look, it was people that have to go to the army for three years. They didn't want to go to the army. They run away to the United States. They run away. They run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was life for you when you came to the United States? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How was life for you when you came to the United States? 

JACOB FLASHENBURG: It was not so easy, I will tell you the truth. You know? When I come to work, a joint used to send me to give me a ticket to go to work, you know. I came once to work. I didn't have a profession, you know. I was never working for someone. You know? I was a contractor. I got 60, 80 people daily, sometimes more, working for me, you know. It's every Saturday, I'm paying their salary what they made. 

When I came over here, I had to do something. So some people came over to me and tell me, you go to be an operator. What means an operator? I didn't know what means this. You know? I spoke-- I spoke English because I learned English. I had somebody here in the United States. I have to write him a letter in English, you know? From my father's family. So I got a letter once, I couldn't answer this letter. I didn't know what it means, you know. I took a course for a couple weeks, you know. And I-- and I got it. And I answered the letter. 

So what I want to tell you. I came over to the man to work. He gave me a machine, and showed-- he showed me how to work. So I'm not-- I was not a dummy, you know. In a minute, I was working on this, you know? So I make in town 600 sleeve linings a day. When he gave me a half a penny for a sleeve lining, I could make $8 a day. You know? But he wants me to work for $1 a day. 

And I-- and the law was $0.65 has to make a refugee a day-- an hour, you know. He don't want to pay this money, $0.65. He claims when he come to the United States, he was-- he was carrying-- he sell machine, you know. And I haven't got my machine, so he hasn't-- I have to work for him for $1. You know? 

And I took this-- I was working seven working days for him, you know. The first time, I was working four days. Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. So I hoped he will pay me the next week, you know. The next week I was working again three days, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. And I says, listen, mister, I need a few dollars. I haven't got for what to live. I have a wife and a child. I have to support them. 

He called the-- the office, the girl. Nancy, come here. Write down for the next week $4. I says, for what you give me $4? What will I do with $4? For four days, you have $4. What could I do? I says, no, I don't want it. So pay him-- give him another $3. So she wrote me two checks, one for $3, one or $4. 

I took the checks and I went to the joint where they sent me for work. I was a stranger here, after all. I was speaking English, but I was a stranger. You know? I just came to New York. And I gave them the $7, and I says, look at it. He gave me for a week's work, for seven days' work. $7? So they call him up. And they want-- they start to argue with him. 

He was a big [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], you know. He was from West Galicia from somewhere. Went away. He doesn't want to go to the army, you know, when he was young. So you went to the United States. Probably-- I didn't know what happened to him, but they sent me to him. He asked for a man, you know? They sent me to him. What could I know? 

So I didn't belong to the union in this time, nothing. Up to today, I didn't take the $7 back. I find another job right away in the same building. They gave me $28 a week, instead-- instead for seven days $7, you know. For five days, they gave me $28. And later, $32, and-- this was at $0.65 an hour. 

