INTERVIEWER 1: So you want to begin again-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: With the Altestes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. You want me to tell one day in the camp, right? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: OK. OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: One day in a camp was like we has to wake up 4 o'clock in the morning for appell. We didn't have to do anything all day. They could let us-- at least 6 o'clock, like. But they didn't do anything human. 

They just wanted us to be, uh, inhuman. I don't know. OK. So these are some Blockalteste and Lageralteste. They came to wake us up. 

People who were there much earlier than we were. They were in a position that they were sort of the boss. The Germans only came when it was appell. Only the guards were around the fence with the machine gun. 

So we woke up at 4 o'clock. We had to go to appell. with [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] black coffee. Stood there until they counted how many people. Now, it was 13,000 people-- very difficult to count. Because one is in the hospital. The other one is-- they had positions like going to clean up the SS rooms. 

And they were not there for appell. So they always made mistakes, and we had to stand there and stand there. Let me tell you why we-- why was Auschwitz chosen for this concentration camp. Because it would not-- they would not be able to grow anything in this place. 

In the morning-- in the day it was very hot. In the night, it was freezing. The temperature change would not allow them to grow anything. So that was just good for the concentration camp. So we were freezing in the morning when we went out. 

People just died like flies. They just collapsed, and they were taken in their blanket and on a truck. And they went to the crematorium. So we went 4 o'clock to appell. After the appell. you could not go back in the block, not even if it was raining or cold or hot, anything. 

We had to stay outside-- no chairs, nothing. Sit on the floor, talking. You want to know what we talked about? Recipes. All the time we were very hungry, and we always talked about recipes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which one? 

SUBJECT: Our head was shaven, so it was cold for the head, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember recipe? One? 

SUBJECT: No. Apple pie or cakes, like European cakes. We're all Europeans. Uh, OK. After the appell we had to stay outside. If you wanted to sit down or-- you know, it was nothing provided. The little food they gave us was-- it barely survive. So we didn't do anything all day but talk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The appell would last how many hours? 

SUBJECT: Oh, sometimes-- at least one hour, then two hour, three hour. When after they are done if they didn't have the 13,000 people-- after did this, we would have the coffee. We could do anything. 

I mean, we have no books, no nothing. It was an orchestra. You probably heard about that. Some times they played from us, you know, Haftling. 

We were called Haftlings. It's-- Haftling means that, uh-- an inmate. Not prisoner, because the prisoner of war were the soldiers. We were Haftlings. We were treated like-- oh, worse than anyone. 

They had dogs, German shepherds they're that big. They loved the dogs, but they hated us. So we waited until appell again at 5 o'clock at night. With this you would have the little bread, something. 

Then after the appell we could go back to the barrack, sit on the floor, eat the thing what we received, and that was it. Then we could go to, you know, sleep. We couldn't go out. 

Uh, sometimes we heard, uh, people talking and walking, like heavy footsteps. They came from another camp to bring something over or something like that. Now, we heard that the men which were the same train with us, who was in the life are in the C camp. And I thought maybe my father is there, because my father wasn't taken to the left side. 

So one day a man came from the C camp. He was Polish, not Jewish. And he told us that a lot of people from the same county, from the same city are there. He wants to help us, if he can, to see each other. 

We were estat-- you know, I cannot describe the feeling that if I would be able to see my father again. So he said, I don't have that much time. The Germans are coming. Just write on a piece of paper your father's name. Put that in my pocket, and I promise that if he is there, they'll come. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where'd you get a piece of paper? 

SUBJECT: Oh, uh, that was one room in every block where was the Blockalteste and the Stubendienst. Like, they were helping to clean the room or-- they were in a position. They had everything. 

They got paper. They got cigarettes. They got things because they stole them. So-- no, I think he gave us a paper because he had-- anyway, I wrote down my father's name. 

The next day, my girlfriend who was with me all the way and we were in-- we went to the same school in Debrecen. This man who was the Lager of Camp F-- leader-- the Lageralteste in the C camp-- he was the one who promised to bring our fathers over. He brought over my girlfriend's father alone for some reason. He created the reason that they brought some blankets from their camp which we need or something like that. 

So they met. Her mother was with her. They met and they-- you know, I know-- I knew her father, and I was happy even to see him. They talked. 

Then the next day we heard man's foot-- you know, it's heavier than woman. And then the Blockalteste came that-- he-- she declared Blocksperre, which means that you cannot go out from the block. OK? Because she knew that the men coming and they are-- they belonged-- we are relatives. 

But then I heard the steps. I knew that if my father is alive, he is in this camp. He will be there. Then a friend who was in the same school as me-- who came and told me that my father is here. 

So I didn't care about the Lag-- the Blocksperre. Or I didn't care about anything. I just jumped out the window. And the first I saw was my father. 

We hugged each other and kissed each other. He brought me a piece of bread, which he saved from him-- you know-- and that knife and needle and thread, whatever he could, you know, find. They wore striped uniforms. The men wore striped uniforms. 

Then he saw me without hair, how I looked. He cried, but at least we said goodbye to each other. And he said that just maybe we will through-- live through this. And he told me that every man told to every relative out-- out from Auschwitz, because everywhere is better than here. 

The next day-- well, I said goodbye to my father. We talked about the mother. He said he doesn't know where she is. He didn't want to believe that she died. 

And then they had-- oh, yes, the Germans came and started to beat us because we went out when it was Lagersperre. And the men kept telling us that, go back, because they didn't want to see us beaten up. It-- I had about five minutes with my father. 

So we went back to the block. And that was the time-- last time I saw him. Because the next day, every day in Auschwitz, it was a selection. 

Dr. Mengele came and selected people to go to the third camp to work. Everybody said, go, because it will be easier than here. So the next selection, we were selected to go to Germany. They didn't tell us that. They just told us that we go an Arbeitslager. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I-- I have to ask you. 

SUBJECT: Yes? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were sitting outside, after the appell you're sitting outside on the ground all day. Was there any place to relieve yourself? Was there anything to do? Describe what-- 

SUBJECT: Nothing. That was the-- well, for this, they put drugs in every food and every drink to calm us down. Because otherwise we'd just-- we would fight with each other, or we would kill each other in these kind of circumstances. 

There was nothing to do, nothing there to sit down or nothing at all. It was a camp only for concentrating the people there. But every day, they selected people to go to an Arbeitslager. That's why it was that we didn't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The selection-- it was always one man who did all the selecting? 

SUBJECT: Right. Well, I-- what I know of, it was Dr. Mengele all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But in any event, it was the same face that you saw-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --all the time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, I read a book about it. A man who was from the city that I lived after the war, he was a doctor. 

And Mengele forced him to help him with the experiments. I knew him before the war. He wrote a book about his experience. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever see or hear at the time-- 

SUBJECT: Who? 

INTERVIEWER 2: --about-- did you, when you were in the camp-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --did you ever know anyone who had been in an experiment or who had returned? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know if they ever took anyone for that? 

SUBJECT: For the experiment? No. I don't think so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Only later you knew? 

SUBJECT: Only later, after we were liberated and we talked to each other. Because-- no, I didn't know that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long were you in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Six weeks. They kept telling us to go and go and go. So we went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You meant what other things? Toilets? 

SUBJECT: Oh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The orchestra? 

SUBJECT: The toilets were around-- way, way back in the open air, just a hole. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You could go there anytime? 

SUBJECT: No. When it was Lagersperre, we couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But outside-- 

SUBJECT: Well, after appell we couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But from 6 o'clock in the morning or 7 o'clock in the morning-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --till 5:00 in the afternoon, you could go back and forth to this latrine? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Then-- only-- then when it was appell or Lagersperre, then you couldn't go out. After that, you could. Or when it was food-- distributing the food, you couldn't go anywhere but there. 

I didn't eat the food for six weeks, didn't touch it. My aunt came with a-- you know, a dish with food. And she begged me to eat, because I won't survive. I was very skinny as a-- before the war. 

And, uh she-- well, I couldn't. I just couldn't. So for six weeks, I ate only the bread and the margarine and the salami or something like that, what they gave us, and the coffee, which was drugged-- every single drugged. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you know? 

SUBJECT: Because-- oh, everybod-- we knew that. They told us. Some of the Blockal-- Blockalteste or-- because we didn't have our period. They put drug in the food. 

And it had to be something to start, right? And they put in tranquilizers so we would be, uh, calm, you know. The worst thing was that we didn't-- we couldn't do anything. So after six weeks we were selected. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about this orchestra? 

SUBJECT: Oh, they played Friday nights-- not all the time. It was beautiful-- from the Haftlings. Didn't you see the TV show which-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me what you saw. 

SUBJECT: I saw this lady from France who was in the orchestra. Well, I didn't know her there. I didn't know anybody from the orchestra. I can play the piano, but they-- they had only violins and, uh, drum, saxophone. 

This was also psychological, because it calmed down the people. Because some people are stronger. Some people are weaker. Some people needed more medication than others. 

But they distributed the same. So the orchestra was there for, uh, calm us down. Enjoy-- We enjoyed the orchestra. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They played Friday night? 

SUBJECT: Friday night. Uh, yes, I think so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's all? 

SUBJECT: Uh, no. They played more than that. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? People listening to it? Were-- how were the-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, everybody was listening when they played. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They'd gather? 

SUBJECT: I mean together. Yeah, gathered. But, uh, some people-- after they got to Auschwitz, they couldn't-- I mean, they couldn't function. 

They didn't want to eat. They didn't want to hear anything. They just wanted to die, and they did. But people who were-- we were very young and strong. 

We wanted to live, especially after I knew my father was alive. And the orche-- I loved music. And most of the people loved music. So it was one of the best things they did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was the orchestra and what did it sound like? 

SUBJECT: In the middle of the camp, like five blocks here and five blocks there in one side. It was a podium for the orchestra. 

They played Strauss and Lehár. I don't know if you know that. He was a Hungarian, uh, composer-- and light music, not classical. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did people in the orchestra get better food? 

SUBJECT: I'm sure. Everybody who was in that position got better food. People who worked in the kitchen get better food. Or people who worked in a place where they made things for the soldiers, like socks or feather or gloves-- everybody was in a better position who had that position. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The orchestra would have a program? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they would announce what they're playing? 

SUBJECT: No, they didn't announce. They just played. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For how many hours, usually? 

SUBJECT: Oh, two, three, as far as I can remember. I might be wrong. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they were all-- all around the orchestra were the inmates-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --sitting together? 

SUBJECT: In-- inmates. They were inmates. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they sometimes join singing? 

SUBJECT: Oh-- yes, I think so. I loved to sing. But I can't remember, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What at the end of such a concert? 

SUBJECT: Yes, then back to appell. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT: Went back to the barrack and talked about the music, talked about our former life. And that's it. He fought for the place where we slept. And, uh, the thing was good that I was with people who I knew. That was very good. 

INTERVIEWER 1: While you listened to a concert, did you forget you were in a camp? 

SUBJECT: Did I forget what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That you were in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't forget it. But I felt that something like what I like-- they provide something that we like. And it was much better than without the orchestra. It helped. 

So after six weeks, it was a selection for Arbeitslager, 1,000 people. We went together like two aunts, the two cousins, and my cousin who was with me all the way. And we were selected to the same camp. 

Then they gave us a little food under the sun. It was so hot. I remember this day until the rest of my life. We were sitting on the stone. 

And, uh, they distributed the food for two-- two days, because we were to go to work in Germany. Took two days to get there, and we didn't get anything during the trip. Uh, I was happy that my two aunt and cousins sat with me. You can take suffering more if you are with people who you love and know, you know. 

So we were taken to Germany. The city where we arrived was Allendorf. That was the name of the city where we were settled down. 

And in these barracks, they were bunk beds, you know, which is up and down. Are-- they're called bunk beds? We had a blanket. 

We couldn't believe this. We were so happy that we had our bed. And they gave us a new dress, which looked at least normal. So we saw that we would be better off than in Auschwitz. 

And then they selected people who would go to the factory to work or who would go-- they were outside Kommando who had to work outside the camp, the open air without coat. That was-- OK, July-- that was August 15, sometime-- something like that, when we went to Germany. We felt that it will be a better place, and, well, we were willing to work to be able to have a better conditions. 

So I was selected to work in a ammunition factory. We made bombs and grenades. Every morning, we had to go-- it was far away, and it was underground. It was a forest on the top, so nobody knew that was an ammunition factory there. 

And we worked eight, 10 hours. Then we went back to the camp, back to bed. I mean, we collapsed. It was very difficult work for women. 

But then it started to get a little better because, first of all, I speak Ger-- I spoke German. Everybody who spoke the language had a better condition, because they understood you. They were there Italians, French, Russian, uh, from Holland. 

I remember I talked with a boy from Holland. He told us that he was stopped on the street by the Germans, taken away to this camp to work. He could not call her-- his mother or take anything with him, and he wasn't Jewish. He was Dutch. They took the young people to work for them. 

Now, let me tell you, this work wasn't good at all. Nobody did a good job. We didn't want to do a good job. We could not sabotage, because then we would be punished. But we tried to do as bad as we can. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like what? 

SUBJECT: Oh, they have to mix somethings which we put in the bomb to be able to explode if it hits the ground. Well, they didn't do-- they didn't put in what they were supposed to. They put in something less. 

One day-- or, excuse me, the Russian soldiers, the prisoner of war, they worked outside before a train. Because they made the bombs, and it went from room to the other to be able to finish. Every room made different things. When they arrived through the last, the Russian soldiers put them in the train to transport them. 

And one day I heard-- we were not there. We went back to our place where we slept in the camp. It was a bomb, uh, exploded on the train, which was full with bomb. And they didn't explode. 

You see, that's why I tell you that we tried to do a bad job. I did. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: Well, I wasn't in this place where they mixed the thing what go-- went to the bomb. I was in a place where we cleaned that outside, which was-- it was not that hard. But after, we had to lift it up and put that in another place. Two people for one. It was about 50 kilograms. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Lift the what? 

SUBJECT: Bomb. The bomb. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Lift the bomb. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the outside, was dirty because when they put in the ingredients where-- which the bomb will explode from-- some went outside, you know. That was our job to clean it. And the thing was very hard for me that we had to stand on our feet all the time. 

So after this, I-- I told you the Russian soldiers didn't do a good job, either. But they were in a terrible condition, too. Everybody tried to help. I mean, the Dutch, the French-- there were people from Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia, some, who also were taken from the street to work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you said you did not do a good job also? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I-- I didn't. I mean, on the top of the bomb, I clean. But in the bottom, you know, nobody saw it. I didn't. And that was bad because of the wall of the bomb had to be very smooth in order to explode and that it wasn't small. 

But everybody tried to do something like-- that wasn't good. We-- we did what we could beside-- we used, I remember, a lot of salt-- [INAUDIBLE] salt for kitchen salt. And the German people didn't have salt to their food because they were taken into the factories. 

OK. So we were in Allendorf until, uh, the Americans came and they liberated the town. It was not the end of the war. It was March and it was Passover when we were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I remember. What happened-- the Germans-- SS-- well, let me tell you about that. SS were the elite army, OK? The regular army was called Wermacht. 

But the SS were the-- in the position they can do anything they want. They can tell us anything they want. And the leader of the camp was called Hauptschar-- Hauptscharführer. He was very old-- 75 or 80. 

And he was not bad with us. He was not bad. What he did was-- we didn't have-- oh, they gave us some coats because it started to get cold. And we couldn't work if we wouldn't be able to-- you know, if we will be sick, we couldn't work. 

What they did was they put a big K.L. on every coat with, uh, red, which was obvious-- concentration-- concentration Lager. Lager, it's "camp" in German. And beside that, on the bottom of the coat, they cut off a little material, and they put in something else. 

So everybody who wanted to escape would be recognized right away that he's-- she's or he's Jewish. We had that coats every day. And we knew that 1,000 coats arrived from another place which was like a-- a raincoat. But they had no mark on them. 

So then we-- the last day when we're in the camp, they evacuated us because the front came closer and closer. And the Hauptscharführer told us that we are going to move because of this. And with that 40 kilometers one night, some people collapsed. 

Uh, some people got sick, but everybody got there. It was a big, big place for anyone else-- you know, a barn or something like-- a big one. So we were-- cleaned that and waited for the Americans to come in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said that they put a mark on the coat when you were in-- when you were in Auschwitz. Didn't you get a number on the arm? 

SUBJECT: No. No. We were in a transport where we did not do that. It was one of the last transports, and they didn't do that anymore. Before that, they did. So I don't have a mark. 

Oh, yes, and before we ever created, the Hauptscharführer had distributed the coats. So we were not recognized like Jews. We started to go, and then we arrived. I told you we collapsed and slipped. 

And the Hauptscharführer told us to go with them. They will give us food, and they will protect us. Excuse me. But we knew it's not true. We knew that the front was close, because we could hear. 

So we escaped, 40 people, to the forest-- my cousin and my aunts. But the next day we waited. Nobody came. So we were so exhausted and hungry that we gave ourselves up. 

We went to, uh-- the Burgermeister, you know, the mayor. We told him that we were from the camp. We lost, uh, our-- the other people we were with. 

And he put us in a school. He was helpful. He was helpful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, this was March 1945. 

SUBJECT: Right. Uh, so we go-- went to school and waited and waited. And we heard some noise. We looked down the window, and we saw the big trucks-- you know, not, uh-- not the jeep, but the big one, the camper. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Trucks? Oh. 

SUBJECT: But we didn't see any human. I mean, it just came, and it was nobody there. Because they were blacks, and we couldn't see them. It was the same color, the bus or the camper. 

But it was the letters, the United States, US. You-- I cannot describe this effect. I just can't. It was the most beautiful day in my life. I mean, when they came off with-- I never saw a colored man before. 

I mean, we never did. There were none in Hungary. I spoke a little English then, because I learned a little. And, uh, then we saw the first. 

They came to us, and we told them who we are. And, uh, they were very understanding, and they brought us food and everything they could. They were very good. But then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think when you realized this person had black skin? What-- what did you think? 

SUBJECT: I know there are black people in the United States, and I saw that they were just as human beings as we are. I never, uh, thought about them-- it was very-- it is-- was a strange feeling to see them first, you know. But the next day, we saw how good they are, how have-- they wanted to help. And they were so good. 

But then they came, the white army, after that. Everywhere the blacks were in the front. Because some German city put out the white flag, which meant that they gave themselves up. 

And then they came on the back. They shoot. They did that. But that time, we were lucky. It was no shooting then. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you saying that what you thought was happening was that the American army was sending black soldiers in first? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't thought about it then. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But that's what you saw? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Say it again. You saw that what? 

SUBJECT: It was separate army, you know-- black division and white division. The blacks came in first everywhere, because we thought these were other people. We were only 40, remember, in the school. The other people who they found had the same experience. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the experience? Say it again. 

SUBJECT: Well, about-- well, that the separate black unit. Yeah, they said that everywhere, they sent the black units first. After they established in the city came the white army. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So the city would put up a surrender sign, a white flag? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But they didn't really mean it, because they-- 

SUBJECT: Some. Not in-- in our-- our area, they meant it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the black groups came in and they shot at them? Some? 

SUBJECT: I never saw that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You heard this? 

SUBJECT: I heard it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But then when the black troops had-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --made the town quiet-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Then the white unit came in. And the first jeep, it was an MD, a German Jew from United States. But he speaks German, too. 

So he made a speech. And one of my cousins was very good in English. She understood that we cannot eat, absolutely not, only, but he will tell us. Because if we eat, we were so weak and so starving, we will die. It's just impossible. 

So he told us what to do, and they distributed us to houses. Now, the house we were in, seven people-- my two aunts, my two cousins, and another one. Uh, the lady cried and said, why, why me, I-- I-- we-- we were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: German houses? 

SUBJECT: German houses. We were not in the SS. Why did you do that to me? He told to the German soldiers who helped with the bringing the belongings or something like that. She didn't want us in her house, but she couldn't do anything. 

So we established in this house. And after that, everything was different. We were free. 

War was not over until May 8, but this city was liberated. So we were almost two months before the war ended. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you-- 

SUBJECT: --we stayed there until the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the-- how did the inmates and the Germans related to each other? 

SUBJECT: Well, the Americans told the Germans to live upstairs and we live downstairs. We didn't have anything to do with them. I mean, we had a conversation if we went out, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had a conversation? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Good morning or good evening or something. We were more human than they were. I cannot go out and if I see somebody not just say anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, but-- but food. Who cooked-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. Well, the Germans provided the food, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did-- but did you speak about what had happened? About Auschwitz to them? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Of course we told them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And? 

SUBJECT: They knew that. They said they've never heard that before, and it's not true. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well-- 

SUBJECT: They didn't want to believe it. It was more comfortable not to believe it than admit. Because don't forget that the concentration camp was in Auschwitz, in Poland, and that was Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, but that was-- the labor camp was in-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, but that was much better than Auschwitz. They admitted that they knew about that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you could be polite with them and tell them-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, nah. Just formal. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they react when you told them about Auschwitz or the labor camp? 

SUBJECT: Well, the intelligents, like the teacher or the mayor, who formality-- they came to meet us. They reacted like-- they showed that they are very sorry for it and that it shouldn't happen. And it-- most of them said that they didn't hear about it until now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, that town didn't have one single SS man? 

SUBJECT: The town? SS? 

INTERVIEWER 1: That whole town? 

SUBJECT: SS? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: The-- all the SS, when we evacuated, took off the SS, uh, mark from their collar. So they acted like Wermacht, like the regular soldiers. They-- they took that off. That was the first thing when we evacuated that they did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How-- how did they react when they saw you? You must have been very, very emaciated-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --and dirty and-- how did they act when they saw you? 

SUBJECT: The Germans? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The house you walked into? 

SUBJECT: Well, they gave us right away some clothes. I think American either gave them money, or they bought us-- I don't know that. We got some clothes, and we had the bathroom. We could clean ourselves, and they gave us food. 

We cooked and, uh, we just waited for the end of the war. Yes, the American soldiers came to see us who were in the same city. We were young, and they were young. 

And they were very good. They were very good to the Germans, too. Every soldier had a girlfriend of-- you know, they were young. 

And they gave them chocolate and cigarette. And the German girls loved them. They just went to bed with them without any problem. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did the German girls act toward you? How did the German boys act toward you? 

SUBJECT: We were-- no, we didn't mix with them. We didn't. They lived upstairs, and, uh, we were downstairs. We had everything downstairs, so we didn't talk to much. 

The first thing I did-- I was very aggressive. Then I was only 19 years old. I saw the piano in another room. I said, I want this piano in my room. 

And they did. So I could play. It was like a tranquilizer, music. Of course, they gave us radio. 

We had food to cook. And, uh, that was in March. And in May 8 was the end of the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the-- the-- the American soldiers and the German population became friendly right away? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were the dirty refugees still? 

SUBJECT: No. The-- no, with the Germans? Uh, they didn't bother us too much. It was a small town, and they pretended that they don't know anything. 

I mean, it was probably easier for them. We didn't go shopping. They brought us the food. We didn't go anywhere. I mean, just for a walk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why not? 

SUBJECT: We didn't have money to go shopping. They-- they didn't give us money. But we had everything provided what we needed then. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you went for a walk, did the people stare at you? Did you talk-- 

SUBJECT: No, it was no houses where we went. It was a forest. Still, of course, if they saw me, stared at us. But mostly we went out of their way, because what-- what could you do? 

I told Americans, why are you so friendly with them? They were enemies. They killed a lot of you. They were mostly young guys who-- they had no hateness for the Germans at all. 

When-- even after we told them what happened, they said, not everybody was that bad-- you know. Only the SS did that, and the German people wasn't that bad and things like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mrs. Riesz, is that why you needed a tranquilizer or a piano? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I need a tranquilizer, period. But the piano was like a-- it calmed me. I loved the music. 

And I was young, and I didn't think about that I lost my parents. I hoped that my father came home, because I saw him. But he didn't. 

OK. So May 8, when the war was over, we were still there until August. We didn't have any paper to go home. So my two cousins went to Kassel, which was the closest city where it was a, uh, office where they help with the refugees. 

And we had-- they gave us some paper-- not a permanent. It's a temporary paper we could go with. And then they organized groups, a bus which took us from Germany to Czechoslovakia. We were in Prague. 

We gave-- they gave us a room where we could lay down and-- but Czechoslovakia had that policy that every refugee who arrived there, he had-- they have to leave in 24 hours. OK, the Czechs were very friendly, very nice people, but the government had that policy. So we had to leave. They took us by the bus to Pilsen. 

After that, they said good bye. You-- you go home as you can. So we went by, uh, freight trains, and, uh, hitchhiked. So we arrived to Budapest. 

In Budapest, one of my aunt's husband waited for her, who had a store on the same street where my father had. I asked him, is my father home? He said, no, not yet. Then I knew that he is not coming home. 

So when we arrived to our city the next day, that was a point to going home. I wouldn't go back to Hungary if I knew my parents are not there. Some people from our camp turned back in Budapest. They heard that their relative died. They went back to Germany and then applied for the United States. 

I went back because I hoped that my father would be alive. I was very, uh, hopeful until Budapest. When he told me that he's not home yet, I suspected. But I wasn't sure. That's why I went to our city. 

Well, my uncle was home, my father's brother. He was in-- you know, I told you in the army without the uniform, with the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

SUBJECT: Yes. So he was home. He was, uh, a prisoner. They put them in jail, and they said that they will execute them because they were Jewish and war is almost over. 

They didn't want witnesses who saw what happened, and they forgot about them. They didn't give them food, no water. They had cigarettes. 

Six days they were in the jail. After six days, the Russians came in and then they liberated. So he was alive. He was home. He had a store. 

By the time he came back, he said he waited for my father to come home, and they were-- would be partners in the store. But he never came. And I talked-- we had a dentist before the war whose wife by-- was with me in Auschwitz. 

This Dr. Weiss was this my father all the way. He died in March. He lived until March. So if this territory would be liberated then, he would leave. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The dentist-- 

SUBJECT: The dentist temporarily liberated only May 8. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the dentist was-- was with him-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Was with me when we died. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened when you went back to your city? 

SUBJECT: I hated it. I hated it. I didn't want to live there. I had no choice. In 1945 in Hungary, there was no such a thing that a Jewish girl can live alone in her apartment or convert. 

It was out of the question. My uncle wouldn't hear of it. I lived with them until I got married. They were very good, but I knew I had to get away. I have to have my own. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mrs. Riesz, what is left today from all this with you? How are you different? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- how am I different from anybody else or in my mind or-- I'm different. I lost my parents. I lost my grandparents. I lost other relatives. I felt very alone, insecure, depressed. But when you are 19 years old, you are strong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But do you consider self-- yourself to be a different human being because of-- 

SUBJECT: I think so. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In what way? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I am more sensitive. I get hurt very easily. People who would not even notice that they told them something, I would be hurt because I'm very sensitive. My nerves are not in the best condition because of the camp. 

And, uh, I had lots of, lots of thoughts in my mind that everybody who was in this camp are different. Nobody came out without hurting. Everybody has some what left from their camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What thoughts in your mind? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What thoughts in your mind? 

SUBJECT: Well, I thought something that why I am alive when my parents are killed and my relatives were killed. At least if they killed people, they should kill families together and leave families together. But to break every rule in the human condition or world-- they broke every law. 

And they killed this, and they didn't kill that. And so I just felt that it's not my-- I felt that, uh, fate was not good with me. I suffered more than I deserved. And I didn't do anything bad to anybody in my life to deserve this. 

And, uh, it was a thought that I am-- I am not alone. A lot of people suffered that. Some people take it easier than others. 

But let me tell you, I don't think that people who were in the camp came out without this scar-- not physically, maybe only emotionally. We were hurt very badly. We never will forget. I don't even want to forget. 

The Hungarians, speaking back-- I'm sorry, but I just want to mention, they helped the Germans all the way. They were against us. They were our enemies. So why should I live in a country like that? I didn't want to live. 

Then when I met my husband, he-- he lived in Transylvania. And I-- when we got married, I told him that I don't want to live in Hungary. We go to Romania. 

Because the Romanian Jews were not taken out from their country. They had camps and they had bad time, but they were not taken out of their country like the Hungarians, the Polish, Czechoslovakian, Austrian-- I don't know-- and lots of other countries. 