[CHATTER] CREW: You're off by 10 years. 

CREW: How old are you? 

CREW: You're off by 10 years, Sophie. 

CREW: What is he, 17? 

CREW: Ooh, thank you. 

CREW: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: Ready? 

[LAUGHTER] 

SUBJECT: The lights. Oy vey. Can't see with the light. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, all these lights. 

CREW: Can I just get something to drink? 

CREW: Yeah, go ahead. Just chip back in, that's all. 

CREW: You can start any time you like. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

CREW: Thank you very much. I appreciate it. Thank you. 

CREW: Any time you're ready, sir. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, good evening, Mrs. Sussman. 

SUBJECT: Doctor. 

INTERVIEWER: We talked a little yesterday. And maybe the simplest question to start with, what is your date of birth, if one can ask that? 

SUBJECT: February 10, 1933. Really, I didn't know my actual birthday. But that's-- 

INTERVIEWER: The official one. 

SUBJECT: --official that I-- 

Get your name. 

SUBJECT: --came to this country with. Beatrice Sussman. 

INTERVIEWER: And where did you spend your childhood? 

SUBJECT: My childhood, whatever I can remember was Poland from 1939. And then I was there until '42, really, 1942. And then I escaped. And I was in Siberia. And then I came back to Poland. Then I came to America. 

And somebody asked me where I spent most of my life. And I said, what do you mean? You know, at one time, I was in New Britain, Connecticut. Because I was there eight or nine years steady without traveling or moving from place to place. 

INTERVIEWER: What town did you grow up in? 

SUBJECT: In Poland? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: It was a little village, a little shtetl, really, called Kreviech It was Vilna Gubernia It was a very small town. 

And we were very close Jewish community, what I remember. My parents were very law abiding, kosher, Orthodox Jews, observed the Shabbat and all the Jewish holidays. And I really remember very little because I was small. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any conception of how many Jews might have been living in Kreviech 

SUBJECT: Maybe 100 families, which would be a lot. I really have no idea. There were only two streets. 

Go on. You are opening an album and looking at the pictures. Go on about Kreviech 

SUBJECT: I see it as a little shtetl. And well, they used to call it Telim Street because like a cross, there were four street. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean Tselim Street, yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yes, that's what it's called. And we lived right on the, there's a market place right across from the shore. And my mother, my father, and I had a baby brother, and myself. 

And one day I was playing outside. And I was, I saw three or four planes coming right into the house. I thought they were going bomb. I didn't even know what planes were. We'd never saw those things before. 

And they dropped a bomb in the back. And they told me, this is a war. And a couple days later, the Germans walked in. That was in 1941. Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER: But back tracking a little to Kreviech before the war, what kind of trade did your-- 

SUBJECT: My father? 

INTERVIEWER: --father-- 

SUBJECT: He was dealing with import, export lumber. He was spending a lot of time up in the forests with farmers. He used to come on Friday night, Friday afternoon for shabbas home. I remember I used to go to meet him. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he bring you a present when he would come? 

SUBJECT: Of course, I was his favorite. 

INTERVIEWER: What would he bring you? 

SUBJECT: Candy or volleyball, those little balls and the mesh nets or some books, papers. 

INTERVIEWER: He would bring something for your brother too? 

SUBJECT: Well, I really don't remember because my brother was two years old when he got killed. And I just remember him slightly. But I'm sure he must have brought something for him too. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had a house in Kreviech? 

SUBJECT: We had a house. And we had a big garden. We had cows, a cow, I guess, and a horse. 

And my father had a bicycle. It was like a car here, I guess. That was a way of transportation those days. 

And I had aunts and uncles and cousins, a lot of relatives. And I had a grandmother, which I adored. And I'm the only survivor. 

INTERVIEWER: They were all living in Kreviech. 

SUBJECT: In Kreviech, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, well, what was your maiden name? 

SUBJECT: Poliski, Basha Poliski. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you start going to school there? 

SUBJECT: I went to school, what I remember, I must have been in kindergarten or, it was a Polish school. And we had the nuns. And we had to cross ourselves, the Polish laws. 

And then 1939, the Russians came. Because when the war broke out, our part of Poland, it was the eastern part where we lived, the Russians came. And everybody got them out of the year, signed up back in kindergarten. 

And that was the end of it. And then 1941, the Germans came. And we couldn't go to school. So I really had no schooling till I came to this country. 

INTERVIEWER: And did the Russians deport Jews from Kreviech to Siberia? 

SUBJECT: They did. They deported a lot of our friends to Siberia because they had businesses or a bigger house. And they called them [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] 

And that time, unfortunately we were not sent to Siberia. And everything is relative. If we were sent to Siberia, my family would have survived. 

The people that were sent, there were, they survived. They had hardship. But it wasn't destruction the way the Germans did to the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: But I guess at that time, it looked like a big calamity. 

SUBJECT: It looked like it was, yes, at that time it looked very bad. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had a shul. 

SUBJECT: We had a shul right across the street from us. My mother used to go. My father didn't go as much. 

And I remember when the Germans came, the first thing, they burned the shul, the tallisim, and the prayer books. And we had to be all lined up. We stood outside to watch. 

And we had a rabbi with payos and the capote and a real orthodox rabbi. And they put the German police dogs on him to tear him. And whoever cried or made any kind of noise, the Germans shot them right there. 

And I see it all the time with, I see that picture, the poor rabbi eaten up with those German police dogs. And to this day, I cannot stand the German police dog. Whenever I see them, I shiver. 

INTERVIEWER: You, I guess what is really uppermost in your mind is the transition when the Germans came. It's most vivid. 

SUBJECT: Well because I really, with the Russians, I don't remember that much. I knew they took businesses away from people who had business. My father, he was, his business was not such as, I don't remember him-- what happened. Really, it was a short time. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember Russian soldiers from that period or anything? 

SUBJECT: Yes, would have had Russian soldiers march. And they couldn't have possessions. Everything belonged to the government. But everything is relative. 

When the Germans came, that was already heaven. At least they didn't kill you. They took things away, or they sent people to Siberia. But it wasn't killing or destroying for innocent people. 

INTERVIEWER: Just before we go into the real war, would your family go to shul every Friday night, every Saturday? 

SUBJECT: Definitely every Friday night, every Saturday morning, and every Jewish holiday. 

INTERVIEWER: And your father took you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, well, it was orthodox shul. I remember my mother and I were sitting upstairs. And my father used to sit downstairs and pray. 

INTERVIEWER: I see. Then you had kiddush and everything. 

SUBJECT: Yes, definitely. 

INTERVIEWER: The family used, bigger family, cousins and uncles all together? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we always would get together for the holidays. And for Pesach we always would get together, have a big Seder. And I was going to my cousins', my aunts', my grandmother, spoiled, I got my grandmother. 

INTERVIEWER: I can see why you were spoiled. 

SUBJECT: I got spoiled very fast. 

INTERVIEWER: And you generally remember this period as a happy one up to the war? 

SUBJECT: I think I was happy. I had my friends. And I was playing in the backyard. 

My father had a bike, and I rode the bike. It was a man's bike. And I used to get underneath the bar there on the bike. And it was normal life as they had in those days. It was normal. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, let's move to the real war. You said it started with planes flying over the house and dropping a bomb. Did it fall on your house or in your back-- 

SUBJECT: No, I think it fell on the back, a few houses back. And of course we didn't know what was happening. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why don't you begin with your first impressions and just go on as you keep remembering them. 

SUBJECT: Events? 

INTERVIEWER: Just proceed. Planes came over. And just go on your own. 

SUBJECT: OK, after the planes came, they were coming right into the house. I thought they were coming to the house. But obviously they dropped the bomb. And next day, the German soldiers came. And everybody's crying and carrying on. 

And I didn't know was happening. And then the people start hiding things, burying their possessions. And everybody was telling stories that people were coming from different villages telling us what happened. And it was hard to imagine what happened in other villages because it was atrocious. 

INTERVIEWER: What stories? 

SUBJECT: They tell them how they, the Germans came in and start killing and shooting and taking people, putting, sending them through ghettos. I think then they didn't have the concentration camps. We didn't know of them. We knew it as ghetto in those days. 

And a matter fact, there was a little boy that I remember. He came to our town, to us, looking for us. He was my father's partner from a different shtetl. And I don't know what happened to his parents. But he was the only one that ran away. 

And he knew of us. He came and told us what happened to his family. And he stayed with us. And I don't know whatever happened to him. 

And every day the Germans would come and take different things away from us. One day they took the cow away. One day they took the sewing machine. Mother had a Singer sewing machine with other, fancy beds, and they were nickel. They took that. 

And then they would take the men to the labor camps. And the men, they were hiding. So my mother hid my father a couple times. When they came and father wasn't there, so they just went. And we were always scared. 

And then my father was, went someplace else to hide because they were looking for a man at that time. And I and my mother and our next door neighbor, she was the rebbetzin, with her children, they came. And I guess I was so afraid, I was frightened, that I remember him telling me. 

I don't remember the story, but I know my mother told me. She thought I was dead. I was so afraid that the Germans came in the house. They threw me off the bed. They put everything on top of me, the sheets, the mattresses. 

They broke all the walls and the flower pots. They were looking for guns. They said, Jews have guns, which we never even heard of guns those, at that time. 

And next, when I woke up was like a hurricane went through the house. My mother told me what happened. And she said I was dead because I just was out cold. I didn't react to it. 

INTERVIEWER: I didn't understand. Who threw you on the bed, the Germans? 

SUBJECT: The Germans threw me off. Because I was asleep, I guess, or I was out. And they threw me off the bed. And they put mattresses on me. They looked for guns underneath the mattresses. 

So that was one incident. And there were many incidents like that. And finally, the last one before I left that little shtetl, they came to look for men again to send the horses to the front. 

And my father was hiding. And then my mother got up in the morning. And she saw the gestapo in the backyard. And she knew that was the day. Since every, they had a plan for the schritte, they'll call it, the slaughter. 

And when she saw the gestapo in the backyard, she said, this is, today's the day. So all of us went into this little cellar, my mother, my brother, myself. And we were going to hide there. 

But it was before Pesach. It was very cold and dark, and my brother start crying. And my mother said, because of him, we'll all get killed. So she went out with him. 

And she covered us. She covered the top up on the cellar so they wouldn't see that there was an opening. And she went to our next door neighbor, who was Christian, Polish. 

And the gestapo shot her. And my brother was wounded. And I saw through the little window there. And my father put his hand on my mouth I shouldn't scream. 

And to this day, I have trouble breathing. And I think it's because what happened. And he was wounded. And then the gestapo came with his boots and just stepped on him. 

And we stayed in that little cellar for, till dark, I guess. We heard the screaming and crying of neighbors. I guess the Germans were collecting all the Jews. And they used to shoot them right there at the marketplace from the house. 

At night when the shooting quieted down, my father came out to get some bread or clothing. I don't remember why he went out. And he couldn't close the top good enough. 

Next day, our neighbors, the Polish neighbors who knew that we had a little cellar in the back, because they played with me. They were my father's friends. They came. They found us there. They put five rifles in the little hole. 

And my father started crying him, begging them. I know you. You're my friends. You're my neighbors. You can't kill me. So they said, well, you have to give us all of your gold and tell us where-- all the Jews got together and buried their belongings, the silver or whatever they had-- where the stuff was buried. 

So he gave them, he showed them where that was buried. And we had the Russian gold, the ruble pieces. He gave them that. And we escaped at night because we knew that they could kill us after they took all things away. There's no reason for them to keep us. 

So that night, my father and I, we went to the woods. Because he was very friendly with the farmers when he was working. And they were very nice. They kept us there. 

But it was very dangerous. So we had to sit in the swamps in the daytime so the other farmers wouldn't see us and the Germans wouldn't see us. And at night, we would come in and sleep in the barns with the cows. And I was swollen. I was eaten up by mosquitoes. 

And I was going to church for a while. And I learned how to cross myself. And I was taking care of the sheep and the pigs with the kids. But I was always afraid because any little thing, they would find out that I was Jewish. And everybody would get killed. 

And this went on for a while, for a few months. And then the Germans were getting very strict. People were squealing on each other. 

So they told us where to go. So my father went back to the woods. And he found some Jews who were also wandering around. And we all got together. And there were a few Russian partisans at that time. 

And they helped us. They had two, three rifles. And we used to hide in the woods daytime. At night we used to walk, come to villages, knock on doors, and ask for a piece of bread. Some people were nice and gave us bread. 

Some people called the Germans. And when the Germans would come, start shooting, we had to run back into the woods. And this went on for quite a while. And people would get killed. And people would get reorganized. 

And one time I was underneath a dead person. Because the Germans were shooting. And I didn't know what to do. 

And a dead person, a person got killed and was on top of me. And I wouldn't move, so the German passed right by. He thought I was dead. And then they left. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember at that moment what you felt or thought? 

SUBJECT: I was just, we just wanted, we all knew we were going to die. But the only thought was, we should only get shot through the back. We shouldn't see the bullet in front of our eyes. That was the only wish. Because we never thought any of us would survive, just a matter of time. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you were lying under the dead body, what crossed your mind? 

SUBJECT: I thought I was dead. I just didn't know, I couldn't move. 

INTERVIEWER: There was a group of Jews together? 

SUBJECT: Yes, the Jews from different towns, and they were all left. 

INTERVIEWER: How many were in the group? 

SUBJECT: Oh, 50, 60, 100, it all depends. And previous to this, I went, I was sitting when we were in the swamps. And I was swollen and eaten up by mosquitoes. 

My father decided to send me to another shtetl where my other aunt had another aunt and uncle and their family. In their shtetl, they didn't have a schritte yet. So they put me in a wagon with hay, the hay on the top. And they smuggled me into the shtetl. 

And I lived with my aunt and uncle and their children for a few months. And then my aunt got up in the morning. And she saw the gestapo in the backyard. And she knew, this is that day. 

So we hid. They had a double door. You know, like you have a wall. You have a double wall, make the room smaller. So they had a room that was closed up. 

They didn't know it was a room. They had wood in the front of it. And we crawled in through the back. There was a little opening. And we stayed there. 

And we heard the screaming and the yelling, the shooting. The same thing that happened in my shtetl was happening here. And after they stopped shooting at night, we walked out. 

And somehow I took them to the farmer where my father was hiding at night. And I didn't know how I ever got there without a map, not through regular roads. And I came there in the morning. I was so exhausted, I couldn't recognize the house. I just collapsed. 

And they saw my father. He was doing something. And I knew that we came back. And then we all left. And we got separate then when we'd gone back to the woods. 

When they were shooting, I lost my aunt and uncle and my cousins. We didn't find each other until after the war. And this is how we lasted '42 till '43. We had to cross the front. The Russians and the Germans were fighting. 

INTERVIEWER: You told me yesterday on the telephone-- 

CREW: Excuse me. That's all there is. We've got to change tape. 