INTERVIEWER 1: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Both of you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Talk to each other. Share experiences with each other. 

SUBJECT 1: Like, you see all of a sudden, the say the young who survived, so they can take it. They can go back to Romania. So me, my brother who was very sick, what I told you. He was beaten till he lost his mind. 

So they make a group, and they say we should go to Balta. And there they're gonna take all the young kids who survived, and they're gonna send us back to Romania. So my mother said, at least we should remain alive. 

I was very close to my mother, but she pushed me. She pushed me. She forced me to go. She said that I have to go, and I must go. 

And OK, so I decide. And we go to Balta. With the group-- with young children who survived from this. 

INTERVIEWER: This is after the war. 

SUBJECT 1: No, no, the war is still on. But this was-- 

SUBJECT 2: This was later on. 

SUBJECT 1: Later on. This was in 1943. And they say now is the time when the Romanians decide with the Germans that the youngsters who survived this, we should go back. So we walked. And they take all the young kids who left who left, when, oh, there's very few left-- we go to Balta. 

And we came to Balta. And they washed us, and they gave us clothes. There was the Romanian [NON-ENGLISH]. And we were gonna go back to Romania. 

And the war comes closer. And they took my brother. And they took all-- and you see already, the war, you know, like the-- the fight was over our head. We saw the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Artillery. 

SUBJECT 1: --shooting, and everything-- what's going on. So here my mother pushed me away from her, and we go to Romania. And it wasn't just me. Me, my brother, and-- and other kids. And we was already in a register and everything, we'd go back to Romania. 

And here the war is so close that the whole thing stopped all of a sudden. They're not gonna take us anymore. And they take-- the Germans take young girls-- we was then was only 17, 18. And they-- wie sagt man vergewaltigt 

SUBJECT 2: Raped. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Raped. 

SUBJECT 1: Raped. The screaming and the yelling was going to God, himself. But nobody was listening. In the streets it was murder. It was something unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw this? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, I saw this? Yes! But when I was in Balta, took me in, a Jewish family. There was a residence there. And they say, you're gonna stay here. 

And they took in my brother and me. And I helped them in the house. They took me in before it was so close. We saw everything what's going on. The fire was over our head. 

So they took my brother, and they took other youngsters to the airport where they have all the munitions-- to load it up. Because the Russian was very close. Close like I see you now. That's how we saw this-- everything. 

So the-- so the war is so close-- the Russians are so close. They took all this hundred people-- this was all of my brother, between them. And they say all the munitions has to be packed and put in the trains. But they saw the time is too short. 

My brother-- after he was so too, he's very sharp, just like a fox. He said, here is this the end of it, because here is the death. No two ways about it. He took another boy. The boy, he was from Balta. 

And he said to him, you know what, we have to go and run away from here. Then no, you're gonna be dead. [SIGH] So he took him, and he said, you're gonna show me the way. Then we run away from this place where they put all the munitions. 

The Germans stop him, and ask him where he's going. He said the Germans sent him to bring some things. And then, so they let him go. They let him go before an house. They go in there, and they shoot a whole family. 

So my brother-- so it's very bad-- so he went in a-- a latrine. You know what a latrine is? Like a toilet, but there is not the toilet, there's just a grave-- you know, like-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A hole. 

SUBJECT 1: A hole. Excuse me, a hole. So he went in, in there, because he saw this is very bad. And this next day, when my brother ran away from this, the hundred people who unloaded the whole ammunition and everything-- they was put on dynamite, and wiped off like this is here clean. This was only my brother who survived from this. And I was on the-- wie sagt man in den boden? 

SUBJECT 2: Ah, in the attic of that family's-- 

SUBJECT 1: I was of the family's attic. I was with her children, we was there. And I didn't hear from my brother for eight days. And the fire goes over my head. 

And I always was crying them, I said, I didn't want to do this. My mother pushed away me from her. That I should go back to Romania. And it's not enough I went through all these years. 

So I have to be the end of this? This has to be the end of my life, because I want to save myself. God punished me for this, because I left my mother. 

So in the morning, my brother came back. He was black, like your dress. That's how black he was. Scared. And he said everything what's happened. 

And after three days the Russians came in, and we was liberated. So when we was freed from them, you should see how the kids from us was left, and the Russians came in. We grabbed them and kissed them. We were so happy that they freed us. 

So we start going back to Bershad. From Balta to Bershad. And then we go, just on the sky and earth, nothing else. 

We saw so many soldiers, Germans. They was afraid for us. When they saw us, they ran away. They didn't know who we are. We saw them give-- in the last moment, when we was already liberated, we could be killed. 

And that's how I came back to my mother. But it took more than weeks when we was liberated from them. Going back to Bershad, looking for my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to you? 

SUBJECT 2: I mostly was working with a group on the highways-- repairing highways. And that's what we was going from one village to another, mostly on the-- on the working group, that's what how I survived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was guarding you? 

SUBJECT 2: There was mostly Romanian soldiers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And none of these people could do anything about the soldiers? They couldn't run away? They couldn't-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, no. They-- you didn't risk it to go, to run away, because you never knew where you'll-- where you'll be-- where you'll come out. 

SUBJECT 1: Let me answer this. Where could you run? You don't have no way to run. Where could you run? 

We was left from-- from God, from people, from everybody. How far can you run? Where you gonna go? We was too [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH], that means chicken. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Too frightened. 

SUBJECT 1: Too frightened. I mean-- 

SUBJECT 2: Not just frightened. You-- you was thinking-- 

SUBJECT 1: You didn't have no-- where you gonna run? You don't have nowhere-- no-- no places to go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But it was so terrible where you were. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, but-- 

SUBJECT 1: Terrible is no word for it. 

SUBJECT 2: Once you were involved in physical work, after a day of work, you're so exhausted. Put your head down. You don't even think what it will be, further. Just living day by day. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did The Jews help each other? You mentioned that they-- 

SUBJECT 1: In the beginning we was very cool, and it was like animals. Because we was-- not because we was cool. You have to understand. We-- 

SUBJECT 2: There was-- 

SUBJECT 1: We have no hope for us. OK? No hope whatsoever. We was waiting every day to die. This was the end of us. We didn't have no hope that we can ever be anybody. 

No hope for us. No hope. We was forgotten from God, from people, from everybody. There was no hope that we ever can survive. No hope. 

And we could-- where can you go? When we was living with them, no way-- where to go. Nowhere to survive. No. No hope. Every day we was waiting for-- to die. That's all. 

SUBJECT 2: It was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Later on, I asked were the Jews helped-- local Jews. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? What? 

SUBJECT 1: Just with food. With food. He helped, like I say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember personally someone-- you mentioned the family that took you in. Other instances that Jews helped? 

SUBJECT 1: In a lot-- even the Ukrainian-- there was people who helped a lot, yes. He helped. They helped us a lot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

SUBJECT 1: Even-- how? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who do you remember? What do you remember? 

SUBJECT 1: What I remember-- I don't remember by names. But when I came back to the door, there's the-- I should-- I'm starving for hunger. And I left my mother, and my sister, and my brother. So they said, you-- you-- you want to work? I said, anything, we would do. Anything. 

So they took us in. And we worked. And this was already in the good times. This was the first year-- a year and a half, we was just waiting every single day for the death. 

Then you was fighting to live another day. But not hope that you're gonna get out of this. You didn't have no hope. 

SUBJECT 2: There was episodes when you was working, let's say on the chaussee, when we was working, there was peasants-- mostly women-- passing by. Having a little bit-- they had like a little-- I don't know how we are saying in English-- a-- a basket type. 

They used to have-- have, let's say, a piece of bread in it, or something, whatever they used to have. And when they passed by, they was looking, when the guard didn't see, they threw us a piece of bread, or whatever they managed to-- that was mostly Ukrainian women. Where they have see-- they used to help this way to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there any religious life? 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did Jews get together at Yom Kippur or Rosh Hashanah? 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Nothing? 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you talk to each other about what was going to happen to you? 

SUBJECT 2: We was hoping from day to day. We was hoping-- we heard later on, you know, sometimes if you have your ears open, you can hear talk between the soldiers. You could hear that there was something wrong, and there was something wrong. Once you hear that a battle went wrong you knew something is kooky. 

And then you saw-- on the mood of the soldiers, you could see sometimes that it's not that rosy for them. So they try to be a little bit more lenient with you. In some instances. Not always. Some of them, they was-- because it went wrong for them, they had-- we were sometimes the scapegoats. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did ever a soldier speak to you about the-- that he was going to lose the war, and-- 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: No, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. 

SUBJECT 2: Just between them, they was talking. They never said that they would lose the war. But sometimes they said, sometimes there-- the battle there. We hear, for instance, the battle near Stalinville-- it was with Stalingrad-- there was discussions of the just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they ever talk to you? Did the soldiers ever talk to you? 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: No. 

SUBJECT 2: No. The only thing that they used always to say, speed up. Sometimes they pushed us harder because if-- if some transport has to come by, and it has to be-- they used to push us a little bit harder. Otherwise, they let us-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they call you? What names? 

SUBJECT 2: Uh, Juden. Juden. 

SUBJECT 1: Juden. Jew, Jew, Jew. Name? No name. Jew. 

SUBJECT 2: Jude. 

SUBJECT 1: Goddamn Jew. Goddamn Jew. 

SUBJECT 2: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 

SUBJECT 1: Never learned the name. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: No name. Just goddamn Jew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know who they were speaking to? 

SUBJECT 1: Ha, because to who would we speak? Just us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, I mean which one of you. 

SUBJECT 2: No, they didn't-- they didn't say person with the room. Generally, the whole room. Uh, mostly they used to say, dirty Jew. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. [NON-ENGLISH], it mean-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Make way. Make way. 

SUBJECT 1: Right, right, right, right. 

SUBJECT 2: Speed up. 

SUBJECT 1: One thing I can tell you. We saw a difference. The Americans are very naive. But we saw the difference. 

Like the Russian people, they are-- their country's-- is this correct expression? They are very rich. But the people, for themselves-- when we was in Bershad, and we was in the [NON-ENGLISH], you know what he had? He was living just-- did himself-- the people, the nation-- was living just from day to day. 

They don't have, like, furniture like we used to have in Czernowitz. A nice home, furniture, nice clothes, nice things. They lived very primitive. They had just the iron bed, and they had very little clothes. And they lived day by day. 

SUBJECT 2: It was-- they didn't have-- even there they didn't have, for instance, a radio, or not speaking television they had at that time. 

SUBJECT 1: No television. I don't even-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How were you liberated? 

SUBJECT 2: The Russians came. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember the day of the liberation? The day. 

SUBJECT 2: Not the exact day. But it was in March of '44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember what you saw? What-- one day how they-- 

SUBJECT 2: We just saw tanks and soldiers passing by. They-- they-- we were still in the villages. They passed by, and they marched further and further. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the Romanians were retreating? 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw them? 

SUBJECT 1: I remember-- I-- I remember, I just told you. This was in Balta. They saw the death. I saw the-- the kugele [bullets] -- how you say-- they fly over our head, like I see you now. 

SUBJECT 2: We saw the artillery battling each other. 

SUBJECT 1: In every second we saw the death for our life. 

SUBJECT 2: In one episode I have seen that was a-- a truck-- a German truck with German soldiers-- German soldiers, at that time. And were some Italian soldiers, too, retreating. Marching, and they wanted to get on that same truck. The German soldiers pushed them down. Italians-- there was fighting comrades. 

But at that time it was a retreating time. They didn't even let their own-- there was-- there was two or three Italian soldiers. One of them grabbed at the back handle there. And he had, you know, the [NON-ENGLISH]-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT 2: [NON-ENGLISH], and he knocked him down-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you feel as a Jew watching that? 

SUBJECT 2: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you feel as a Jew seeing that? 

SUBJECT 2: I have-- at that time I've seen that, you know, like, uh, [NON-ENGLISH] fighting each other. That's how I saw them. I have seen that now is the time that it nears for them, and then too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What feeling did it give you? 

SUBJECT 2: A-- a feeling of relief that I will be one of the survivors who would see that the Germans will lose the war. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- do you suffer now any physical or emotional difficulties from that? 

SUBJECT 2: Ah, physical, not. Because-- but sometimes emotional, I still have in my back mind, still sometimes you see through-- like a picture passing by, some episodes. Like, for instance, now talking to you, I remember before the war. That was in 19-- yeah, 1937. Came to power at that time-- 

SUBJECT 1: Cuza-Goga 

SUBJECT 2: --there was-- there was, a-- like the Iron Guard-- there was another branch, Cuza. They were also not-- it was two different groups, but he came to power to government, to be like having-- Cuza was the prime-- prime-- Goga was the prime minister. 

It lasted just six weeks. But they had a band with the swastika on. And that was-- that was before the war, in 1937. There was mostly [NON-ENGLISH]-- I don't know you're saying [NON-ENGLISH]. 

SUBJECT 1: Superintendent. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, like-- not superintendent. It's like a-- 

SUBJECT 1: [NON-ENGLISH], superintendent. Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: In a way. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: He's-- let's say it's an apartment building for, let's say, 10, 12 apartments. 

SUBJECT 1: So superintendent. 

SUBJECT 2: And he is taking care, mostly, that's-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: So they was-- at that time they was the big shots. And in the [NON-ENGLISH], like today I remember they had, like, basements. They used to get, for instance, I've seen a bearded Jew, or uh, even like me, I had a long nose, they could recognize right away that I am a Jew. 

They grabbed him in-- in the basement-- beat him up. That he should feel that he's beaten, then after a couple of hours they let him out. But that's how they treated, in 1937. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did the Jewish community do when that happened? 

SUBJECT 2: Was nothing more to do. 

SUBJECT 1: Nothing. 

SUBJECT 2: The-- the government was-- at that time, that was a-- an anti-Semitic government in power. That's true, at that time King Carol was-- no, Mihai was-- 

SUBJECT 1: Mihai. 

SUBJECT 2: Mihai was-- Mihai? 

SUBJECT 1: And then Carol. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Carol. 

SUBJECT 1: Carol. 

SUBJECT 2: Carol. At that time he was-- and after six weeks they-- he put in power Armand Calinescu. It was an iron hand. They'd switch-- after six weeks they switched around the whole thing, it became another government. 

But in this six weeks there was one of them in that little city where my father was born was one of the leaders from that group, [NON-ENGLISH]. He had on the-- on the roof of his house, from [NON-ENGLISH]-- 

SUBJECT 1: [NON-ENGLISH] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bricks. 

SUBJECT 1: Bricks. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, there was glazed bricks made a big, uh-- 

SUBJECT 1: Signs. 

SUBJECT 2: [NON-ENGLISH] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Swastika. 

SUBJECT 2: --swastika on the roof. He was, at that time, prefect. He was named prefect of Czernowitz, like a-- a governor. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, like a governor. 

SUBJECT 2: In the six weeks, one night he was sleeping there, like it's a mansion there. In the morning, around 4:00 o'clock, took over from that-- the new government, there came a new guy, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you frightened during this time? You were a young man. You were 20 years old, or so. 

SUBJECT 2: Frightened? Ah, some-- sometimes yes, and sometimes no. You-- you still, when you was in a group, you-- sometimes you could fight back. One episode I remember, there was students-- some students, what they had anti-Semitic uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Slogans. 

SUBJECT 2: Outbursts. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Outbursts. 

SUBJECT 2: For instance, one day we lived, the [NON-ENGLISH], that was a street. So I remember, like today, I had on a-- a silk shirt and a [NON-ENGLISH]. And I was going through the center of city, and came across a group of three or four students. And one of them saw me with a-- ha, look, a communist. And slapped me a couple of times in the face passing by. 

That was episodes what I went through, personally. One time that was already-- where was it? In '41, right after they took Tova in July, we lived, at that time, it was a small street, [NON-ENGLISH]. It was [NON-ENGLISH] was one street, and there was [NON-ENGLISH], another street. 

And we had to go to buy kerosene, because we didn't have electricity the first couple of months there. Going with a big bucket-- a metal bucket-- to buy kerosene. Came by another group of youngsters. I was, at that time, wearing the yellow star, and they was going-- there were about four guys, like a chain. 

And I had to pass by. So I tried to evade them. The second from that chain-- not the first, the second-- came out and slapped me in the face. So I didn't-- at that moment, I didn't think what I'm doing, because I might have been killed there, that time too. But I had that bucket-- that metal bucket that's from-- slapped right back. 

So they-- they-- they let me through. They let me go. They didn't bother me. They didn't even bother just to-- they should beat me up. 

That was one episode that I, myself, went through. Several things like that. But that remains, still, in the memory. That was before the war, and during the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Coming back to Czernowitz, what was it like? 

INTERVIEWER 1: After the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: After the war. 

SUBJECT 1: After the war? 

SUBJECT 2: After the war, we were-- we was working at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like to come back to Czernowitz? 

SUBJECT 1: It was a dream, but you never thought it can come true. It was unbelievable. But when you came back, and our house wasn't anymore there. It was destroyed. 

And the neighbors wasn't too friendly, because they took all our things. And then they saw coming back, so they was afraid we gonna ask they should give us back. It was very unfriendly. 

When I walked in, in our neighbors', I saw all our things. The furniture, the beautiful chandelier. The candelabras with my mother used to [NON-ENGLISH]-- you know, for Friday night. Was very cold. 

When they took us in concentration camp-- in lager, they was friendly to us, and they brought us food. But when we came back, it was very unfriendly. But my sister was in-- married in 1940, and she had brand new furniture, what my parents bought. Was the first child, when she was married. She was just one and a half year older than me. 

It was very unfriendly. But we wasn't, you know-- how should they tell you-- very-- you didn't care. Like, you came things to get back, it was-- they just didn't care. We didn't have a desire to stay there. We just want to go, go. 

We came just because it's like where we was born, where we was brought up. But the child would remember, it was very unfriendly, and we thought they're gonna be nice. They're gonna give us back things. They didn't give back, so we just didn't care. 

And we make money. We went right away to work, make money. It was a very bad time, because still, the war was on, and the Russian-- I was working in the factory in [NON-ENGLISH]. But the-- 

SUBJECT 2: There's where we met. 

SUBJECT 1: You know, after you go so much through, you become very cool, should I say? Yeah, you become-- yes, you become, you know, you don't care about nothing. So the Russian want to take me from the factory. I-- I understood Russian, because I learned the hard way then I was in concentration camp. And they say they gonna send us to, uh-- where was the [NON-ENGLISH]? 

SUBJECT 2: Donbass. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Donbass. 

SUBJECT 1: Donbass. And because I went so much through, I go to the man who is near the door. He's the [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, like the [NON-ENGLISH]? How you say in English? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Doorman. 

SUBJECT 2: Doorman, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Doorman. I was youngster when I returned. How old was I? 19? I was 19. I just grabbed him here, and I pushed-- 

SUBJECT 2: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 

SUBJECT 1: I pushed him away. I said-- he said, you cannot go out. But I was-- I heard the conversation. They say this kids, we're gonna take them all, and we send them now to Donbass. 

I heard the conversation. I understood. I was [NON-ENGLISH], but I understood what's going on. I was very rude. 

I remember just like now. But what was yesterday, I don't remember. I pushed him away, and there was a cemetery near. Ran over the fence and ran away. 

I came to my mother and I said, Mom, in case they look for me, you just say you never saw me. You don't know me. And I ran back-- from Czernowitz, I ran back in the suburb, in Juche, because I was hiding. I said, they want to send me, they're not gonna send-- 

SUBJECT 2: Hiding. 

SUBJECT 1: Hiding. They not gonna send me to Donbass. And soon we'll make money. I paid off, because Romanian, you can pay off. They are very-- they like money. 

So I met my husband. We paid, to this time, 20,000 ruble. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah? And came to Romania. 

SUBJECT 2: To get-- not just because they were-- we paid the money. Besides paying the money, I-- we was Romanian citizens, because we was born-- my father was born in Radautz. Radautz belonged to Romania. So we wanted to go back to Romania, so that's how we left Czernowitz, in 1945. 

But in 1944, four weeks after we came home, the-- the war was still on. And exactly four weeks after the Russians came back to Czernowitz, they drafted people to send because at that time there was fierce battling on the Baltic states-- Riga, Latvia, in there. So they needed soldiers. 

They didn't care. They took people, two, three, or four weeks of training, and they send them up the front. I remember distinctly one day, it was April the 29th. My father, me, and my brother was called in the same day. Luckily, we managed to escape, all three, because we knew that three people from one family, one will be [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. 

SUBJECT 1: [NON-ENGLISH] 

INTERVIEWER 2: A victim. 

SUBJECT 2: A victim. So, we-- we worked out, like, to say time to be strategists. So we talked to each other, how we will go. My younger brother-- it was my younger brother-- he worked as a telephonist for the Russian Army, for the [NON-ENGLISH], repairing telephone lines. So we knew that he being like a-- considered like a soldier, that they will let him go right away. So we said, you'll be going the first. 

Couple of hours later, my father will go. And then I'll go, that we shouldn't go all three with the same name at the same time. So my father was, you know, sometimes it's not good to be a straight person. 

SUBJECT 1: [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what [NON-ENGLISH] mean? The [NON-ENGLISH] knows one and one makes two. 

SUBJECT 2: Two, not three. 

SUBJECT 1: Sometimes one and one makes three, though. You know, he's still the maniac, and not me. 

SUBJECT 2: When we registered, at that time, we could have made ourselves younger or older. But who knew? So my father always was-- almost was drafted because of, they drafted at that time, up to the age of 50. And my father was 49-- a little bit over 49. They almost drafted him too, but he was working in the city hall, in a financial department of city hall, having a-- a paper that he worked there, they let him go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you went-- in this last question, you said you were in a concentration camp. And up till a few minutes ago I thought you were just in a ghetto. Were you in a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT 1: In a concentration camp. 

SUBJECT 2: That's-- that's not the-- 

SUBJECT 1: The ghetto was-- excuse me, I was asked. The ghetto was the first two weeks when the Russian took-- when the Russian ran away, and then the German [NON-ENGLISH] took over. Then the Romanian took us to-- for two weeks, in school, in the same town in [NON-ENGLISH]. But then we was in a concentration camp it's-- 

SUBJECT 2: Generally, it's not a-- it's not like the-- like the Germans have concentration camps. It was different. It was like a-- like ghetto type, mostly. 

SUBJECT 1: Why you say ghetto now? 

SUBJECT 2: That's not-- that's not concentration camps. In Transnistria, they didn't consider Transnistria as a concentration camp. You-- you was not-- you couldn't move freely. You had-- you was confined to a certain area, but it's not like Dachau, or Auschwitz, or this. 

SUBJECT 1: It's not there's the whole [NON-ENGLISH]. 

SUBJECT 2: That's what you're saying. Concentration camp, they're considering concentration camps-- Dachau, Auschwitz, all these lagers. That's they're considering concentration camp. Our- Transnistria was in a different way considered. That was in a slower way by extermination. 

SUBJECT 1: Let me make a statement. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: Let me tell you. And listen to my statement. Believe me, I don't know-- you spent a half hour, an hour with us, I don't know. Believe me, I can stay with you, and you don't have so much paper when I take day by day to tell you what we will do. 

Believe me, this is impossible that human being can go this through and still survive. Take my word. This is me. I'm telling you. 

SUBJECT 2: Well, the Romanians did it in a slower pace of extermination. A longer-- because-- 

SUBJECT 1: The [NON-ENGLISH]-- how do you say [NON-ENGLISH]? Would you help me out? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The purpose. 

SUBJECT 1: The purpose was to kill us all. But very few survived. This was the purpose. They, themselves didn't know that there's gonna be some from this people that's gonna survive. 

From us is no work. We never talked about this is possible, that you can survive. Because it is impossible. But it's true. 

[WHISPERING] 

[BEEP] 

