INTERVIEWER: Well, first tell us how you got to Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: I-- yes. They took us back. The rest, uh, you know, transfer. [INAUDIBLE] it was [INAUDIBLE] was co-- eh-- co-- concentrate and the-- and the-- you know, the platz, you know, in the lager, in the camp. 

Was a big, big place, you know. There was a-- eh, you know, it come from the people. They send out people and they came back. One was missing. One run away. The-- you know-- the cop-- call-- they caught them and they shoot, every-- every five-- fifth every sec-- tens. 

They count 10 and they took after the person. They-- they shoot them if somebody makes such a move, you know, he runned away. But a horrible thing. And the-- something happened, you know. Some-- you know, the-- the-- right away, everybody was on the apple plots. We call them apple plot-- apple plots. 

INTERVIEWER: They're used to count people. 

SUBJECT: Yes, they're used to count. Oh, yeah, terrible. And somebody brings something. They send out people over here, over here, where most places they have to-- they have to work. You send them out. You know, young people, before they're able to work. 

They buy something. Piece of salami, piece of-- you know-- butter-- something, you know, because over there, we don't got such a thing. We got-- the beginning, of course, now we had food. They give us piece of bread every day, a little-- you know, supper. Little soup, some, you know, or but not such a thing, you know. 

The people that they went out working came over the-- and not the SS, just was other kind people, you know, but he wasn't watching them. He wasn't the-- the-- the-- I-- we called them-- he was not this horrible like the other, you know. He wasn't buying something from the people, we paying them and they [INAUDIBLE] 

They wasn't-- they wasn't-- hil-- hil-- searching them. He took away everything. The whole thing. They making such a trouble. Things was terrible, you know. And this time when we cut the transport, no-- was no more place to send away us, we went back. 

And we was in another six weeks over there, till we clean up the place, we leave-- we didn't want to leave any-- anything, you know. The-- you know, eh, this time-- they wasn't-- eh, over there, you know, in Poland, the-- uh-- liberate the-- the Russian people-- the people in liberate-- and liberate us. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get to Auschwitz finally? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER: How did you finally get to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: I told you. Another six weeks, they liquidate the rest us. How many was, you know? Mostly womans. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember arriving in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Oh, now, why not? 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Was terrible. Terrible. They putting us in the-- you know-- in the uh, trains. [SIGHING] 100-- was not the place where to sit in. If they're sitting, where-- where was place to sit in? Was no place to sit in. Was all-- you know-- such a-- like, they put in the-- the-- the-- the cows in the thing. 

100-- on that. Was very bad. We came to Auschwitz, Bergen-Belsen. Even took us to Auschwitz before was-- you know, before such a-- a small town, and they was over there-- all over the-- you know, the wieza of the German-- um, yeah, you know, watch mit the reflektoren you know. 

But he took out [INAUDIBLE] and somebody want to run away [INAUDIBLE]. Mit the, you know, the electrische things all over was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Electrified. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And what-- and we was over there on the block. This time they don't liquidate the whole transport. The whole transport was-- they keep this transport, because it was already too late, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember in Auschwitz-- did you ever see gardens, a swimming pool? 

SUBJECT: Oh, my god, swimming pools. Once they took us, you know, to the, eh, you know, to get a bath. The first time that we came, the took us to, you know, in the shower rooms to give us a shower. We went to this-- this-- here in and another place out. This clothes, what we had, we never saw it again. We got one has this and one has this and one has this. And they, you know, the wood shoes-- you know this. Not like they were now, just all was wood, you know? 

And a very-- very loud people, they-- they cut off the hair. Them give a haircut like horrible. You can't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER: How were you able to stay alive in Auschwitz? How were you-- 

SUBJECT: I was not long in Auschwitz. I was a couple weeks, just a couple weeks, because either way, eh, after a couple days, we went out, you know, to-- to count us, you know, of the appelplatz. And I saw right away in another block, you know, through the-- the-- the-- the ghetto-- through the thing, I saw my cousin. And he tell me, don't stay here. If you want to stay here, you don't going to-- you don't going to get-- you don't going to make it, no way. It's so horrible, you don't going to make it. 

Just came people from-- from elsewhere, you know, taking people, woman, to work younger woman, you know, who is stronger. And they took us. Don't hide it. Eh, it comes somebody, be-- be the-- the first one to go away from here. But here is very bad. And that's what I made it. 

And came, eh, a man, you know, one person. And he took people to Bergen-Belsen. I was liberated in Bergen-Belsen, not in Auschwitz. And one time we was, mm, you know, we was ready to go to making us, you know, numbers. But I didn't got a number. 

He came, you know, uh, I think Nazis stop them-- no more, no more numbers. They stopped. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in-- 

SUBJECT: And we was hurt. We went then through, you know, the-- the doctors was over there and they selected the people who were stronger, who was younger, and older, uh, a very skinny one right in the gas chamber. 

And we was hearing that they-- the cries and the yells and the everything from the people what he tooking them to-- to-- to gas-- to, you know-- to-- to make them finish. You can't believe it. It was rough horrible. 

And they took me to Bergen-Belsen. Oh, there was also very hard and terrible. Was nowhere to work, just the people were sitting like a dummy, nothing but to doing And even the last time was very horrible. We don't got food. We don't got, was of everything cut off for them, you know? Because it was close before they liberate, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends? Did you become very close friends with anyone in Auschwitz or anyone in Bergen-Belsen or anyone in Plaszow before you left? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I got a friend, what I was together mit her [INAUDIBLE]. We were sleeping together. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk about the hope for a future? 

SUBJECT: She was married. She has a husband too. And she was hoping he's alive. Everybody was hoping. We were-- we could-- could believe it-- this that could come in our mind, are they going to make us such a horrible thing? Never, never. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hope that you would have-- go back and find your husband? 

SUBJECT: I hoped it. I hoped it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see that woman again? 

SUBJECT: I-- I saw here, yes. We-- they-- when they came to Bergen-Belsen the-- you know, in Britain, I was sick. I was very, very sick. I got, uh, the high fever, the typh-- typhus, lots of people, not just me, because, you know, in this, eh, way how we was-- it was no hard thing to get the-- the typhus. No food, no good conditions, no clean, no, eh, a bed, no nothing-- and how we-- how we can survive this way? How? 

Plus, by a couple days, we don't got even a piece of bread, nothing, because it was-- didn't have already. And the, you know, you hear of Mengeles in Bergen-Belsen. He ordered already to making coffee, make bread, and to give all woman and to-- to-- to-- to give them poison, to put poison in the coffee, in the bread, and all liquidate. That's what he ordered. You didn't hear he got a trial. And people went and it was in, you know, a town but he made it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they poison the coffee? 

SUBJECT: No, no, didn't poison, no. It was somebody in the kitchen. And he didn't allow to do with it. Yes. You know, the-- there was some work but very, very little. They're making [? such ?] from the, eh, [INAUDIBLE]. [INAUDIBLE], you know, they wasn't making like braided, you know. 

And I went to them. I just want to go out, not to sit like a dummy, you know. And I went out from this place. And I went to another place. And over there, I was not finished, even. Was not even places to sleep, just on the floor we was sleeping, all woman, together. 

And I got sick. I went out, because I have to go to the bathroom. And I fall down in high-- high fever. Nobody even come to you and pick you up and ask you, what happened? What's going on? I was late maybe a couple hours till I came. And I went back on my knees, back to the inside. 

And the woman-- the, you know, the friend, what he was very close, she-- when I was sick, she was-- she took care of me. She, eh, not before, this time was already we was liberated. The Britain was already over there, you know. What took-- doesn't took too long. They came. They liberated us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see that woman again? 

SUBJECT: I saw her, eh, you know, after. Oh, but not in-- not in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: Not in Israel, not here. I don't know where she is, what happened to her. She don't find her husband. This I know because I saw her after. 

The Briton came. I was sick. And he was marked on here, on the forehead. I thought she cries and like with the ink. She take the old sick people in the hospitals because, you know, they're making a horrible thing. They don't know I don't take-- tell they making this on purpose. 

People was hungry, didn't got other food just to conservate the meats, the [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] you know, the-- the cans And this, they make a horrible thing. People got sick, and they got, eh, you know, the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Dysentery. 

SUBJECT: That's right. You should see what kind of cemetery over there is built up after the war. After the war, people was dying like-- like flies, because they was sick. And they couldn't get-- they could eat such a food. And that was terrible, terrible. 

I don't eat this food because, you know. And she went, and she-- eh, she took a potato. And she took something. She cooked a little soup for me. She give me, and this, thank God, I came to myself. 

Oh, but anyway, I don't want to go in the hospital. I was in this mind as still like the German. They're going to take me to the hospital. He's finished with me. I don't going to be alive. And I took something, and I crossed this. And I don't want to go in the hospital. 

Oh, but anyhow, the-- I was not able. Eh, this was the camp for-- the Jewish people was in over there. And after-- after the liberation, we-- they took the whole camp from over there. They took in another camp, where the German people used to be. Over there was already apartments, rooms, buildings, not in the, you know, in the, em, eh, you know, eh, like we was before in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Barracks. 

SUBJECT: --barracks, that's right. They sent away my friend with other people before. And me, they took me in the hospital this time. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see your friend again? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I saw her, sure. Till I got better, I was full. I got strong legs. I could work. I could eat. I was very sick. Oh, but after a while, you know, I came to me. And they liquidate the whole hospital over there, in Bergen-Belsen, where there was the camp for us. And they sent me over there, where the people was. They don't send me already to-- to her because-- they sent me-- they took us with other people in our room. It was about four or five woman together in a room, very nice people I met over there. 

You know, in-- in [INAUDIBLE], rabbi's daughter, a very, very nice person. She was married. She had a husband. She has a child. And they took her husband to Treblinka and her child. And she got a brother in Israel, you know? 

And you hear in Bergen-Belsen, the "Svedish," the Swedish, em, the-- the-- you know, the-- the queen, she made a gesture for the people from the concentration to take over there some thousands of people. And I was already signed up to go over there, to go over there because, you know, what you're going hang around here? It's not-- she want to go, because her husband and her cousin went. And she want to go very badly. 

And I was signed up to go too. After, I said, no, I don't going to go, because I made-- they sent over there a transport mens where my husband was together with them, you know? One part is sent to Bergen-Belsen. This was after-- after the liberated. And one part is sent another place. 

The-- my husband's friends, they wasn't from our town, even. And I saw them, and I went to them. And they tell me-- uh, you know, they tell me, I saw your husband very, very late the last couple days-- eh, weeks. And he was looking good. He was working in the kitchen. He was working, you know? He cooked, eh, food in the kitchen. 

And the people-- this was in Plassenburg, [INAUDIBLE]. I don't exactly remember where. And he was-- he was good-looking because he got what to eat. And he got over there, you know, the shave. When the kitchen was not a German. He was, um-- [SIGHS] he had-- he was so mat at the German, because he took his two sons. One died in the war, you know. He was very, very-- but very, very angry of them. 

And he-- uh, he was so close to my husband, you can't believe it. He was a baker, you know. At home he was a baker. And he held my husband like a brother, you see. People came, you know, and they want to take him out to the-- to the-- eh, walk outside in the, you know-- in the mine from the rocks. 

He was good-looking. He said, here can come a [INAUDIBLE] person. But he is very skinny. And he didn't have food. He has enough on him, he can go work up there. He was-- he was fighting with them. If you're going to take out this person, I don't going to cook for your good food, because he is such a good worker, he works for four 

Anyway, they took out him. They're going to listen to him. He was working hard and sending [INAUDIBLE] clothes, you know. The-- him, they liberated the-- eh, American people over there, because he was in Germany. He was near-- in Bayern, over there in someplace, you know? 

And one day, I said, no way, I don't going to go to Sweden. You're going to go, I said to the friends. It's all right, I'm not, because I am cut off from all-- everybody. And I don't know nothing. And I don't going to even find out or somebody is alive or somebody who is living. I said, no way. 

And I said, no, I don't going to go. In a while, came my husband's brother-in-law to Bergen-Belsen. He was from, eh, Lodz. And he said he got such a big family. My husband was-- there was seven brothers, you know, with-- with sisters, married with children. He thanks somebody he's alive. He going to-- he has lots of woman. In Bergen-Belsen, he came-- before he was in Lodz enough that he came to Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: And he found you. 

SUBJECT: And he had find me. 

INTERVIEWER: And you went afterwards-- in the last few minutes, Mrs. Resnick I'd like to ask you why you chose to go to Israel. 

SUBJECT: Oh, oh, this, I going to tell you. He came and he tell me, I'm pretty sure that your husband is alive. And I want to go with him, but he left me to look for my husband, you know. He said, no. He was afraid to take me. 

First of all, it was very hard to-- to, you know, to-- to get someplace, because the roads was terrible. The-- the trains was not running. It was a horrible thing. He said, you think you're going to sit and go in the train? You're going to go? It's horrible. You have to go stop, and you have to wait till you're going to have transportation. And you can't go back. A couple days also, you can't go. He don't want to take me. He was-- he was afraid to take me. And maybe he don't going to find him. He was-- he didn't want-- oh, but I promise you, I'm going to bring you husband, you know? That's what he said. 

He went away, back. He went to Germany looking for [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] He-- my husband-- meanwhile, my husband was-- he was sick after the liberation. He was very sick, because, eh-- I think you know the story of what they went through. And he was in the hospital. And he got better. He-- he said, I going to go to Poland. He was also [? mine. ?] Maybe I'm going to find somebody. Oh, but I have to go looking. If not, I can-- I can never know. 

He went to Poland. He went to Krakow. He finds some friend over there in Krakow. And the friend tell him, you know who is alive? Your wife's cousin, Morris. Or another one, he is in Sosnowiec He went to Sosnowiec you know? And he find over there, my cousin. And my cousin tell him as he saw me in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: So is that how he found you? How did he find you? Where did you reunite? 

SUBJECT: He went back to Germany, to Bayern you know? And he said, I have to go now to Germany, to Munich, Munich. And, eh, over there, was a lots-- a lots of kinds of places also in-- in German, you know? 

And he went to tell the thing. He went in another place, very big places. This was after the, you know, after the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did he finally find you? 

SUBJECT: He find of the-- my brother-in-law. 

INTERVIEWER: But how did he find you? 

SUBJECT: He came with him back to Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were still there? 

SUBJECT: And I was still there. Yeah. And this was a Thursday. I remember like now, so many years. And I went with this friend, with the rabbi's daughter in another place, for to the rabbi, [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] for Shabbas, 'cause she was a very religious woman. The father was a rabbi. And the-- the husband was a rabbi. And she has even a brother got in before the war in Israel. A matter of fact, he's a rabbi over in Israel too. 

CREW: We've got one minute of tape left. 

INTERVIEWER: We have one minute of tape left. So I would like to know how you feel now about this experience that you've been through. 

SUBJECT: How I feel? Believe me, this never, never goes out of your mind-- never. You have the-- the-- the-- you know, the picture all the time in front of your eyes-- all the time. [SIGHS] I don't know, but you know, you have to push away everything, because how can you live? 

INTERVIEWER: [SIGHS]. 

SUBJECT: And lots of people, even in America, here, in the United States, don't believe it. You think all people believe it? OK. 

You're thinking a lot saying, you know, it was a-- a-- a professor, a Jewish professor. You hear this? He said this is just eh, make up. Can I talk already? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: You see? One day, it was Thursday-- 

INTERVIEWER: Are you-- are you shut down? 

CREW: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you shut down? 

SUBJECT: He don't hear you. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

CREW: That's right. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. Um, no, I'm glad that you said that, that people don't believe it. That was very important that you said that. 