DIRECTOR: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: Well, when we got married, our-- a year after we came to this country, we got married. Our entire savings at that time were $700. That included the wedding gifts. We-- I came to New Haven. My husband already lived here. And we both worked at-- my husband had three different jobs. He worked in a kosher butcher store. He worked in a delicatessen store on Legion Avenue, which now it's M&T, by that time. I forgot the name of it already. And any time they needed someone to go to New York to deliver, to bring some fish or so, before the holidays, or any-- he did that too. Just to ma-- sometimes he would work from six in the morning, didn't get home until two o'clock in the morning, slept a couple of hours, and go back to work. 

I worked for one year after we were married. And I was very careful with every penny that we spent. We lived on the third floor of an apartment building with a baby and saved every penny possible. I would make my own clothes, would make clothes for my daughter. As I said, we never in the 31 years we are in this country collected unemployment or in any way collected welfare. 

He always-- then he went into business for himself after a few years. We saved about two and a half thousand dollars for him to go into that business. And of course, he took a great chance and a risk. I felt this way, that if he fails, we will not have any more children. I would go back to work and pay up if I borrowed $1,800 yet too, I felt that I would go back to work and pay up, and the debts, and that's it, and start all over again. 

But fortunately enough, with hard work or so, he s-- they started slowly progressing. And I didn't have to go back to work. I was able to devote my complete time to my children, had more than one. But I-- as I said, we were very careful with-- to this day, my children also are very conscious of prices and how they spend the money. And they know that they have to save, even if it's $1 a week. They have to save it. Otherwise-- I felt this way and somehow transmitted it to my daughters, too. I could not be secure, unless I could put this $1 away a week. 

I had an educational policy for Susan, where I put away $1.50 a week. I had a life policy, where I-- you know, it's-- actually, I was dealing with pennies. But every little thing had to be somehow figured and very carefully spent. 

INTERVIEWER: With the capital that it takes to go into business, how did you manage to have your husband start his own business. 

SUBJECT: Well, at that time, as I said, we borrowed money from my brother and his brother. He borrowed money from the bank. To this day, he says-- he tells the story, when he came for a $5,000 loan, he says, well, they ask him for a collateral. So he says, look, the only collateral I can give you is my wife, and my child, and my promise. He says, all right, I lend you $5,000. And he did, you know, deal with that bank for many, many years afterwards, out of gratitude more than anything else, because they lend him the $5,000 to go into business. 

He had a partner. That's in addition to what he put in of his own already in. And-- and hard work. He worked very hard all his life. And the past few years or so that he was actually able to take it a little bit easier. But the first, I would say 17, 18 years, he worked very hard. His day would start 6:00 in the morning, he would get home about 7:00, 8 o'clock at night, sometimes later. 

INTERVIEWER: There was no help from outside agencies, or-- do you th-- do you really s-- are you really saying that you prospered because-- only because of hard work and dedication? 

SUBJECT: Exactly. I understand when my husband first came to New Haven, the Jewish Family Service helped him. They paid for his room the first couple weeks, I think. So-- and-- until he found a job. And I remember they found him a job at 18 dollars a week. And then two or three months later, he found himself a job at 30.00 dollars a week. So he changed jobs. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he have a language problem? 

SUBJECT: He did. To this day he has difficulty. Because he was brought up in Hungary, and Hungarian language is not similar to any other language. Only I think a little to Finnish. The Finnish language is little-- there's similarity. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of a job could he get with no English facility? 

SUBJECT: Well, he was working as a butcher. His father was in that business. They had the slaughter house. As a matter of fact, his brother has a butcher shop in New York, a kosher market. And uh, he was working in this line. As I said, at this point, whatever he could get. He was working as a kosher butcher. He was working Saturdays and Sundays in a deli store, behind the counter. And whenever they need any odd jobs or so, he would always-- if somebody needed a-- fish market needed a quick delivery from New York, he would run down, because he could make extra $20. 

So it wasn't, you know. It didn't come easy. It came hard. But we did it on our own, with any help, with any, you know, as far as that, as I said, it was just was careful planning and hard work. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, that's fantastic. Because you know the accusations that are constantly made. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: I was born-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, not yet. 

DIRECTOR: Sorry. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, not yet. 

DIRECTOR: Thanks. 

SUBJECT 2: [NON ENGLISH] 

MAN: Tell us when, John. 