[BEEP] INTERVIEWER: You just talk. 

MILLIE W.: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: So forget everything else-- the cameras, other people. Just go ahead-- not every little detail, but what was really-- what was important to you. 

MILLIE W.: Well, uh, I should begin with the wells. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. OK. Maybe you can begin by telling your name and when you were born and where you were born and how was life at home before the war? 

[CLEARS THROAT] 

MILLIE W.: Uh, I'll tell my name from before-- wasn't born Millie. I was born Malka Drezner. And born in Radom, Poland in-- in April, 1927. And so I was 12 years old when the war broke out. And-- and-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like in Radom in '28, 9, '30, when you were a little girl? 

MILLIE W.: Well, we went to-- it was-- I didn't know any other life. We have aunts and uncles and grandparents and cousins. And we lived a very Jewish life. We were quite separate from the Poles. We didn't go with Polish children to school. And so to us, this was normal life. I only knew that my father never wanted to stay in-- in Poland, you know, was-- but my mother didn't want to leave her family. So we remained in Poland, which he always regretted through the war. She felt-- 

INTERVIEWER: Now sometimes memories stand out, of a particular day, a particularly event, an unimportant one, flashbacks of Radom way back. Do you have? 

MILLIE W.: Well, I, uh-- our family wasn't rich. They were not rich people. But it was a very warm-- I loved my grandmother and my grandmother. And one other-- my mother was a dressmaker. And um, she counted a great responsibility towards the family. She-- before Saturday, she knew that they need. So she used to always-- she worked as a-- and made a good living. So I remember that every Thursday evening, she used to give me money to bring to this uncle, to this aunt, to-- and it was a-- it's a good feeling. I remember she did it. Before she went shopping, she felt she had to provide for them. 

INTERVIEWER: And you would have the privilege of giving? 

MILLIE W.: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Do you remember moments? 

MILLIE W.: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you tell-- describe them? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. I remember she used to-- I used to know this hand was for this uncle. And this hand was for the grandparents. It was a very good feeling. 

INTERVIEWER: And you have-- you had also a brother. 

MILLIE W.: Yes. I had an older brother. He was three and a half years older than I was. And uh, he went to also-- a Schul Kult was a Jewish school. And um, until the war broke out, we heard that this-- in '39, is-- 

INTERVIEWER: And more, what was home-- what did you do at home? Do you remember scenes with your-- memories with your brother, with your grandparents? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: With a holiday? Describe-- it make look unimportant, but-- 

MILLIE W.: Well, as I said, my father was a lot away. He didn't want to stay in Poland. He was-- once in 1920, he was in America. And my mother didn't want to go. So he came back. And uh, then I-- he went to France to work there. He just wanted to get away from Poland. He felt he-- 

INTERVIEWER: What business? 

MILLIE W.: He was a tailor. And he felt the anti-Semitism so great, more than we as children, that he didn't want to stay. And my mother didn't want to leave. So um, the-- for many years, he wasn't home. But uh, then maybe 1935, he came back. I was a little girl. 

And my fa-- my brother went to-- as I said-- to a school, Schul Kult was called. Was a Jewish-oriented school. And uh, then he belonged to the Akiba, which is a-- a-- a Zionist organization. And then he pulled me towards-- in '39, he tried very much to take me in. My mother told I was too young. But I joined. It was a-- a very-- what I can remember, it wasn't a rich life. But we-- I didn't know anything better. So this must have been the best. 

INTERVIEWER: Other people in the shtetl or a rabbi in die schoykhet. 

MILLIE W.: I remem-- I remember a lot of poverty, a lot of much-- 

INTERVIEWER: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. ?] 

MILLIE W.: --poorer people than in our building, the house where we lived. The neighbors were not like here. They were close and friendly. And we lived with each person. So we-- there was a lot of poverty and hunger before the war. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the schoykhet. 

MILLIE W.: I remember the schoykhet, I remember the baking. I-- well, to the schoykhet, I-- I was sent every Thursday with a chicken, which I hated it. But I went anyway. And uh, Friday, we went with the tchulnt to the baking. This was the-- these were different dramas. Saturday during the day. Um, the poor people knew which tchulnt is the fatter one, the richer on, which was quite-- always [INAUDIBLE]. And this was what I remember from home. 

It was, uh-- we were concerned with every cousin, with every member. It was a close-knit. We lived through with every experience that in the family happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Bakers in town or not? 

MILLIE W.: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have bakers? 

MILLIE W.: Oh, sure, we had bakers. 

INTERVIEWER: Any-- 

MILLIE W.: No, not particularly-- I-- I just went-- every baker had a pseudonym, a different name. We-- to the baker I used to go, he was called Motel toyter. And we used to bring the-- the tchulnt We used to buy from him the bread. 

INTERVIEWER: Motel toyter? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was it Motel toyter? 

MILLIE W.: I don't know. Each baker-- everyone has another name. Why, I can't tell you. 

INTERVIEWER: Do have any jokes on them, funny people? 

MILLIE W.: Oh, yes, we had crazy people. But they were not in the sense like they were crazy, they were sick people. But we were not afraid. They were not harmful. They were [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one of the? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me. 

MILLIE W.: This I remember-- quite a few we had as children. We were-- and in our building was a woman that called, uh-- you will laugh probably-- [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: I-- say it again. 

MILLIE W.: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

INTERVIEWER: [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] 

MILLIE W.: Anything we said with a zwanzig, funfzig, She went wild. And she was a very nice girl. And the story was that a boyfriend went away to America. And he left here. And she went crazy. Why the sichzig the zwanzig... When we used to say zwanzig or funfzig She went wild-- but she was always dreaming that her boyfriend is coming back from America to marry her. And this is-- we have a lot of fun with it. And they were not harmful. 

Then we had a-- a man. He was related to the-- we the had a [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] And a-- a [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] And he was related to them. But also, something snapped. And he used to carry the water, a vasser traiger. 

INTERVIEWER: Vasser treiger? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. And he used to, um, come up to the house until-- it was when it-- before the war, he said some-- somebody will come. And he will kill all the Jews. And he didn't name a name. But he said it's going to be a guy [INAUDIBLE]. And of course, we looked at him as quite-- we didn't-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did he have a name? 

MILLIE W.: His name was Doolittle, the vasser treiger And Kessenberg was his other name. He was from a very nice family. For a long time before the war, he used to tell this story, that will-- somebody will come. And we should run away. We should run because they will kill all the Jews. [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: And Doolittle, the vasser treiger was right. 

MILLIE W.: He was right. And many things-- we we talked about many times. Now we remember him. He was telling stories that we looked at him as crazy. But he somehow had a feeling or he saw something. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did it begin? 

MILLIE W.: How it began, it-- 

INTERVIEWER: For you. 

MILLIE W.: --in '39, that September, '39, and there was bombing in our town. And this was the first encounter with bombing. It was quite an experience. A bomb fell not far from us. And a lot of people were killed. It was near the shul. And so we were praying that the Germans should come in already, the bombing should stop. And it-- and the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you did on that day? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. We were-- at one moment-- point-- I just remember that they said that they dropped some gas bombs. And we were all-- we all smelled the gas. Believe it or not, it was not true. And we were-- because we were very hysterical with the bombs. And when the Germans came in, we were relieved. 

INTERVIEWER: You were then 12 years old? 

MILLIE W.: I was 12 years old. And my parents and grandparents were telling us, it's not so terrible. The Germans in the First World War were very nice. We were dealing with them. We were huddled. And we bonded with them. And they were nice. They-- they liked them more than the Russians from before. So there wasn't such a-- and they were very nice. They were throwing candies to the children in the streets. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, did you see them coming in? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. There were-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? What's the picture? 

MILLIE W.: I-- they had black uniforms. They looked very handsome. And they were throwing to the children candies. And so we-- we couldn't understand why we were so afraid, until-- and little by little, they-- when they used to go into the stores and buy and pay more money than was it expected from them. And they just took in everyone with their good-- with their good word. 

They were-- they were very nice in the beginning until they-- this was in September. And the Jewish holidays approached. And something happened that they started to grab people to work in the-- and to work was nothing but to torture them, especially Jews with beards, with the Jewish headset they were wearing. And they used to pull the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes. They used to pull-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

MILLIE W.: They-- especially-- they grabbed Jews with-- with beards with the [INAUDIBLE]-- and they used to torture them, beat them, and especially pull the beards out. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you seen anybody that you have known, that you knew-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --that they pulled? Who was it? 

MILLIE W.: A neighbor of ours-- he was a very religious young man, very-- and he was taken that Rosh Hashanah. And he came back a completely broken man. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he look like? 

MILLIE W.: He was-- his beard was pulled. And he was beaten. And he was afraid to talk, because they told him not to tell. But he did. And we saw it too. They used to place two Jews on-- on a tree, on branches. And-- and they should call to each other names, different names and-- 

INTERVIEWER: What names? 

MILLIE W.: Cuckoo and stupid names-- and one should hit the other. And-- and they-- he came home that Rosh Hashanah. He was-- the whole house, the all [INAUDIBLE] was sitting and crying over him. And then they were grabbing young people and send-- they sent once my brother away-- he was that time 15 years-- to different camps. 

But it was-- although it was terrible, we still didn't know what it's coming. It was all yet-- and of course, foods began to be very scarce. It was very bad with food. Since my mother was a dressmaker, in the beginning, we didn't feel that because she had a lot of customers from the outside, from the Aryan side. And so she asked for food not for money, so we didn't feel it that much. But of course, we had to share with-- the family was a mess. You could see children with begging. It's not beggars, but people that you knew. 

INTERVIEWER: Who? Can you-- 

MILLIE W.: Respectful people, that-- 

INTERVIEWER: But somebody-- can you comment on somebody? 

MILLIE W.: Cousins, friends. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you name or describe a particular person, your memory? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. I saw many. And then typhus broke out. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You see, when you describe the vasser treiger, 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --you described somebody. 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: If you can, could you, when you say-- say something, describe somebody that you have in mind at that moment? 

MILLIE W.: Well, um, I-- we had, in our building, a family that was-- he was, um, [SIGHS] I don't know, a tin maker. And there were six girls. And once the war broke out, he stopped working. He had no work. And there was such a hunger there. And they got-- all got sick with typhus. And there were-- and these were-- a girl that went with me to school. And when I saw her begging for food, it-- it was a terrible experience. And also-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did she look like as a beggar? 

MILLIE W.: She lost her hair. She got the typhus. And she looked like a old lady. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: She was also 12 years old? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. Yes. And one of my cousins, he was very hungry. And he-- he went out. And he went to a-- we had where the garbage was placed. So he went in to search container to find something to eat. And a German saw him. And he shot him. He was that time maybe 14. And these things are terrible to remember. 

INTERVIEWER: That was before the ghetto? 

MILLIE W.: This-- yes, this was before. Yes. We were already concentrated in one place. Then they made, um, maybe 10-- 10 blocks. In Radom were about 30-- 32,000 Jews. And we were all placed area of 10 blocks. 

INTERVIEWER: It was quite a big ghetto? 

MILLIE W.: This was the big ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

MILLIE W.: And we were in Radom. 

INTERVIEWER: What time? What year? 

MILLIE W.: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

MILLIE W.: This was-- see, the years are for me-- it's-- I can't-- I think it's maybe '41, the end of '42, that time. And so we were really eight people in one room. And the room, it wasn't bigger than maybe 10 by 12. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that you have four in the family. Who were the other four people that were living? 

MILLIE W.: My mother's sister and her husband and two children. And-- and also, we were four people-- my brother, my mother, my father. So there were eight people in this room. [SIGHS] It was a very hard life with no bathroom facilities, no water. But all this, we will survive if they wouldn't, uh, kill us. 

So there-- there were a lot of things that were happening. And within-- my-- my grandfather constantly was begging to die. He said he wants to be buried. He also felt that something terrible is coming and said he wished to be buried. But he was deported, too. And at one point, we realized that we all have to go to some kind of work do. I mean, so my brother was working already by the Germans. And um, and my-- and at that time, they announced that in Radom was a ammunition factory, that they accepting from 15 to 40. So my mother and I went to-- we should be together. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember when-- when it was? 

MILLIE W.: This was in '43-- or '40. The years are very mixed and the times. 

INTERVIEWER: How old-- before you come to that-- 

MILLIE W.: I was 14 in-- 

INTERVIEWER: Before we come to that, you were two years in the ghetto. 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Any pictures of ghetto life? How was it guarded outside, inside, shops in the ghetto, other things happening, life, marriages in the ghetto? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you're there now. And what-- you're walking down the street. 

MILLIE W.: Yes. It was-- people married. People had children. 

INTERVIEWER: Who, you know, if you remember some? 

MILLIE W.: I remember an aunt of mine that gave birth to twins, twin girls. And it was a terrible-- she had no food to feed them. And so, uh, I-- they died probably of hunger. I don't know. There was no food to feed them. She had no milk. And-- and there was an organization that they provide-- they were providing some milk but probably was not enough. They both died. And, uh, it was a very hard life. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see in the ghetto later? 

MILLIE W.: We-- they-- eh, first, we stop going to school. So our teacher-- the Jewish teachers-- were trying to get together the children. And they were-- we tried to continue with our schooling as much as we could and-- until the deportations. She was with us. Because we were hoping somehow it will end somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean, every day you woke up and your went to school? 

MILLIE W.: In-- in diff-- some-- in different departments, not always. But then one got sick. And one-- the other two covered. They-- they did the best they could under the circumstances. Uh, as long as I was home with my mother and father, I was-- I felt protected. I didn't see so much. I just saw the food was the biggest problem, the worry where the next meal will come, the next piece of bread. And uh, It was a-- a war for just for this alone and to hide. 

And at that time, a lot of men ran-- ran away already, like a few of my uncles ran away to-- to Russia. There was one evening that everybody was going to Russia because they were politically involved in different organizations. And we were told that-- that the first thing they-- they will arrest the people that were organized in any way. So there were a lot children left without parents. So this was a struggle just to feed the children, just to dress them. We were very crowded in the rooms. So life was very unpleasant. But we lived. We lived. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you sleep, eight in a room? 

MILLIE W.: Uh, we slept [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] There were-- we had two beds and some on the floor. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you sleep? 

MILLIE W.: I slept on the bed with my mother-- with my mother. The beds were not like here. We had two little, very small beds. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you participate in the search for food personally did you do anything 

MILLIE W.: For food? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

MILLIE W.: No, I-- I couldn't do anything. I couldn't do-- I was so, so thankful for, uh, my mother's clients, the ones that came in. And some of them were volksdeutsche too. So we were lucky in this respect that they used to bring in some bread and some food. 

And um, until the separation, we-- the aunt, um, that lived with-- this was my mother's sister, her two children. And her husband worked in a leather factory. And she had two-- a boy and a girl, too. And she gave the children away to a Polish family. Because we felt that something is coming and to hide them. But um, just before the deportation, she brought them back. She didn't want them. 

The girl was six years and very smart, very-- the children were unusual bright. And she was very much afraid for the Germans. So, uh, one day, they, uh-- my uncle hid with the two children in the factory. And she heard that-- that the Germans are around. And she ran out. And-- and we saw-- they called her. She was six years old. And she was begging them to let them-- let her go. And there-- there was a pit and a [INAUDIBLE]. This was called [INAUDIBLE]. And they threw in there children and grenades after them. 

INTERVIEWER: Grenades after the children? 

MILLIE W.: Ah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear about that, watch it, or-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes, we were there. 

INTERVIEWER: And-- 

MILLIE W.: Her father was there. 

INTERVIEWER: Fa-- your father? He told them? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: He told you? 

MILLIE W.: Mine. Mine. And my aunt, uh, she got very sick that time. And she-- she remained with the other boy. And she was trying-- and the children were sinking. She was trying to make him as a grown person, built his heels up and make him look more mature. And the children for fear, they were sinking. 

The children were unusual. I will tell you about a case when we were-- I'm skipping-- about the boy that we found when we worked in that ammunition factory. And going to work, there was a child. So we were a group of women who said we're going to take him with us. And he was maybe four years old-- I assume about four years. And he didn't want to tell us who he was and what was his name. 

So we named him Sholem. And Sholem Shpitalnik, because we gave in-- we had-- it wasn't a hospital [INAUDIBLE]. It was a block where there was a doctor and a nurse. So we called them. And he needed some medical attention. So we gave him in there for awhile. And we called him Sholem Shpitalnik. And he never gave us his name. He never wanted to speak. 

And he was among us quite a while. When we went out for an appell to be counted, he hid himself that we couldn't find him. And after everything was all right, he came out. And he was among us. And the [INAUDIBLE] gave him just a little piece from what we had. And he was, uh, with us until we went to Auschwitz. He went to us on the journey from Radom to Tomazow. 

And in Auschwitz, they took him away. They placed him on arms of a-- of a woman that stood next to him. That's what-- we had the other children without parents. But he was so bright. He felt a danger that something is coming up. He hid. And he did-- we didn't know where, what it was. And after the atmosphere relaxed, he came out. Him, I will really not forget, his behavior, how he was fighting to live. 

And whenever we asked him about his parents, he never wanted to tell us. He was probably told by the mother and father not to tell anything. We also had two little girls like this that-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you look back to the time that you went to work with your mother? 

MILLIE W.: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: It was in 1943. 

MILLIE W.: This was a terrible thing, because they took me. I was 14 so they took me. 

INTERVIEWER: But you went together with your mother? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. And my mother-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you say that? 

MILLIE W.: My mother was 41. And I was 14 at that time. And I was only 14. I wasn't 15 yet, but they took me. And my mother, they didn't want to take-- 

INTERVIEWER: You went where? 

MILLIE W.: They-- we were supposed to register for work. In Radom was a ammunition factory. And before the war, no Jews could work there. So when we went to register, they took me. And my mother, they didn't want to take. She was 41. She was too old to work. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you remember the scene, what it was like? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. Well, they-- they said she cannot go. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: It was a desk? It was what? 

MILLIE W.: It is in a-- it was-- uh, I don't-- it was an office some kind. I remember where it was in the ghetto. There were-- Jews were working there and from the gmina and Germans. And she couldn't go. She was 41. 

So I didn't want to go, either. But my uncle, the one that lived with us, he said, no. We-- if they don't, if-- we should separate. If they take you, go. Maybe it's meant to be like this. Let's separate. Let's go in different directions. So it was-- I went home, yeah, to say goodbye to my brother. He was at home. 

At that time, my brother was-- had an accident. They ran him over. This-- he was-- he had the armband. So, uh, a truck ran him over on purpose. This, he was wearing-- and so he had a broken leg. So he was home. And so I said goodbye to everyone. And I went there. 

INTERVIEWER: Goodbye to-- 

MILLIE W.: To the whole family. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say? 

MILLIE W.: Well, there was nothing to say. We didn't know-- we knew something is coming because they were constantly taking out people. At that time, there were different selections that they took out. At one point, they took out butchers. One time, they took out the-- the intelligentsia one time, they took out all Zionists the Communists, and further. 

And so when you even-- and the ghetto got smaller. They closed in on us. We had maybe three, four blocks already of people. And we knew that it's coming to an end. Something will happen. So, uh, my father was taken to another factory, a leather factory. And my mother was in a-- in a clothing factory for the Germans. And my brother was also working for the Germans. 

And so during the-- a few days later, it was the first big deportation from Radom. And, uh, so they had a certain amount of people. And at that time, they were-- they left first the ones that were working. And there were-- there we a lot of people unemployed. So they took the unemployed first. And they were missing still for the quota, a number of people. So they took out from the clothing factory. And that time, my mother went. 

And-- and then I was told my brother was shot because he couldn't walk well. And he had a broken leg. So he was shot. And, uh-- and most of the family went with the first deportation. 

INTERVIEWER: So that time when you came home was sort of a farewell? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they say to you anything? Can you recapture that moment? What did you think of that moment? Did you know what was going to happen? 

MILLIE W.: We didn't know what will happen. We knew something will. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

MILLIE W.: And we said maybe we'll meet. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what did you take with you to the factory? 

MILLIE W.: Uh, some clothing, and-- and my mother gave me a heavy blanket. Riches-- big riches we didn't have but some warm clothing, because this was already towards the winter, and a blanket. This was-- and blanket was very useful. Because we were-- we were sleeping on cement. So my friend also had a-- a blanket. So one was cov-- we were covered. And one was on the floor. 

And so this was the last time. So the whole family was killed that time, except my aunt was working in another factory and because she had a little boy, and my uncle and my father. And they joined me later in the ammunition factory. 

And there, we were-- I worked 12 hours a day, one week night and one week daytime at tremendous machines. And I was young, small. They used to place boxes I should reach the-- the-- the machine. I should be able to reach the machines. Uh, it was-- the beginning was very hard, first rule with, again with the food. It was-- I wasn't used to the un-kosher food. And for three weeks, I couldn't eat. I couldn't eat. 

When I saw the fat pieces when they come out, I-- I just couldn't. But my friends kept talking to me, you have to eat. If not, you will not live. So after three weeks, I was holding my nose and pushed through the food. 

It's um- and one night, I felt I am-- I have to fight for myself, that I didn't have anybody. I wasn't an aggressive person. And I was-- so I just pushed along. I-- when I was called for work, I volunteered first because I was very much afraid of leaving. So-- and this till-- till 1944, we were that. 

I-- one incident I had when one night, I made 1,500 pieces for what I was working. I-- this was-- I was making drilling holes in a part of-- I don't know what was, probably a gun. And I made them wrong. And for this, I knew it was a death penalty because people were shot. 

For every holiday, they took out some people. And they called us out. I remember for the first holidays we were in that factory, they-- they told us, this is to bring, um, a sacrifice for you all. And-- and they used to shoot. The first time, it was a terrible encounter. Well, I was very close to that man. And this was also a Yosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur. It was in fall time. And so each holiday, they took out some people for the sac-- they said it's a sacrifice for us. 

INTERVIEWER: They took [INAUDIBLE]? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. And-- and I thought, [INAUDIBLE] the people were always-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember seeing it? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? Can you describe it? 

MILLIE W.: I remember the man being shot-- 

INTERVIEWER: Describe it. 

MILLIE W.: --and falling. It's-- it's un-describe. We felt like the bullets go through us. So-- and each time somebody made mistakes was killed. And here one night, my, uh, foreman calls me in. And he was a Pole. And he tells me that I have to make-- I don't remember how many boxes-- 1,500 pieces were wrong that I made. He says, you know what's-- what's going to be? And he was, uh, very sympathetic towards me. And he said, I will cover up for you. 

So he took-- every night, he-- I was entitled to make five, 10 pieces wrong doing a day's work. So he was-- was very nice that time. He really saved my life. And he put in-- every night, he put in a few pieces to distribute the 1,500 pieces over-- over a period of time. 

And uh, we was hoping that something will-- these circumstances also-- the conditions were very bad. We were hoping that something will change. And then the KL took over the-- the factory. 

INTERVIEWER: KL? 

MILLIE W.: Concentration camp. Before we workers and, uh, and-- which the conditions became more strict, more severe. And Germans were there. And a lot of things happened that didn't before the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Likes shooting and executions-- 

MILLIE W.: Shootings and killing. 

INTERVIEWER: --were in a regular factor or in a KL? 

MILLIE W.: Well, the factory was took over by KL. The Germans took it. Before-- well, also the Germans but a lot of Poles were with us. And then the Germans took it over. And then they came. They made the electrical wires. And they made-- it was different conditions, they came. 

Also, I can tell you among us, a woman had a child. And every morning when we were-- went out to an appell, she used to bundle up the-- the child like a package and give to the child a pill to sleep, every morning. And she put it behind-- near the gate, there was the wires. So she used to place this child every morning with a pill and he-- he slept for a few hours until we took him out. He didn't survive. But for months, this child every morning was sleeping for hours with the pills. The doctor gave her pills. 

INTERVIEWER: You said we. Then there was a group? There were people-- 

MILLIE W.: Well, we were-- 

INTERVIEWER: --talking to each other and planning things. 

MILLIE W.: Of course. We were-- in one room, we were maybe 100 women. There were bunks-- or more than 100. We were 500 women in-- in that factory and 1,500 men. And that's why-- 

INTERVIEWER: What would go on in an evening? What kind of talks, what kind of activities? 

MILLIE W.: We couldn't-- we couldn't go out in the-- we would stay. Once we came home, we stayed-- stayed in, unless they needed us for other work and the-- for cleaning or other work. So they took us out. [SIGH] We got-- there were times that we were talking about making recipes. Women were describing how we lived at home, how it was before the war, and how-- and not realistic things. Women were giving each other in worse conditions. When we were hungry, they were giving recipes one another. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of recipes? What kind of recipes? 

MILLIE W.: Food recipes-- how to bake a cake, how to make-- 

INTERVIEWER: For example, do you remember? Yeah. 

MILLIE W.: No But this, I couldn't under-- we were once on a quarantine for three weeks in-- in-- in the most horrible conditions. And women were giving each other recipes-- how to bake, how to cook. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a friend or two friends there? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell about them. 

[SIGHS] 

MILLIE W.: The-- we had-- we had a lot of-- we were close most of the time. We were-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who was the person? 

MILLIE W.: There were evenings that we were singing, too. We had a friend that he was reciting beautiful. So he used to recite for us [INAUDIBLE], different recitations. He used to recite and sing to-- to kill time, to-- 

INTERVIEWER: In a barrack of 100 women or 500-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --there would be recitals. 

MILLIE W.: Recitals and more-- different things were happening in that barrack. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any particular thing that was-- 

MILLIE W.: And people were married, too. I remember people were married, too. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell about the marriage, one marriage that you--? 

MILLIE W.: What can I tell you? It was horrible when they were married. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Describe it. 

MILLIE W.: We-- we slept on bunks. And-- and-- and two people had beds, two friends. If one of them was married, the one had to go to be a thir-- there were evenings that men used to come in. This was before the KL. After it was, they couldn't. So we-- we knew that if our friend was married, we just have to go and sleep with another friend. 

INTERVIEWER: That's how the baby was born? 

MILLIE W.: I assume. I assume. Many children were killed. They were born. And they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Who would marry? Who-- 

MILLIE W.: There was-- there was a rabbi. And there was a cantor between us that lived. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- do you remember a marriage ceremony, a chuppah? 

MILLIE W.: Not-- not what you think about the Holocaust. This was just a story with a white dressed and a chuppah. This was-- 

INTERVIEWER: No. But what could you-- was there any ceremony? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. If they were religious people, there was. There was a rabbi that gave them Khevre Kadisha. And there were less religious. They were just-- they assumed they were married. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know that at a certain evening, somebody is going to get married? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And did you-- did you prepare for it? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you [INAUDIBLE] can you describe such an event. You had saw the-- 

MILLIE W.: I-- I've been to a wedding in ghetto ton. It wasn't-- first of all, it had to be quiet. The Germans shouldn't hear. Nobody should sing. So it wasn't such a happy event. Everything had to be quiet. Just the gathering of the closest people was a big thing and wishing that we should ever meet again to survive and meet. There were-- sometimes people were forced to get-- be married because-- not forced. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to ask about your personal contact knowledge, not you're-- that you heard something, but what you personally saw, also about-- were there love affairs? Did you know-- did a friend of yours fall in love with a young man? Do you know about it? Would you tell me it? 

MILLIE W.: Yes, many-- many girls. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me. 

MILLIE W.: Many girls. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe it-- one girl and one man. 

MILLIE W.: Many girls, there were. 

INTERVIEWER: One man, not many-- many, many is a-- is a-- the count. One is real. 

MILLIE W.: I don't know what to tell you. 

INTERVIEWER: If one girl fell in love. 

MILLIE W.: Yes, there were many. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it you, for exam? 

MILLIE W.: It was-- everybody had-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you fall in love in the ghetto? 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- You don't have to-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't have to far. Tell me about you falling in love the-- 

MILLIE W.: No I can't tell. 

INTERVIEWER: Only what you want to tell, of course. 

MILLIE W.: It's-- there were very painful things. And I loved somebody that was-- after three months, he was killed. He was taken away. 

INTERVIEWER: What did it look like? What did he say? What kind of mensch was he? How did he-- how did you lose him? 

MILLIE W.: He was arrested by the SD And he was taken away from that camp. And I never saw him again. I was once also arrested. I don't know you know what the SD is? 

INTERVIEWER: Sicherheitsdienst. 

MILLIE W.: This right-- to be arrested to them and that. And um, even, even I'm-- during all these times, there were different wars, Jewish wars, too, for power and this. When we were in that factory working, the ghetto was about to be liquidated. A-- a group of Jews-- policemen-- came down to-- to the factory. And, uh-- and many-- so there had to be made room. So a group was send-- they were killed from ours and others taken away and send away. 

So of course, the Germans themselves didn't like when-- didn't like when one Jew squealed on the other. So they-- they wanted to do something about it. So they were afraid. The Jews were afraid-- certain particular-- not many, but there was. So they told the-- the SD that this German in this particular factory-- because we had different-- in the factory-- that he is living with the Jewish girls. So that he was-- and he was a sadist, but I don't know how far. I didn't work there, so I don't know. But I know that he tortured the girls in many ways. They were separated from us. 

And so one day, um, the SD came down. And they arrested everybody. If there was a-- a Moyshe, they arrested how many Moyshes it was. And among them, I was there, too. And this was a terrible experience. We were thrown into a-- a cellar without windows and without a floor. We didn't know-- it was completely dark. And we were close to 30 people, men and women. 

And this was the-- an experience I will also not forget. We had to use the bathroom. And there was no such thing. And we were afraid to do in there. And it's impossible to imagine this situation. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

MILLIE W.: It's even worse than food, what-- what man, what we did it was-- But how we survived this, I don't know. Men, they used to tie together, pull a string off and tie themselves together that you-- you shouldn't come out. 

INTERVIEWER: Tied? Tied their penises? 

MILLIE W.: Yes, pulled off a string and tied it together. And we used to-- I remember I was pulling my hair. It was awful. Among us was a very nice woman that she said, take off everything you wear except a dress. And took her-- she had a big, heavy sweater. And-- and she said to everything it should absorb. Because it was a terrible thing. 

She-- and we were there. Each time they took us-- took out one to investigate. So they were beating. The screams were unbearable. And this woman, she's now in Israel. She was a-- she gave us a lot of courage. She-- and to distract us from the need of the bathroom and food, she said, I want to tell you a story. And she-- she imagined. She said look, from here, we not gonna come out, we're dying. But we're coming. We're coming up to heaven. I reminded her because I met her now in Israel. We're coming up. And there are long, white tables. Sorry. And she kept on talking to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Long white tables. 

MILLIE W.: There were long, white serve tables, white tablecloth and food. And all the angels will-- will dance around us and sing and be happy to greet us. And she stretched the story I don't know how long. But this time, it relieved us. We-- we forgot about our other needs. It was a great help. 

INTERVIEWER: Other needs to go--? 

MILLIE W.: I realized-- to go to the bathroom, food, or not to hear the screams from the other rooms. And I-- how I came out of this, there was one man. He was involved with that German. And he said to me, I know that they don't mean you. You are accidentally here because of the name. And if I will go in first, you will be free. And that's how it-- I was lucky, I supposed. 

Well, after he was called in, an hour later, they called me and one more man. And he-- they took me in the room. Of course, they beat me up and not to remember this. They said, not remember what I heard and saw if-- that if I will mention this to anybody on the outside, they know people that will know about it and that I'll be returned. Of course, it was hard not to. This what happened. They knew. They had people everywhere. So that's how I came out of this [INAUDIBLE]. 

And I met this woman. She was also-- most of people were killed from this group. But she somehow got out, too. And she was in Auschwitz and had experiments done on her. And I met her now at the gathering. 

And I reminded her of this story, what this story meant to us that time. I don't know how long it lasted. But it-- it distracted us from a lot of thing. And it meant an awful lot. We were-- the way she was telling us, we really experienced it. I-- I quite often think of it, how I felt it was. She was telling us that it was true and this is how it was, it happened. So --. 

INTERVIEWER: Around-- around the time-- 

MILLIE W.: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any idea what was going on? 

MILLIE W.: When? 

INTERVIEWER: In terms of the liquidations, when you were working? 

