[INAUDIBLE] INTERVIEWER 1: OK. May we begin? All right. 

SUBJECT: Well, the dogs were registered, and the dogs were taken care of. But Jews had no rights. We had no rights whatsoever. We could not walk where people walked. People-- they meant Gentiles. We are scum. The scum walked on the streets. In the middle of the road, we had to walk. We could never walk near a sidewalk. And, of course, whenever a German truck came or a car, they just ran us over just like that. Just like that. No one ever had to account for it. So people are afraid to walk out in the street. It was simply a matter of being afraid, not even going to work. 

We had to report to umschlagplatz every day to go to work. And we did not know how to walk. We ran. We went in bundles because they would run us over. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have been only the Germans related or also the others? 

SUBJECT: I tell you something. The Lithuanians and the Ukrainians did a much better job than Germans. Our town was too little, too insignificant for them to bother with. There were only two sonderfuhrers, only two. And they weren't vicious compared to the Lithuanians and the Ukrainians. The sonderfuhrers, as a matter of fact, they treated me very humanely. I must admit. They never laid a finger on me. They used to ask me if the children home. I said yes. They used to give me food for the children, which my mother wouldn't allow. It was not kosher. 

But the Lithuanians and the kettle-- I mean the Ukrainians, they were vicious animals. They are the ones with beat me with the rubber hoses at night. They are the ones that whipped the people on the roads, the working people. They are the ones that run over with cars. They hit you with sticks. The Germans did not have the time for that. There were too many little towns to bother with for them. Our town was a little bit of town. They didn't care about it. 

But it was in very good hands, this Kommandant Dadylaletsky did a very good job organizing a local militia. And they really took very good care of it. They killed. They murdered. They butchered. They tortured. They did everything they had to do, and I don't know how they learned it so quickly. Overnight, they became experts. They really became experts. But I would not say that the Germans were in our town. We didn't see too many Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So how many people have been in your town since they related to the Jews? The millice, the police? 

SUBJECT: I don't know how many, but quite quite few. I don't know. There were always too many for me. Whenever, whenever we went to work-- I don't know where they used to come from. Like a swarm of bees in the black uniforms, they came from nowhere. We used to think oh, we're saved. We're going to work in peace. All of a sudden, they're coming out with the nightsticks hitting and clubbing. Where did they come from? I never knew. We never knew where they came from. But they were the most vicious animals, the Ukrainians and the Lithuanians. 

I tell you something. Today, after so many years, if I hear Ukrainian spoken or Lithuanian, I cringe. I get very sick. I can't be in the same room with them. I can't. It's just simply impossible for me. I can tolerate German much better than Lithuanian or Ukrainian. I can't stand Ukrainian. It's just-- it-- everything opens up all over again. I'm very sick when I hear the language, including Polish. Not as bad because the Polish family saved me. Not as bad. It's not as painful. 

But I really object to hearing Jews speaking the Polish language when they get together in a home, they get together in the theater. I really object to it. I think survivors should not speak the Polish language. I don't think so. I think it's absolutely wrong. Maybe I'm wrong. I don't know. But the Poles, why did the Germans entrust all the concentration camps in Polish territory? They were saved. They knew it will be done very precisely. And just for this alone that all the camps were on Polish territory, I would not speak the language. I object to it. I object to ever going, visiting there. I would never go if I'm paid to do it. And I don't associate with Poles. And I don't associate with anything that has to do with the language, the Polish language. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you fake [? urings ?] to get to them? Some such about the resistance fighting against-- 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, I was-- I played a very active role in the resistance. We got out from the blockade. Of course, we had a lot of ambushes. We lost a lot of partisans, including they were Jews living in the woods that were supported by the partisans. There were groups of Jews that were non-fighting, that were non-combat. But they are living in the woods and hiding in dugouts. And the partisans used to support them with food. You will ask how did we obtain food. We used to raid villages. Take a cow, or take a pig, or take whatever, and kill it. And this is how we lived off. 

Anyway, in this blockade, the Jews were killed off because they had no, no one to direct where to go and how to go. They were slaughtered. There wasn't one that escaped. Also, the partisans, we were coming out from one blockade, and I see one person crawling. He's alive life now in New York. His name is Artie Beersch. I looked at him. I said are you Jewish? He said, yes. I said, where are you coming from? He said, my whole brigade was wiped out in an ambush. I'm the only one survived. The whole-- everyone. There wasn't one except him. OK, I told them who he was, so they accepted him in our brigade. And we were kind of sneaking out. 

There was no way to go, no place to go. But finally, the Germans retreated. They did their job. And the territory was ours, the woods. And we started operations of sabotage. They wanted me to work in the kitchen, being a Jew and being a girl. They told me to dissect a pig. When I looked at that, and I started doing it, I fainted flat. I couldn't do it. I said, I'm volunteering for the patrol. They used to call it, razvedka. They say, you? A Jewish girl in the patrol? I say yes. I volunteered. I was given a horse. I was given ammunition. And I was given an assignment. 

My first assignment was-- I'll never forget it. There was a school that was used for an ammunition dump for the Germans, and we had to go and set it ablaze, this ammunition dump. I've never been on a horse before. I went on the horse with 30 people-- two girls. 28, 28 men. And we blew up the school all right. But the horse threw me off. And the Germans had flares all over the place, and I was exposed. I don't know what happened to me. I really didn't know where I was. My gun, my life with my gun, my ammunition went with the horse with the saddle. Put some partisan plucked me by the neck for me to settle and rescued me. 

From then on, I was more careful. I knew already how to work, and they taught us how to set explosives on railway tracks because it already at the end of '43, beginning '44. And the war was turning against the Germans. And we knew that they will be retreating. So by that time, already, we were a real organized force. We got ammunition drops. We used to make fires, three fires, and they used to drop ammunition, medical supplies, food, and personnel. And we had radio communication. We had a newspaper. And when you knew what was going on in the world. And we were given orders to make the retreat of the Germans as difficult as possible. And, of course-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What have been your know feeling? 

SUBJECT: The partisans? 

INTERVIEWER 2: For revenge? 

SUBJECT: Well, by revenge, I want to tell you one example of revenge. I couldn't do it. When the first German was caught, a 17-year-old with a wounded knee, the commander handed him over to me. Cecily, he's all yours. You could torture him. You could kill him. I couldn't. I bandaged at his knee, I fed him, and I turned him over with all the captured. I couldn't do it. I shot a lot of Germans, a lot of Ukrainians, a lot of frequent Lithuanians in the course of my work, but not point blank to take the 17-year-old and kill him. I couldn't do it. Maybe I was soft hearted. Maybe I'm sorry. I don't know. I just couldn't do it. 

But we killed mercilessly. we killed. We used to go into villages, where we knew that their people corroborated with the Germans. We use to kill indiscriminately. We killed off an awful lot of people we knew that were against Jews. My brother was the leader. He was very good at it. He's in Israel now. We used to go into villages, we used to find out where they lived, and we pulled them out one by one. And we killed them. 

But being in the partisans, we did a lot of damage. We blew up a railway tracks. We blew up bridges. We blew up roads. We blew up trucks. The Germans had a miserable time. They couldn't retreat. This is the reason that so many were captured. They could not retreat because of the partisans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I would like to ask you a personal question. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you killed, did you feel a kind of feeling of revenge? It was more easy for you? 

SUBJECT: No. I wouldn't say exactly revenge. I knew it was stamped on me. It wasn't exactly revenge. I knew if I don't kill them, they'll kill me. I was on the patrol. I was in the wolf's mouth. I was in their territory. I came to their garnisons. Usals You know what the garnison is, what the Germans had their posts. And we came to inflict damage on them. So in other words, if I'm not going to kill, they'll kill me. We had to do it very quickly. There wasn't once that we didn't lose people doing it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned before, said you went to the villages. 

SUBJECT: Oh the civilians. That was revenge. But I mean with the going on ambushes, that was a different story. But the civilians we killed just for revenge. We knew people that did a lot of work for the Germans. And we went into the villages, and we exterminated them. The law actually-- there was a law not to do it, but they, they didn't pay attention to it. We just did it. 

And it was a very dangerous life in the partisans because people were killed every single day, the Germans, just to make ambushes. They, for example, they had intelligence. So did we, but theirs was much better than ours. And a lot of German spies infiltrated the partisan movement. And obviously, whenever we had to go someplace and to some things, they were waiting for us with flares, ad of course, not too many who came back. We lost quite a bit of people this way. But life had to go on. And work had to be done. 

And I stayed in the partisans until the Russians liberated us in 1944. And then, my soldier's life was finished. I began a civilian life of insanity I will say. Was pretty insane at the beginning. I didn't sleep for six months. I didn't sleep. I couldn't sleep. I never slept. I was always awake. I couldn't think, didn't have any emotions at all. I don't think I had-- I even had hatred. I doubt it. There weren't any emotions at all. You couldn't hate. You couldn't feel. I loved my two brothers. I loved my sister. But I didn't show it. I just, I-- and they felt the same way. Everyone was distant until, of course, we started mellowing down. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When? 

SUBJECT: We started gradually, gradually. I went to a doctor, and they put me on bromide. I'll never forget it. I used to swallow it. Bromide. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bromide. 

SUBJECT: Tablespoons. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When was it? 

SUBJECT: That was right in 1944 after the-- for us, the war has ended because our territory was supposedly liberated by the Russians. So, of course, the men were drafted, the rest, remnants of the partisans, and girls were released. So my brothers and I and my little sister, we set up housekeeping in a block in one little room. And we tried to resume our life, which was extremely difficult. We had no money. We had no skills. I was never skilled at home to do anything because I was a pampered child from a well-to-do family, and I was in school all the time. And at home, we had maids. I never did anything, and I really was a helpless creature. I didn't know how to take care of myself. 

So the first thing I did, I got married. I saw a man who wanted me. I got married. And that was the end of my singlehood. I didn't know anything else. I really didn't know how to take care of myself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you marry? 

SUBJECT: I was married in 1945 in Glubokoye and the way we were evacuating to Poland. People started leaving Russia going towards Poland in 1945. We lived for a little while in Glubokoye It was, of course, it supposedly was a free life, but it wasn't an easy life. It was very hard. 

My brother was fighting, being drafted. So he had to do some work that was nice and maybe not so nice. I don't know. He used to work and buy his way out all the time. He didn't want to go to the front. So he was constantly busy with himself. I was left to fend for myself and my little sister. She was only-- '44, she was 13 years old, 14 years old, and illiterate. I had to send her to the first grade. She didn't want to go to school. She was a big girl. I used to beat the daylights out of her. She should go to school. And she did got her to first grade with five, six-year-olds. 

I wanted to go to school. I was so anxious to go back the school. I tried. I went to Postawy and I found a gymnasium there to resume my education. No way. They want us to pay them. I had no money. So my sister said, you know, what? You go to school, and I'm going to tend geese and pigs. What do you call it? When you tend geese and pigs. They call it a pastukh. A shepherd. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Shepherd. 

SUBJECT: She said I'll do shepherd work, and you go to school. You're so smart. I'm so stupid, she said, I never went to school. I tried for a few weeks. I went to school. I stayed with some people that live now in Hebron, Connecticut. They have a farm. I tried. It didn't work. I couldn't concentrate. I was hungry. I had no place to live. So schooling was out. So the only way for me to survive was to get married. 

So I started looking for a husband. It's just like you go out and look for a horse in the market. I was looking for a man, and the first man that wanted me, I got married. I didn't know him. I knew him only three weeks. That's all. And because there was no way-- everyone was out raping girls who were helpless little creatures. We couldn't defend ourselves. And we had no way of surviving any other way. You couldn't earn anything. I began working at a very prestigious job. I was the secretary of [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], ?] which was a big job, but it couldn't buy a loaf of bread. So what good is it? 

And my husband was a tailor. And right away, he started working. And he earned bread, and eggs, and milk, and things. I say gee, at least I'll eat. So you didn't look for romance, or compatibility, or anything like that. You just got married. A lot of marriages were made like this in '44, '45. You just got married. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you still married? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I'm still married. 34 years. I didn't know my husband at all, but it was just a way out. I wanted to leave Poland-- my territory-- and go to Poland, which was also Russian, but that was a little bit different at that time. And from Poland, we went to Czechoslovakia. And we were smuggled out to Germany. And then, we came here. But I knew that on my own I wouldn't have been able to do it because I was too helpless. 

I could take care of myself in the partisans, but then when it was all over, all initiative, all energy, everything left me. I was just a nobody. I was weak. I was soft. I was just sick and tired of taking care of myself really. So I said, if I marry a man, who would at least provide for me, and that was it. Marriage is made in heaven. This is what happened. 

And it was very hard to start a life after the war was over. I was pretty suicidal. I must say that. It was very hard for me to get adjusted. I gave birth to a son, who worked out very well right now. But my son had a very difficult time. For years and years, I was sick. I had no business giving birth to a child in the state I was in. I admit it now. I could see it, and I know what. And my son really suffered for it. I could say all my three children suffered for it. And I was seeking help, and I got it. I was not ignorant by no means. I knew that something was lacking in my personality and that the wounds are not healed, that things have to be dealt with. And I was looking for psychiatric help. And I was getting it, and I was trying to raise my children the best way I knew how. 

Of course, as the years went by, when my daughter was born, I was pretty much getting more normal already. After 10 years, after 15 years, and now, I consider myself a normal person, I think. But it took a lot of doing. It took a lot of work on my part, a lot of self-help, self-analyzing. And I did look for help. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you began to think about help? 

SUBJECT: I went to professionals, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when? 

SUBJECT: When, when I came to America. When my son was very small, I came here. He was three years old. I realized-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was born in DP camps? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I was in DP camps in Germany, yes. And I was very ill in DP camps. There wasn't a hospital all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What, what kind of-- 

SUBJECT: Well I was-- I think, thinking back now, I think it was emotional, and I became very ill. I had mastitis. And I had surgery after surgery. And my temperature would not subside. And I was really rotting away. Penicillin was $50 a shot, which was beyond my reach. I couldn't get it. So the doctors gave me up for dead. So I was rotting for seven months in a hospital, and got out, and got sick again. I was-- most of the time, I spent in the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was it? 

SUBJECT: In-- before Stuttgart, Ulm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ulm. 

SUBJECT: Ulm. And I was ill all the time. And then I spent in Stuttgart about seven months. And I was not in a mental hospital. I was in a hospital being treated for physical ills, which I think, I think-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of ailments you had? Complaints? 

SUBJECT: I had mastitis. You know mastitis? After my son was born, I had breast illness. And I was very very ill. They really gave me up for dead. And then I had blood clots in my legs. So I had to be hospitalized again. Now, the boy, my son was in a kinderheim, a foundling's home. There were a lot of black children. Fathered, I mean, by black fathers, German mothers. And in the foundling home, of course, the children died off like flies. They didn't have the means to take care of them. There were too many, and this is what they sent my son. 

And instincts really play a big role. I'll never forget it when I was operated on the second time, and I had a 103 temperature. It was Christmas Eve. The hospital was very quiet. I got dressed. It was freezing. I had no clothes on, just a light coat. And I went in search of a kinderheim. I knew there was a kinderheim nearby. I went in search of my son. I found him. He was a shell of a baby. Six weeks old having bronchitis. He was dying, dying, skinny. There was nothing. I couldn't even believe it was him. I recognized him, though, by his eyes. And I started screaming. I say, I want a camp doctor. They say quiet down, you insane woman. Look at the temperature. I had under 103, 104, I don't know what I had. I was very bandaged this way and that way, and my arms in slings. I just couldn't move. I started screaming, and the camp doctor was someone from the camp. 

And he took my baby in the ghetto, and they started raising him the ghetto. He had rickets. Dr. Goldberg. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's a ghetto, you say? 

SUBJECT: I get what I said, excuse me. Camp. I mix it up, the DP camp. And they brought him in there. He had the legs were-- I have a picture of him-- the legs were like this. The belly was big. He was undernourished. He was sick. I thought this baby will be definitely mentally deficient. He didn't have any mother's love. He didn't have any attention paid to him. Anyway, when I got out of the hospital, finally, after almost a year he was walking. He didn't know me. He didn't want to go out with me. He didn't acknowledge me at all. And my struggle began, relationship with my son and my family. 

I could not adjust to a life of a wife and mother. I was really, I would say, three, four personalities. In one instant, I would be a young girl. I dreamed about going back to school. This was my foremost dream. I wanted to go back to school. I dreamed that I'm a little girl, and I'm back in school, 17. Then, I would find that I'm back at home. Then, I would know I'm a wife and mother. And then I would know that I'm not normal. Something is lacking. I couldn't relate. I didn't have any emotions. My son didn't have any emotions either. I recognize this. This is the very early stage. 

So when I came to this country, and he was enrolled in the kindergarten, I couldn't speak, but I relayed my fears to the family service. I told them, I say, I think my son and I need help. We're both not normal. We really can't function the way we are now. And of course, they are scientists and social workers. And they started working with both of us. And I saw them on a regular basis every week. It was Mrs. Malton at that time, I think. And my son saw a children's psychologist. And now, I'm in the-- Ms. Flock can tell you. My son is doing very well. But it was a very uphill battle. The boy struggled for years, and years, and years. 

He was an extremely intelligent, sensitive child, and he absorbed every breath I took. Every breath I exhaled, he absorbed. I could see he was breathing, and I didn't hide my suffering. I didn't know how to hide it. I was miserable. So he was miserable. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your husband is also survivor? 

SUBJECT: Yes, but my husband did not go through what I did. See, he was sent. He was arrested, so he was sent out to jail. So he was in jail, and he was freed. So he was in the back. He didn't even see a German. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In Russia, you mean? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, it's Russia. He didn't see a German. He never heard shooting or anything. He suffered, of course. He lost his family and all, but he did not suffer to the extent I did. It was hard for him to understand me. I mean, he hasn't been in the ghetto. He hasn't been in a camp. He hasn't been under German occupation. So even American people, well-educated people who are constantly working with the Holocaust survivors, I think even you, it's hard for you to comprehend what it is really to go through and feel and what we went through, if you know what I mean. It is hard for a person who really didn't experience it to really put it into proper perspective. It's hard. My husband couldn't. 

After so many years, he's still asking questions, still prodding. And he's still-- when he saw the Holocaust-- he couldn't watch. I said to him, to me, the Holocaust is-- what can I tell you? It's a Pollyanna story. It's a Pollyanna story compared to what really happened. It's nothing. My husband couldn't. He cried. He broke down. He went away. He came back. He put the television on. He put it off. He couldn't watch it. 

I told him. I said it was much worse than what you see here. For example, they portrayed in the Warsaw ghetto they had matzo, they conducted a seder. It's so ridiculous. We didn't see matzo six years. We didn't see bread in six years, never mind matzo. I mean this is all they were nicely polished. Also, where was it heard of that a German girl openly would defy authorities and follow a Jew around? I mean, this is ridiculous. I mean, you know. I don't have to tell you this. It was unheard of. A German girl, the Germans would allow this to happen? To show people that a German girl is pursuing a Jew? To the concentration camp? It's not true. It's fiction. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let us come back. I understand it's relating to your feeling now and your old assaults. How you are doing now? 

SUBJECT: The way I feel now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your family. 

SUBJECT: About myself, or the family, or the Holocaust? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Well, I think I've become-- I read quite a bit. I saw quite a few therapists. I follow programs. I like to read psychology books, and I really analyze myself. And I think I helped myself a great deal. I think I'm a normal human being now. I can function as normal human being, and I can see myself and my children in the proper perspective, I really could. I don't see them through rose colored glasses at all. I see their faults. I see their shortcomings. And I see their good points. I see them just the way they are, and I'm sure I'm right. Because my children tell me when I analyze them, and when they have problems, and we try to solve them together, I'm on the right track. So I think I am normal right now. I don't know how to define it any other way. I think I'm functioning fine. 

I had a lot of problems here-- health problems, which are hard to take. But emotionally, I think I'm fine. I'm really fine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are still in treatment situation? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are still in treatment? 

SUBJECT: Treatments? 

INTERVIEWER 2: If you are-- yes. You are in psychological treatment? 

SUBJECT: Well, I had a lot of it. I had a lot of treatment. If you did this, what you mean? I had a lot of it. I went-- my son had an awful lot of treatments. I went with him, and we went to therapy together. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As a family? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did whole family do, or only you? 

SUBJECT: No-- just my husband, I must say, doesn't believe in that. My husband never joined me in my efforts to help my family. My husband, we came from different backgrounds. And my husband does not believe in emotional instability or whatever. He does not believe in it. He doesn't think such a thing-- you're either crazy, or you're sane. There's nothing in between. 

So when I was looking for help for my son, my husband was very much against it. He did not understand the scope of the problem. He did not. He thought that a boy is wild. A boy will outgrow it. A wife is muddy. Maybe a little beating, which he didn't do. But in Poland, they used to say a beating will beat it out of her. This is how he thought. We think in the opposite directions. We don't think the same. I knew we needed help, and I looked for help. 

And thank God my son is a productive fine human being, right? He's a very sensitive, very giving, very-- I would say he's an emotional person, yes. He's very emotional. But he is a pride to me and, I think, a pride to the community. My son is a very fine human being. And hadn't been-- had it been for me, I think so, if I just let it go. If I just let it go, if I let him crawl and take let destiny take its own course, I don't think it would have worked out this way because I was told by professionals it wouldn't have. Only intensive therapy brought us out, the two of us. This what I think. I don't know. What I was told. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How are the other children? You have two children more. 

SUBJECT: I have two other children, my very brilliant children. My other daughter went on a full scholarship to Vassar College, graduated magna, did very well. She's married now. Doing very well. Very well-adjusted child, beautiful. The younger one is a little bit difficult. She-- as a matter of fact, I was supposed to bring the proposal. I forgot. She's very much with it-- with the Holocaust, with the suffering of the parents. Very much aware. Very much with it. The second daughter, I must say, I must have sheltered her from all this. I could see the damage it did to my son, so I sheltered her. Linda was very sheltered. I avoided discussing things in front of her. I avoided crying in front of her. I was always trying to be happy and playful with her, so she grew up-- I don't think she is very much aware of the Holocaust problem as my other two children are. 

The little one, I couldn't shelter. She's a very aggressive, intelligent girl. The young one, very aggressive. She is very much with it. She wants to write a book now with Sam. So she, I must say, is not as well adjusted as the other one. But she went to Trinity College. She did very well. And, of course, they're not without problems. I'm not going to say my children are perfect. They're not perfect. They have problems. They inherited it from me, probably. Not from their father. Their father was a very calm poised man. He never loses his temper. He's always quiet. You know Polish? [? [SPEAKING POLISH] ?] You know, my house is on the borderline. It doesn't bother me. 

So I wouldn't to say the father had too much influence on those children. I must say that I raised them single handedly, good or bad. It was my doing. and secondly, he worked two jobs. We came to this country We were very, very poor. We were so poor we had nothing. So he had to work two jobs. 14 hours a today, my husband, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you are working as well? 

SUBJECT: I was not working. I worked when my children were older. I became a driving instructor. I was teaching driving. I wasn't qualified to do anything else. I don't have an education. I had an education way back home as much as I could get, but getting married right after the war, and giving birth to a child, and being sick, I couldn't go back to school, which I regret up until now. Very much so. But I tried to educate myself. We didn't know how to speak English, not one single word. I tried to go to night school. I tried to buy books, tried to write little essays, give it to the children to correct. Did their homework with them. And I was always with the children. The children were my life, and I must say for good or bad, whatever they are, it's my doing. I must take the full responsibility because I was with them all the time. They were never left alone. 

And it was a very trying period, but first, I must say 10, 15 years was in an extremely difficult period in this country. A language barrier, not being able to afford decent housing. Now, the people come from Russia to help with everything. We weren't helped. We didn't have any help whatsoever. We lived in rat infested houses, cockroaches, cold. We were very poor. It was a very difficult adjustment for us. I must say that first seven years in this country, they were one of the most difficult of my life, I must say, in this country, yes. It may sound shocking, but it's true. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In what way? 

SUBJECT: In what way? I'll tell you in what way. When you live in a cold water flat with rats and cockroaches, and you have two little children that you can't bathe, that you can't bathe in the winter. The chill in the winter. The rooms are closed. You live in one room and a kitchen. And you're constantly cold. And you're isolated from everyone. I lived in Fair Haven. There were no Jews there. There were only the Gentiles. And I couldn't speak the language. I couldn't communicate. I used to go in in the store and take out money. I said take what I owe you. I don't know how much I owe you. I couldn't communicate. I used to pick items and give them the money. It was very difficult. If you have to live under conditions like this-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You felt isolated. 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned that you felt isolated. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: People didn't speak with you? 

SUBJECT: That was when? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you came to the-- in the first seven years. 

SUBJECT: The first seven years, we weren't in contact with anyone. We were just-- I don't know why it was such an isolated community. The Jews did not pay attention to us. There was no one to give you a helping hand. For example, I had toxemia with my daughter, right? I collapsed in my seventh month, and the neighbors upstairs, an Italian a lady, knocked on the door. I heard her. I couldn't answer. They broke down the door. They took me by ambulance to the hospital. I had toxemia. There wasn't anyone to explain to me what toxemia is like, what toxemia could bring on, why no one ever took me to a doctor. I didn't know. They found out I had toxemia in the advanced stages. They put me in the hospital. I had to stay on my back until the baby was born. 

The Jewish community, God bless their souls, there wasn't one single person that ever came and give you a little encouragement. Then, on top of it, my husband had a large family here. First cousins are still residing here. I don't want to mention names. They're quite prominent citizens of New Haven. Not once did they invite us to their homes, did they show us anything that human beings would show to one another. Family-- aunts, uncles, first cousins. And we were on our own with no help from anyone. That's why it was so difficult. I hope you understand why I say that. 

We had food. We had enough food to eat, but that wasn't all. We could not communicate. We were alone. We were isolated. We were in pain. We were sick. But there was no help from anyone, which wasn't right. There was a large Jewish community, including my relatives, and no one pooled their resources to do something for the newcomers. The wealthy ones got along. We weren't wealthy. We didn't have money. This is why I'm so resentful. 

I am very, very resentful when I think about those years back. Seven miserable years. Until we finally bought a home. Now for the first time, we bought a home that I could take a bath, a hot bath in my own home. I couldn't do it before. I didn't have it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think that-- 

SUBJECT: That may sound some strange in America to what was-- imagine seven years, right? It may sound strange, but that's the truth. If you want the truth, I'll give you the truth. And that's-- I had the opportunity. I've said it many times in the family service, and I'm saying get now. I'm very resentful. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Also now? 

SUBJECT: For the harm they did to us. But 

INTERVIEWER 2: I understand that you also had good experiences. 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah, now they're doing very well. I see the Russians come with everything. They come with jewelry, with money, with furniture, with help, with families. And they're given everything handed down to them on a silver platter, which I resent very much. I think the money should go to Israel to needy people who need it. They don't need it. The money should go where it could be utilized. They don't need it because after two years here, they buy cars, they buy homes. Obviously, they didn't come here empty handed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the sense that you are also relating somehow that you got help. 

SUBJECT: I tell you I'm a volunteer. I do a lot. I take them to doctors. I work for them. I feel for them. No one gave it to us. They pretended we didn't exist. This is why it hurts so much. And I go back. I try to erase it. My husband gets very angry when I talk about it, but it still hurts. It still exists, and I can't erase it. It's very painful that I see that what's being done for people now that don't need it-- come in healthy, with families God bless them, with everything, and they're taken care of. And we didn't. I'm going to try to erase it. I will in time. But it still hurts when I think about it because my children were deprived awful lot that they could have had if the people paid a little attention to them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know, I know. Well it's-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know. That's all right. I know, and I see that you're-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you very much for the-- for your coming. 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry if I was irrational or something. I don't know. I'm not a professional. I'm not-- 