SUBJECT: However it was enough to-- to survive. If everyone had that much, we would've had more survivors. And then they said one day that we're going to have to liquidate the Lager. That was in 1945, April, that the Americans are on one side about 10 kilometers away, and the Russians are on the other side. 

And one girl among us 500 got crazy. And she was in the infirmary. She was screaming all the time on top of her lung, and the time she was tied down. And many, many nights that I-- when we went for the supper, I just couldn't even look at that way because she was so beautiful, and she was just so mentally sick. She screamed, and she sang, and she sang "The Roses Bloom." But it was spare bloom for you. It was just, you know, tearing your heart, really. And I don't know why she was remained in the camp to the last minute, whether to-- that we should see this, you know, daily. Out of compassion, I don't know. 

So the day that we liquidated the camp, the Hauptscharfuhrer said that the Oberscharfuhrer is going to shoot her because we cannot take her with us. They did. As we were leaving, we heard the shots. So all of us mourned, mourned deeply. 

First, we mourned because she was sick. She didn't have the mental strength. Secondly, we mourned because she was a sister. The girl, her sister, was just torn apart. She was yelling, shoot me too. Don't leave me. Don't let me live, and demand for her. 

We were taken out of the Lager, and we started to walk. We didn't know where we were going to go. We walked. We had no food. We had no-- nothing to drink. At one time, I-- you know, when the Americans came down, and they machine gunned, and they said, you lay on your stomach so they could see your numbers, because if they see you are Haftlingers, prisoners, they wouldn't shoot. 

And the Germans ran in the ditch so they couldn't see it, because they know if they see them, they will shoot. And that's true. They didn't shoot. They came down all the way those planes. They ditched down all the way to the lowest level, and they lifted up. They saw who we are. And at one time, I was trying to go and get somebody in a river. They shot after me. It was a bullet, was going by my wrist. But I didn't care. I thought, I want to get some what. 

And I made it back again. And a row of girls, at least five of them, had a drink. I felt so strong. I felt that I could walk forever. And this is what I felt. I felt that this is we're going to do, walk forever, because there was no way out. But in intervals of six feet, there was a soldier. There was no way of escape. There was nowhere to escape. And it was-- another escape would be very hard, because the four of us together. I wouldn't leave my sister. My cousins wouldn't leave. They wouldn't leave one another. And it was impossible for four people even to conceive the idea. So we just felt, we will walk forever. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you hopeful at this point? 

SUBJECT: There was no hope. We didn't know. And then after the end of two weeks, between Leipzig and Wurzen There were a Jeep with two American soldiers, 18 years old, machine guns on their shoulders, chewing gum. 

I've never seen chewing gum. I never knew what gum is. And they liberated us. And I don't know. Again, you know, we took off our shirt. It was white, and stick it up on the pole so they shouldn't shoot. They shouldn't-- you know? We said, you know, that we give ourselves up because we are prisoners. They shouldn't think that we're Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were all the guards? 

SUBJECT: And the guards at that time tore all their rank off, and they threw their guns away, and they were begging us to change clothes with them. They were taking off their jackets. You know? They wanted to tear their identity. They knew that this is the end, and this is it. And they liberated us, the two American 18-year-olds. 

INTERVIEWER: How many women were you now? 

SUBJECT: 499. And then they said, you're free now. What do you want to do? Looked at my sister, and she looked at me, and she says, I told you. And they said, what do you want to do? And we said, we just want to sit down. Our feet were full of blisters from walking. 

And we sat down. I don't know how long we sat there. And then they said that we're going to take you in the house, and you get food, and you get clothes. 

INTERVIEWER: The two soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Yes. But this is our order. And that's what they did, and gathered up the German soldiers, and they took them away. And we were free. They took us into Wurzen, in a house. And the first thing that was that we took a bath. We were full of dust. Our feet were full of blisters. And they brought us food, all kinds of food. Well, we couldn't eat. 

And of course, again, my sister, she said, even if you could eat, we have to be careful what we are going to eat now, because if we're going to eat fast, and we're going to eat greasy food, you know, after a year almost, she said, we can get sick. And many girls died after the liberation because they didn't have the-- they didn't have a sister, and they didn't have the discipline of being careful. 

We took a bath, and we laid down and slept. I don't know how long we slept. It was free. We were free. And then my sister said we were there a few days, and then we came to the demarcation line, Wurzen, and the Americans had to go out, and the Russians came in. 

And it started in agony all over again. They wanted to rape us. And we told them we just came from the concentration camp. We're Jewish prisoners. We just got liberated. What do you want of us? And they just said a few cuss words, and who cares, and all that stuff. And so what we did, we tied neck with a kerchief, and we pulled our hair down, and we made believe that we're sick, and we put a sign outside the room that this is a sick room, so they should be afraid to come in. 

And we would stand vigil, one of us, all night, you know, to see if they're coming. Because certainly, we didn't want to be raped after all that. So one of the girls who spoke Russian, one night he was-- she was entertaining a Russian officer one night, and he was a high ranking officer. Well, he was-- he was just terrible. But she spoke Russian, and she kept him in in conversation all night until the morning came. 

And then by morning came, they became more civil. At night, they were like animals. So then, my sister said, and I told my sister, there's nothing to do here. Were were had three days already liberated in Wurzen. And I said, we have to go back to my little town, because if any one of us, anyone from our family is alive, we're certainly not going to meet them in the middle of Germany. Maybe my mother is free. Maybe my brother is free. Maybe my father. You know? We were hoping to find somebody. I had to hoped to find everybody. 

So there was nowhere to go. You know, there was no-- no papers. We had no papers. We had nothing. No identification. But again, I just said, we have to go, no matter how. And somehow, we got-- we got to Vienna. In Vienna, we boarded the train-- 

INTERVIEWER: You walked to-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. We walked, and then we got a ride. You know, we managed. I said, we have to get away from these Russians because they're going to kill us. And we got to Vienna. We went on the-- we got on the train, and it said to Budapest. Keleti Palyaudvar. And the train was so loaded, there was no room on the train. I pushed my cousins and my sister up, and I stood on the steps, and I stood out there all night. 

And you know, the sparks came from the-- the front of the train, and I was afraid my hair should get on fire, or whatever. But I managed. And we arrived in Budapest the next morning. And I said to myself, why are we coming back? Where are we going? What is here? You know? The place where they-- they took us away. But I said to myself, the only reason we're coming back is to find our family. 

And my cousin said that my brother, he was in Budapest. Maybe he's still here. Let's go and look for him. And we got off the train, and we started to look for my cousin without an address. Budapest was bombed to pieces. We were happy to see that. And we were walking and in finding and asking people. And we found someone on the street who knew him. He said, yes, he's here in such a location. And we went there, we find him. Could you imagine the reunion? 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Well, he just didn't want to believe it, and he just was frozen, and cried, and didn't know who-- who to hug first, and he was very happy. And he said, what can I do for you? And he was telling us the ordeal that he went through. And he said, but there was nothing like you did, and I'm so thankful that you're here. 

And he had a one-- he had one room and said we could all stay here forever. And we stayed there for about a week. And my sister and I, we said that we're not going to take advantage on him to support us. You know, we're young, and we're healthy. We're going back to Tolcsva, and maybe our parents will come back there. 

And we went back to Tolcsva and got on the train. He gave us money to get on the train. And I remember at the station when we got on. That's the station where we went away from. And there was 3 kilometers from the station to Tolcsva, and there was a big hill, you know, you had to walk by the-- it was a settlement that was one of the big-- the man who owned a lot of property in Tolcsva, the baro. His help was living there. 

And as I was-- we were walking, you know, and I said to my sister, you know, the fields were green on either side, and life was going on. They were birds singing, and there were flowers, and people going about their business. And we were coming to the cross. You know, there was a cross at the Greek church. Now, it says "Peace be with you." 

And I said to myself, what peace? You know? And I said, do they still believe in that? But my sister didn't answer me. She didn't say anything. And we seen people coming out of the houses that were Jewish people, and my friends used to live. You know, they were-- they moved in. And we went through there again. 

And I said to my sister, I wish I could have a gun, a machine gun, and just machine gun the whole city down. The whole village, just one after another. I don't think I could have done it, but I had the feeling that I would like to do that. And then, as we were meeting people on the street, I never forget one man said, where's your father? And I says, what do you mean, where's my father? I says, he's on vacation. I wouldn't tell him. I says, don't you know it? I said, didn't you miss him all this time? Or did you see my father? Yesterday. 

No. I said, did you see him last week? Did you see him last month? I said, now you're asking me where my father is? And I just turned away. And we went to our house. It was smeared with swastika. It was dug up. It was a stable. It was empty. 

Nobody was missed. You know? Life was going on. I said to them, where is the rabbi, I says, that you thought so much of this? And I says, and where is the lawyer who took care of your legal affairs? And where's the doctor, I says, who cured you? Who sewed you up after your revels, when you had a game and you had a party, and when you knifed one another. 

I says, where is the man who fixed your pots and pans? And I says, where is our teacher and his family? And I says, where is that man who you used to ridicule? You know, they used to say dirty words after him. There was an old bachelor in town who never married, and he was torn and poor. And everybody that gave him a glass of wine, he drank. I said, where is he? Even he was taken away. I says, why did he bother you? 

I says, no one is missed. I says, where the man, you know, when there was a fire, there was one Jewish man in that village, that he cut the roof in two, and my father was so proud of him. He said, Foola cut the roof again and saved the house. Because you cut the roof, you know, the top, then the fire wouldn't spread. 

I says, where is Foola I says, who's cutting the roofs now when you have a fire? You don't miss anybody? He says, it's fine. I says, living is fine, and you live in peace? I said, it says on your church to live in peace. I says, what kind of peace do you have? And you're asking me where my father is? I says, look at my house. It's dug up. It's smeared with a swastika. It was a stable. I says, why? And that was that. 

So my sister and I, we lay down in that empty house on the floor, and we fell asleep. Got up the next morning, and I find my girlfriend, Zsuzsi. Her hair didn't grow back, and she was, you know, ammunition factory somewhere. She didn't have hair, and she looked swollen. 

She was in a terrible condition, and she was so happy to see me. She says, can I stay with you because I'm all alone? We were alone too, but we were the two of us. And she said-- we said, surely. So we stayed in that empty house, the three of us. 

And then a couple of weeks later, they had a kitchen they opened. A few more came back to Tolcsva, about five or six. And the organization, the Jewish organization, opened a kitchen. 

INTERVIEWER: Which one? 

SUBJECT: I think it was the UNRRA. And they opened a kitchen for food, you know, to feed us. And I went to the man who used to take care of vineyards, and he used to take care of fruit trees. He offered, you know, food and drink. And I says, no, I don't want your food, and I don't want your drink. 

I said, you didn't offer any compassion. You didn't offer any help then. I don't want your food now. I can do without it. And then I said to him, I says, how come that you love my father so much, that you couldn't hide him, or you couldn't hide one of us? I said, what did you feel then they take us away? 

He says, it was a law. You can't go against the law. I says, you know, I remember my mother telling me there is always a little door near the big door. And if you want, you can do something. I says, I hope, I says, you can live with this all your life, but you live, I says. You're lucky. And if you can feel that way, I says, fine. I have nothing else to tell you, and I just walked away. I wouldn't take any bread from him. And we went to eat on that kitchen. 

And then I told my sister, we're not going to stay here and to get handouts. We stayed two weeks, three weeks. Nobody came back. Four weeks, nobody come back. And I said, we have to start to do something. And my girlfriend had some cigarette paper. I know where she got it from. And I took out the cigarette paper, and I sold it. I sold it for some preserves, and I took the preserves and went to Budapest, and sold the preserves, and I bought shoes in Budapest, and brought it back. And I started trading like that, because I said, I don't want to take any handouts. 

And one night, I was on the train, and I had a little rucksack on my back, a backpack. All my belongings were there. And the Russian soldier wanted to take it away from me. And I said to him, you cannot take that away. I didn't know Russian. I just know a few words. And you know, they thought I was Russian because I was rosy-cheeked. And I don't know why they thought I was Russian. He said I just don't want to speak Russian. I said, no, I don't know Russian. And then he turned away, and I jumped out of the window, and I went into the other compartment. 

I got to Budapest and came back again. And then after a few weeks, we got a telegram from the Red Cross that your brother [INAUDIBLE] is alive in Paris. So by then, I had about American $100. I had a coat made for my sister, you know, with fur lines, so she should be warm. And I made myself a pair of pants and a jacket. And I said, we're going to Paris. 

I said, this is what I was waiting for. We're certainly not going to stay here. How can not make any life for here among these people. She said, how do you think we're going to Paris? We have nothing and no papers. How are you going to go? I says, just don't worry about it. And then back to Budapest. And they said, you cannot get papers. You cannot legalize . We're not going legally, we're going illegally. So what? 

And my sister and I, we walked through the Russian border to the American zone through Austria one night. Some other people with a whole group. And the boots that I had made for her, that I thought was going to be good enough to feed off a big blister, and then when we arrived in Austria, she had to take it off. It was all swollen. And we had to carry her. 

And then we went again to the UNRRA and they let us stay there. There was a house. We had to get a doctor. So the last $20 that I had, I gave it to the doctor. And she said, well, you're lucky because she almost has blood poisoning, you know, from the blister. Her foot was swollen. And we stayed there until she got better. 

[STATIC] 

And I said, we have to go to Paris. 

[STATIC] 

--back. We can't get tickets on a military train. Ah, I said, well, if we don't get tickets, we're go without tickets. And we had a letter from the UNRRA. You know, I asked them to give me a letter, and it was written in English. And I didn't know what was in there. I just made up my own story. And they asked me, where are you going? I said, we belong to the American army. Here is the letter. And my brother is a chaplain in the army, and we're going to see him. 

Nothing of that sort in that letter, you know? And they didn't know English. And there was a bedroom, you know, for the officers, a compartment. I said to my sister, great, now we're going to travel in style for a change. And she-- I made her comfortable in there. 

And then they came, and they said, you have to go out of here, because this is the officer's compartment, so my sister was afraid they were going to throw us off the train again. I said, don't worry. You're not with Russians anymore, and you're not with Germans anymore. I'm not worried anymore. I felt safe as anything on that train. That's the first time that I felt safe. 

So they made us go into the third class and just sit on the benches with the soldiers. And we did. And we talked to this soldier all night, and he gave us about 100 Franc to move on in Paris. And we arrived in the Gare Saint-Lazare in Paris. And there again, we didn't know where my brother is. You know? I got two letters from him. And I felt, you know, my common sense said that the letter that we [INAUDIBLE] and that address that he should be. But it turned out it wasn't that way. 

So again, we got on the train with our tickets. And in the station, we slept. You know, made us lay down on the floor and sleep. I says, you got to get some rest. We went to look for him. And I had a picture of him. And I asked everybody. You, know, we took it for granted everybody knows my brother. I mean, who wouldn't know him in Paris? 

And we had to get all the way down on the side of France, you know, that address was. The address. And we went there, and by the time we arrived, he wasn't there. It turned out that they'd been living near Paris. So we came back again, and the guy said again on the train station, we cannot get on the train without money and without ticket. 

I said, OK, fine. So when the train came, I pushed my sister up, and we went in the train. You know, there was no no for me. No obstacles for me. And a ticket didn't matter to me. I felt I didn't do anything. All I want is just to get to my brother. And so what? Ticket or no ticket. And he says, don't you worry. You know? He wanted to pull me off. And I gave him a kick. I says, forget it to myself. 

And he says, on the next big station, they're going to take you down and put you in jail. And I motioned to him, are they going to let me sleep and give me food to eat? Fine. I said, let them put me in jail. And that was that. We got off, arrived in Paris, and went to a police station. And I told him, showed him the letter again. I says, what is this? You know, I have to look for my brother. And then they asked, or who are we? You know? And there were posters all over the station. There were posters all over the city, with hafling with described uniform, you know, talking about the survivors and telling about the concentration camp. 

And I showed them, this is what we are. You know, I didn't know the language. And then he took us over to the other station, where the address was on the Gare du Nord. And there I met a boy, you know, that I told my sister, he looks like one of us, you know? A haftling, one of the survivors. And I went to him, and I said, if he speaks Hungarian. He says yes. And I took the picture out right away, and I showed him. 

I said, do you know this fellow? He said, sure. He's staying with us in the house. I can't describe that moment. And then, we got on the train to Taverny from Gare du Nord. And there was a big castle. It was donated to the Euvre de Secours aux Enfants in France. You know? For the survivors. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. Right. 

SUBJECT: And we walked from the train. And that-- that short distance was so long because I just wanted to see my brother so badly. And he says, don't worry, he's OK, and he's there with us, and you'll be staying there. And they were only boys. And we arrived, and he went in, and he called my brother out. And he was just running as fast as he could. And he embraced us. And he said he was very sick after the liberation, and he was together with my father. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were they? 

SUBJECT: He was in Flossenburg, you know, during the concentration camp. And he was swollen, and his tooth was missing. And his feet were swollen. He had slippers on. But however, he was there, and he took us in, and he explained it, and he said that he survived with my father, and they took him to France. That's why he's there from Flossenburg, the Red Cross. And they took blood from my father, gave him transfusions. 

I never understand why they took blood from a man in that condition. I have no answers for that neither. And he died two weeks after liberation, and he was well. He died from the needles, infections. He got hepatitis 

So he says he's lucky that he wasn't well enough to sense the feeling of his survival through my father's blood. He says, there's he nothing he can do now. And he took us the following week down to his grave where he's buried in France. 

And they said that there were no girls in that house. It was in Taverny. But they're going to make-- they said that we'd be able-- they're going to arrange that we should stay there with my brother. And we stayed in there in Taverny. That was in 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: There was another brother? 

SUBJECT: The other brother was gassed. He was 14 years old when he was gassed in Auschwitz. He didn't have a chance to leave an imprint of his life or his existence. And we stayed in Taverny. Then, of course, we started to learn French, because being in a country, you have to learn the language. 

There was a teacher who was teaching us, and later on, that I thought, um, I can manage with the French. I said, I want to go to school. And then I went to someone-- I wanted to be become something, somebody, to give some contribution. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of contribution were you thinking? 

SUBJECT: I was thinking of some kind of research, perhaps. That's all I was thinking. I could never understand why my father died. I guess I was ignorant. I didn't know the facts. And they take blood from a man who's not a condition, and he could die of the infection of the needles. And I just wanted to research and to be able to-- to do some good. 

INTERVIEWER: After all this, you wanted to do some good? 

SUBJECT: That's right. And of course, we had to live with the thoughts. You know? We didn't have our period for almost a year. And if we get out alive and to we survived, what will happen? Would we ever marry? Would we have a family? Would we be able to conceive children? And if yes, in what condition? 

So we lived in fear. And, of course, still, we suffered. [INAUDIBLE] we suffered. We had the scars. And my brother said that I don't want-- I want to-- that we should go to the United States. We had an aunt. She was my father's older sister, and she came to the United States when she was 16 years old. 

And he said that he got somehow through the organizations in connection with her, and she's not able to send us papers to sign that we will not be a burden on the government, but she will get in touch our-- my mother's first cousin in Reading, Pennsylvania, who are doctors, both of them, who came out before the war. And they will send us the papers, the affidavit, to come out. 

And my sister and I, we were under 21, and we stateless. So we decided that we should sign up for the Czechoslovak quota because there were no Hungarian quota in that time in 1945. And he said he will come later. Because he was over 21, he couldn't come with us. So we were granted the visa. 

And my sister and I, we came to this country in 1947 in April. And our cousin picked us up, who didn't know us. But, of course, anyone could recognize to refugee girls at the shores. And when we came off the boat, I told my sister we were driving to Pennsylvania. And I saw these beautiful highways and advertisement. You know, I said this-- we are in the United States. 

And as we were-- you know, our boat were approaching the Statue of Liberty, I took my coat that I had from the concentration camp, and I threw it in the ocean. And people said, what are you doing? And I said, certainly, I says, we are now in America, and I'll be able to buy a new coat. I don't want to see this anymore. 

And we were driving down to Pennsylvania, and we stopped and went to-- I felt like Peter Pan. You know? I wanted to fly. I says, we are free in a free country. And of course, the tragedy was that there were no parents, and there were no younger brother of mine. And we know that this is it, and we just have to establish ourselves to, society and life has to go on, just because we cannot give in. Because we are here as a witness, and we have to -- assure-- and especially, we came to this country, this new country that we adopted, we don't want to be a burden. We want to give contributions because we survived. Our survival has a purpose. 

And again, we were in Reading, Pennsylvania, and we were there three days, and we told our cousins that they were so nice to help us here, but we want to go back to New York because we don't want to take anything from them. They already have given us enough. And we are young, and we're healthy. We can go to work and make a livelihood for ourselves. 

They were very reluctant to let, you know, two girls out in the life, without the language, without any knowledge. But I had no fear. I had no problem. He drove us back to New York, and there was this boy who came to this country before us, and they were in touch with him. And that was Menashe Klein. 

And he was a Klausenberger bocher, and he lived by the Klausenberger rabbi in Brooklyn. And we notified him that we're coming to New York, and he waited for us. And they put us up in a house that the Klausenburger had. It was a house in Brooklyn on top of a shul, a room. There was nothing there. It was two bed there. 

And we went to sleep. And there was bugs in the bed. There was lot of dust and everything. We got up and poured water and washed the beds. And my sister said, I said, my god. She said, what is this? She says, you know, what a wonderful place. I said, don't worry about it. Everything is going to be all right. So we'll clean it. And that's how we started. 

And the following week, we went to work. I went into the garden center, took a subway. And then when I see a sign, it says, you know, girl wanted-- you know, they had signs out on every door-- I walked in, and I worked on many, many different jobs-- t-shirt factory, umbrella factory. 

INTERVIEWER: And your brother? 

SUBJECT: And my brother were still in Europe. He didn't come until a year after. And then when he came, well, I felt that I was already well Americanized. I spoke some English really well, as a fact, because I went to night school. I knew right away that I had to learn the language. No one spoke French here, because I spoke fluent French. And I went to Washington Irving High, and I learned English. 

Then we were working, and he came after as a student. And then I remained here, then we lived together in Brooklyn. And I was the first one who got married. And my brother went to school in Williamsburg, and he saw this man. He was a very nice looking man. Who knew I like good looking boys. So he gave him my number to call me up. And he called me up, and we had a blind date. And two weeks after, he asked me to marry him. I says, why didn't you ask me sooner? 

INTERVIEWER: [LAUGHING] You weren't in a hurry? 

SUBJECT: Anyway, I felt he looks strong, you know? He's got good ideas, and he has ambition And after all, what else is there? All you need is ambition and some stamina to go on. And he was Hungarian. He was Kirsvarda. Comes from Kisvarda. And of course, I would have never known him if things were under natural circumstances. 

But, uh, that's how we met, and we married May 28, 1950. And then we had our first child, Cornelia, 1951, October 7. And we started to work. He came to this country '49, and the week after, he was working. And we worked, and we saved every penny we could. And then we had Mitchell, who was born in 1954, and we lived in New York. 

He worked night time on a job painting, and day time, he worked in factories, so he can make some more money. And I worked until eight months of my pregnancy, with Connie, my first child. And when she was born, we lived on a top floor. It was so hot there. I remember we used to go up on the roof, and he tied the child to his foot so she shouldn't roll off the roof. It was so hot, we couldn't sleep in the room. 

And then he got some-- we had about $1,500 saved, and he said he's going into business. He bought a sewing machine, and he went going into business. I said, certainly. He said, I'm not going in alone because I don't want to lose. If I lose this $1,500, then I lost everything. 

And he had a partner, and they grew, and they made some money. And one day, there was a fire, and it burned down the whole factory, and he had to start all over again. And then we did pretty good. I still worked again. 

And then we saved. And I always thought that if I have children, I should bring them up in pleasant surroundings, and we should buy a home, that they should grow up with security. So we out to Long Island and bought a small home, and he commuted. He was in the stitching business. 

And then in 1959, he had a friend in South Carolina. We went to visit him. Then he said there was a small factory for sale in Asheville. We should go over and see. And we drove over there, and the scenery was very nice, you know, geographically. And it was like, a small town. And I told him maybe it would better to bring children up in a smaller town. It would be easier. 

But let's move here. So that meant we had to sell our little home and the business and start again. And that's what we did. And we lived there ever since. And then Vivian made her appearance in 1960. And Joseph. I have four children. He's 14 years old. I have wonderful children, so Hitler didn't succeed altogether. I have four grandchildren. 

INTERVIEWER: Four grandchildren. Oh, my. I see you have a book in your lap. Could you maybe tell me how it is that you came to write that book? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, this is a testimony. This is my personal testimony, and it's a monument. It's a monument for my mother, for my brother, and for the 6 million, because I felt that's my personal account, that it will stay here as long as the world will stay here. Hopefully forever. And perhaps somewhere, somehow, maybe it will influence someone to avert another Holocaust. 

Because it's an honest story. It's written-- and I'm not a professional writer. It's written on a level that even an elementary child could read it, and they could learn what happened, and they could learn about my life, and they could learn about the survivors. And they can contribute their knowledge and continue what we survive for. 

Because after us, there's no one else. Unfortunately, there is survivors dying every day by accident or by sickness, and no one lives forever. And after us, there's only going to be history. And it's our responsibility to tell the story, the story in its entirety. 

But there's so many people that don't know anything about it, and there's so many people that don't want to know about it. And the researchers of anti-Semitism and terrorism, and this is the only way that will help. If people will know, the more they know, and the more want to know about it, they can learn what humanity has done against a fellow man. And it was never precedented in the annals of history, such a mass murder as such as here in the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER: What prompted you to write the book? 

SUBJECT: This is why I wrote the book, for a testimony. For a remembrance. And I also wanted to write everything down for my children, because you talk, and you tell them, and they're wonderful, and they're compassionate, and they know. 

But you know how it is. The verse can go by, but the writings remain. So I wrote it down so they will have it forever. And I'm very committed to the cause. I have everything, thank god. I have wonderful children, wonderful husband, married 33 years, successful, and I wanted to know, that to be strong, and for what happened to us, even though we suffered the scars because we can never forget. 

I cannot laugh as wholeheartedly as anyone else can laugh, because it takes a whole lot to make me laugh. But whatever, I'm sane and I'm strong. I believe I'm sane. And I live a normal life. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have nightmares, ever? 

SUBJECT: I have nightmares. Strange, the other day, I was dreaming about my mother, which I don't often do. And I was dreaming that she came to visit me. She looked so well. She had a fur coat on. And she came to visit me in Asheville. I was under the effect all day. Because I can't even imagine what she looks like anymore, and I have seen her, you know? So true. I was happy I had that dream. 

The whole life is a dream. Some say that it-- the whole thing was a dream. Well, fortunately, the people were killed. You know, there is-- there's professors and teachers and there's elements that say that the Holocaust never existed, it was fabricated. I met a woman in my town, and she said to me, don't you learn-- don't you read history? That was just fabricated. The Jews made that up so they could make money and take it to Israel. 

And I said to her, really? It was made up? I said, then where's my people? And I says, did you hear about this-- you know, Hitler's diary that was-- it was just then. I says, what do you think that was? He says, oh, that's a joke. That wasn't true. It was false. So I saw I was dealing with a very ignorant person. But this is what we-- this is what the trouble is, ignorance. You know, ignorance is really our enemies. And that's why I wrote this book too, because you know, if education is the only thing that we have-- and I'm really dedicated to the cause, as I told you before. 

I'm on the-- a member of the Governor's Commission on the Holocaust in North Carolina. I'm the Vice Chairman in charge of the higher education. And I lecture. I go to the middle schools. I go to the high schools. I go to the colleges. I go to the churches. And I would like to erect a monument in my town, because it's a tourist town, and I want the people that come there now, in the future, and forever, so they know, so they see among the other attractions in Asheville that they should see a monument dubbed the Holocaust. I feel it's very important. 

We're out of tape. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, OK. 

[INAUDIBLE] 

Do you feel as though you would like to continue, or would you like to stop? 

SUBJECT: That's up to you. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm fine. 

SUBJECT: I think we covered everything 

INTERVIEWER: OK. I'm fine. 