HILLEL KLEIN: Ask me. Said I should be, also. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you were in New York? 

HILLEL KLEIN: And-- yes. I came down from there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. You may begin. 

HILLEL KLEIN: OK. Yes? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

HILLEL KLEIN: My name is Hillel Klein. I am born in Krakow, Poland in 23rd year. My family is-- hmm, was a quite, uh, big family, and extensive family for many generations in Poland. My grandfather from my mother's side was a rabbi. And it was a huge family, as we lived with my father's side. He had 24 sisters and brothers. I'm bringing this point because only a few of us, they are alive. My own family, we had s--I had three older brothers and a older sister, and I was the youngest. 

From all of them, only one brother who came as a pioneer to Palestine before the war lived after the war, and died there. All my brothers and as well my sister perished. From all my brother and sisters, they have been married. They had children. My oldest brother had three daughters. My age, one older, and one younger. And my other brother had a daughter. And my sister had a one-year-old daughter. All of them perished in Krakow, in my town. And the neighbor and the villagers in the neighborhood as well in Warsaw. 

And when I was-- before the war, I was a student at the high school, active member in the Zionistic/Socialistic organization. I thought that I would be a writer. My mother thought that I would be a rabbi. And I had been involved very much in different activities with my friends. And our ideal was to come to Israel and to build a new society and socialistic spirit. Before the war, we had been very much involved in the fight against fascism. We have been aware about Hitler, about the danger. But in the same time, there was a feeling that the world, the western democracies are vicious, unhelpful, closing the doors before us, the doors of Palestine, as well as the doors of the western world for immigration. When the war break out, I was in so-called-- I was then 16. And they called me to do my duties, and that kind of military duties. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: For Poland. 

HILLEL KLEIN: For Poland, yes. We got Polish uniforms. And after two days I had been standings, uh, near the radio station. I stood alone. And then I came back home in the last minute when we have had the Stuka, the German airplanes, bombarding. And so we have had the tanks. And so I, uh, ran-- run away from Krakow with-- with my older brother. Because we thought that the Germans relate only to the men who are younger. But to the older people and to women, of course they will take care. And they would relate as to civilians. And only to tell you how this, the illusion and denial of the evil, that still, in spite of our knowledge about fascism, we didn't imagine that women, older people, or children are in that danger. 

Before the war, I participated, for example, helped for the Ger-- for the Polish Jews-- Jews who have been thrown away from Germany. And I have heard their stories about concentration camps. But we thought that this rather for political opponents, or that the German are trying to get money from their opponents. But the question of Holocaust wasn't mentioned, wasn't in our fantasy as well. It is interesting from one point of view to observe also the changes in them civili-- in the civil population. 

We are run away with my-- as I said, with my brother, his older daughter, which was my age, and me. And there was, of course, a feeling of panic on our way. And the Stuka had been bombarding all the time, also the civilians. And then we stayed in once more on our way-- in one small town, Bielitz. And there I met a cousin of me. Brother of my other cousin who is alive, Hillel Seidel, who is now member of parliament in Israel. And we stayed there in the night, and the Germans came in. 

And part of the population changed from one day to the-- another, and Volksdeutsche, and Germans. And they built-- they built kind of Triomphe, uh, s-- arcs. And heil, Hitler. And it was the change from day to the other day, they change in Nazis. And that was one of the anticipation how people can change. And of course, they identified themselves with aggressors. And I run away. And the same morning, and in the same town, this cousin whom I met was taken by the Germans, and with other Jews, 50 Jews. It was '39, September. Few days only after the beginning of the war. They had been burned in the Mikveh, in the ritual bath, by Germans, soldiers. So it wasn't '42, '43. It wasn't at the high point of the war. It was at the beginning. 

And when, uh, we run away at the end again, there was a razzia. And the German soldiers took us. So it was the first confrontation with a German from face to face. They took us to the-- to work to build the roads. And I asked the young soldier, who was maybe two old-- two ya-- years older than me in German language. "Was habe ich Schuld dass Ich bin ein Jude geboren?" 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was 18, you were 16. 

HILLEL KLEIN: I was 16. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was 1939? 

HILLEL KLEIN: '39. What-- why I am guilty that I'm Jew-- born Jewish? He looked on me, and then somehow he left me. Said I shouldn't work on this older-- the bad shoes. And of course I said that I'm, uh, set aside my brother. And I would like to work as he. And he excluded, in those days, my s-- my niece. She didn't work. She stayed-- she only had to do dishes and so on. So that was the first confrontation with Germans. Beating, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you talked to the German soldier, what did you th-- what was the feeling? 

HILLEL KLEIN: I felt really that I touched something human in him. I try somehow to speak, a man to a man. And it seems to me that he, because it was a meeting f-- from face to face, he was able to react. But when he was a part of a group, so again, he was the same. But somehow, he looked on me in a way because he had also to defend me against the other Germans, that I was somehow his. Uh, he was my protector, so to say. And after two days, they left us. 

And we came back. It was Rosh Hashanah. It was the first Rosh Hashanah. I came back on my way because we tried to run away to the Russian sides, to the east border. And on my way, I remember we have been turned off. And there was beating taking to wor-- work, and razzias. And we hide. Again, we had to hide ourselves. It was about 100 miles from Kra-- no, less. 80 miles from Krakow, 100 kilometer. And then we came back to Krakow. 

In the beginning, we tried to live our life as if in a war situation. What I mean by that? The schools was closed immediately. But then it was organized in a kind of semi-official official way, a other kind of school. And in the beginning, we had our friendships, our love affairs. It was kind of a-- the realization situation. From one point of view, you tried to hear BBC. You tried to-- we tried to work in a kind of a-- in-- in, um, gardens in such a ways that all our friends, we work together. We discuss literature, politics, the fate of the war. Um, very optimistic. 

And I remember when I read Das Reich from Goebbels. I got it in some way. And they wrote about Palestine, that the British wish to make from it a Jewish state, and Jabotinsky will be general. So I tried to believe in it. It was, of course, a Nazi propaganda. But it was somehow for us, we tried cha-- to change always in something positive. And of course, all our-- my father was a great optimist. So always there have been some rumors how the Russians will try to do something, how-- we couldn't understand, of course, the Russian under Ribbentrop, um, and Molotov, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? Hagro. ?] 

HILLEL KLEIN: Friendships and the Russian going-- are going in. But somehow, we had illusions. The rationals are trying to-- to do something to the Germans. Their policy will be-- says they will invite Germany. Maybe-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have a love affair? 

HILLEL KLEIN: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have a love affair? 

HILLEL KLEIN: No. I had no illusions. That's-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have a love affair? 

HILLEL KLEIN: I-- if I had a love affair? I fall in love, but it is, you know, but a platonic. We wrote poems, and lot of thinking about future. And we had illusions that it will come to the end. And neighbor of me was one of them-- Mordechai Gebirtig, one of the poets of Holocaust, who have written the first poem, S'brent, briderlekh, brent. Our little town is in fire, is burning. He wrote it in '38. Later on, it became the song of ghettos. But he wrote it in a kind of prophetic vision. 

He was a Bundist. A simple man with a lot of intuition. And I remember how he was happy. The Germans took in the first days our bijouterie, all of these things, money. They took the leadership from-- from the Jew-- Juden Krakow and they shoot it. But in this same time, we had some kind of hope the Russian will come. So coming back to Gebirtig, I remember when we have-- when we have had the radio, which was illeg-- legal to hear, but we had it in-- in a bunker. And we have heard his songs in the Russian radio station from Lemberg, Lviv. Because the Russian took over the eastern part of Poland, as you know. 

And we have heard the Russian code of soldiers singing his songs. And that was something for him, and for us, his friends, a sign, maybe the Russians will really come. Really, the fantasies of my fathers and his friends, the Russian will come, which have been all of the time changing. One day it was, we have been in a kind of depression. Second then day, when there was other rumors, we had been so happy. The Russians will invite. It is only as-if situations. They cannot be friends. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In-- invade. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Invade. Yes, that the Russian will invade. And of course, this same man, Mordechai Gebirtig, when he have seen Polish approach of the mo-- majority of supports to the Jews of the Polish policeman, of the Arbeitsdienst, of the civil-- uh, of the civilist. People who have yesterday friends became detached, colder, d-- more distant. It was before ghetto. It was very painful. And he had written a song, "Es tut Weh, Es tut schrecklich Weh." It is very painful to see how the friends of yesterday are cooperating with the Germans. 

More than that. When the oppression was growing more and more, he have written then in '41 a song, "Es wird kommen der Tag von Nachkomme." It will come the day of the vengeance. And we sit together, a small group. And he have been reciting it. And his daughter, Lola, the youngest one who was a fine actor, and we thought about our revenge, how to do it. From where should come our hope? This man, who was a Bundist, artist, after Yom Kippur, when they destroy us, they took all the Sifrei Torah, and they destroyed it with fire, He wrote also a poem, Where Are You, God? 

That would be only some illustrations of our-- of the atmosphere in those days. From one point of view, we could study philosophy in underground. We could organize kitchens for the poor. We began to work in a kind of hachshara, a kind-- to anticipate what will came in Palestine. We had been full with-- with vitality. And that was maybe weird because it was a very important process. And jokes about the Germans. And, uh, humor was one of the most important weapons. 

And it help until it came, really, the Aussiedlung un-- until it came first the-- when they began to speak about ghetto in Krakow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you mean, he is a Bundist? He was a Bundist? What does-- 

HILLEL KLEIN: Bundist. It means he was member of Bund, of the Jewish socialistic party, who have been thinking about autonomy, of Jewish cultured life in Poland. And most of them, they had socialist, artist. And that this also something. This man began to speak about Israel, about Palestine. I remember the discussion. My father was a religious Zionist. And him-- and it is also something which is painful to remember. My father, for him, what he called betukhim was very important. To have the feeling of security in God. 

So it was Simhat Torah. And Simhat Torah, it is a-- it's the joy of Torah, a very important religious, uh, happening. Shavuot, Simhat Torah. And my father danced with the Torah in our flat. And we had been neighbors with Gebirtig. And Gebirtig asked my father, how can you dance? And how can you pray? And my father said, in spite of it, we should believe in God. He will be our-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Protector. 

HILLEL KLEIN: --Savior and protector. And I remember this discussion. I was very s-- ambivalent who has-- who is right. My father, who thought that the resistance against Nazi, against, uh, evil. Sutan he called him. In Yiddish expression, Satan. Said, it must be connected with belief in God. And God s-- he will help, he will save. A kind of a naivete. And this humanist, Gebirtig, who was a artist and he thought that it is not the time to have joy of-- of Torah. And now I don't know who was right. I don't know. But there have been the discussions between people. And I think that both of them have been representative of the atmosphere and the voices of then. 

But still, the angered hostility was that we haven't heard about the voice of Jewery. In the beginning, we thought it is impossible that the mighty Jewery in America, England, will allow this pogroms. Because pogroms have been happening all the time in the same time. Soldiers had been killing Jews, but was not organized. But Say, 20, 30, 50 Jews. They have been kicking Jews. They have been, um, making pictures, uh, how they are. Uh, spying on-- spiting on them. The beards of the religious Jews, they took scissors. And it was-- and there have been atrocities. 

And the feeling of the shame to see my professor, [? Vincent Rappaport, ?] a philosopher, a special man, who wrote philosophic tracatus also in ghetto. And also in bunker. He was killed. This man who have been in evening-- we had with him evening courses about Nietzsche, Ahad Ha'am, Maimonides, Aristoteles. And we ask him, how is it possible? And he was pessimistic. He said-- said, truth will come, but we will not be alive. And this man was taken by the Germans. And he had to clean not only the traitorous, but to tre-- to clean with his tongue. 

Such experiences have been not only painful, but they awake this feeling of vengeance, which was very important for the motivation to live. As my father said, I wish to stay alive only one day after his mapole, after his-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Defeat. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Defeat. His, it was Hitler, it was the Nazis. So the whole question was, when the Russian came in the war, we haven't been Krakow. We run away. We didn't wish to be trapped in-- in the ghetto. But still, the naivete, we will be somewhere in the village, and maybe, maybe that we will be safe. And we came to a small village town that my f-- parents and me, my oldest brother, his wife and three daughters. And this feeling of separation from your hometown is also something very, very painful. As you see that the ne-- neighbors are taking your furniture, your books. You are all on the-- and you are trying to be nice to them because, who knows, maybe that they would be helpful. 

And you are taking only some personal things. Neighbors with him-- whom we lived in this same house many, many years, the Poles have been living Christians downstairs. I-- I thought also that I am Polish from the point of view of culture. I have been identifying with Poland-- Poland. I loved Polish literature, the language, nature. They have been children my age. Some of them quite friendly. But still, we had no close relations because I was in gymnasium, and they had been rather proletarians, not going to school. To go to high school in Poland was a kind of sign that you are belonging to the so-called intelligentsia. But still friendly, playing as children together ball, football. 

And they changed. And we left. I remember the Krakow when I left first alone because you change also. And they grow up per-- person. I had-- I took over because I was blonde in those days. I had blue eyes. And I have been not looking in then-- those days, or I had maybe a news that I am looking non-Jewish. So I could go without the s-- stern without the Magen David. And I-- first, I went there, to the Dobczyce. It was a small town to prepare for my oldest brother, and his family, and my parents, and me a house. My sister was in Warsaw with her husband. She was new married. She married before the war in '39. Special girl. 

And, um, always we have been worrying about each other. So we had been worrying during the bombardment of Warsaw, what is had. And I remember she came to us after the end of the war between Germany and Poland, '39. And she came also as non-Jew. And somehow she came in a train, and she met a German. And the German said to her, "Meine Dame, der Fuhrer weisst uberhaupt nicht uber die verfolgung der Juden." Madame, the le-- Fuhrer, Hitler, does not at all about the atrocities against Jews. And it is on the expression of the the wall. And he was a very high-ranking officer. 

So the messages have been different. But still, I know that I'm not speaking chronologically, but it is not important. It seems to me rather that I should bring the highlights and the atmosphere of the beginning, and how it is changing. You have your friends. You are thinking about family. And then your community is destroyed, and you are trying-- trying to write letters, trying-- We have been-- Dobczyce was about also 80 miles somehow near Krakow. And I have been trying to find my friends, to think about where they are. And they had been different places. Some of them Krakow. 

The girls that I fall in love wasn't-- I lost her traces. And I met her after the war, by the way. And we are very good friends until now. And you-- that is [? Nuscha. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Nuscha 

HILLEL KLEIN: And so, they-- still, it was a kind of a mixture. From one point of view, you have been living with the war, with the atrocities. From other point of view, you are trying to live your private life. But it didn't, um, um, oh, it was not long time. First, I was taken again to press time, to a working camp, Plaszow. It was-- that was also something of the ugliness the the Nazi atmosphere influence, that some of the Jews collaborated, so-called Judenrat. And the first sacrifices have been always those who are not belonging to community. As I came from Krakow to this small town, so of course, those who have been not belonging, the-- the boys and the youngsters, the young people have been the first one. Of course, later on came the others. 

And I came to this working camp. First time, I didn't know what is it. Um, first they took us to the police station. And first time, I was in a jail. I-- now I remember because they forgot about it, the Polish jail, because they took us, the policemen, and they were Ukrain-- Ukrainian police. And, um, we called them "Scharne" in black uniforms, the volksdeutsche And beating up. Mmm, and they have been ugly since. If I wouldn't go, because I run away to the forest, they will kill my parents. I got from the Judenrat messages when I was hidden, so I came back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You ran away from the jail to the forest, and returned to the jail? 

HILLEL KLEIN: No, no. It was before. Before I came to the jail. And then I came to this-- to Plaszow, Judenlager. And the feelings-- the first time I knew what is baracken and first time Stacheldraht. And you know now what is a concentration camp. They have been also observed, um, adding member, a social elements, and also they took gypsies in the same camp. And we had to work. The Germans' work, it was a-- they built to Kiev, the Ostbahn from Berlin to Kiev. And it was the old German industrial enterprises, Siemens-Bauunion, or Rein-Bau, et cetera, which are now industrial complexes. I worked there, and I work in Siemens-Bauunion. 

And there have been German meisters. Some of them, but only few, have been human beings. Some of them have been killing with Eisenstange. It is a German expression. I don't know what they say. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bar. Iron bar. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Iron barn. We had to build a bridge over the Bzura, Vistula. And they had been throwing people to the Vistula. I work very hard. We had to really-- we had to work without, um, um, underwears and trousers. Um, no, food wasn't too much. And my family, my parents, have been Dobczyce. I run away. I run away from there. And it was a typical situation because I had seen first, but I didn't mention. It was also, as you are anticipating, you are not anticipating. 

I came the first day, and there was also some of the Jewish policemen because, uh, in the camp, there had been Jewish policeman. Those who had food and had important roles. In such a way, they thought that the families will not be killed, not destroyed, and they will stay in their towns. That was the motivation. So they had not necessarily had been, um, bad people. But it was a kind of illusion. And I remember one of them said to me, you must organize. You must be quick. I couldn't understand. I didn't-- I wasn't one of the best organizers. So my-- my only one way was to run away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you escape? 

HILLEL KLEIN: And to take-- but before, so, I hear the voices of the, um, Hundefuhrer is calling. And there was a Ukrainian SS in black with a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dog. Dog. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Dog. And somehow, that was the first day. And I-- you-- I didn't adopt myself sort-- for the situation. And somehow, I stayed. And because I thought, I haven't done nothing. And it was after the work. And of course, he throw the dog on me, and it was a huge dog. And, uh-- and-- and he had-- have beaten me. And from so-- this first-- it was first day, I couldn't hear on my ear. And until now, I have the trauma. By the way, I didn't go to Wiedergutmachung. But that is not so important. Not only the association first day, I run away. I run away after one week. I-- how? When I-- we work. And so we work from-- and it's also something which is very difficult to describe. 

The 4 o'clock in the night, or 5 o'clock in the night, it is something where-- that when I am thinking about it now, going through the fields, going and going and going. And here's Ukrainians, and, uh-- and the black SS men. And different kind of, mmm, uh, from lat-- Lithuanian, Estonian, and so on. And it-- I had a feeling somehow of, I don't wish to-- to speak in professional language. It wasn't real, somehow. It was terrible, this-- this morning. I couldn't stand it because it was-- still it was so new for me. 

So after the work, I know that I had strength. And we had to g-- go back. And when the-- you know, there had been hundreds. And I run away. It was also evening, about 7 o'clock. And I run away. He hadn't seen me. And through the fields, I-- I walk and walked and walked and walk until in the morning I came from my little, it was a little town. And, um, I knew that I have a very good friend, in Wieliczka. Wieliczka was another town. And so at first I spoke with the parents who have been afraid. How can you stay? There are no situ-- uh, Juden that we know. And it is a danger. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A Jewish friend? 

HILLEL KLEIN: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: A Jewish friend? A Jewish friend? 

HILLEL KLEIN: I had a fr-- Jewish friend, who is now a gynecologist, and my best friend, uh, from my childhood who is in Chicago. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Weren't you injured from the dog? You said the dog-- 

HILLEL KLEIN: I had been wounded. I had been wounded especially in the legs. I had been nun-- wounded, and here I had been wounded. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Weren't there dogs guarding you out in the field? 

HILLEL KLEIN: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Weren't there dogs guarding you in the field? 

HILLEL KLEIN: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No dog. No? 

HILLEL KLEIN: No, no. It wasn't it-- that was-- when--in the first day. But that was nothing. And, uh, then I, uh-- I saw-- again, I took-- you know, the-- the troops, they have been known-- there have been no cars, but they have been u--and Jews couldn't go from one place to other. But they have been Fuhrwerke. They have been, um, horses-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Carts. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Carts with horses. And again, I, um, run away way to Wieliczka with such-- as a known Jew, as a poor, as a Aryan. And I came to Wieliczka. And Wieliczka was a different situation. So it is something typical. That same-- it was not in the same time. Haven't been this same kind of situation. Dobczyce was a very-- it was dependent from the local initiative of the Nazi, of the SS, of the-- in the village, in--in the town. And Wieliczka was still a-- ash-- what they called Stadthauptman, mayor of the town, German, who had very friendly relation with a Jewish lady. 

And so, he had notes with-- he was much more human. [INAUDIBLE] sometimes. It is very interesting. But-- so, uh, I took my parents. It is also, you know, uh, in the-- that you have so much courage. I went from-- days I went from Dobczyce to Wieliczka to take what we had, and to smuggle my parents. My father had a beard. He was a very religious Jew. So he had to shave. It is one of the also-- the change of your face of your father was religious, too. You know, if you see sometimes on a Rembrandt, the portraits of Jew, this same kind of face radiating. And here your father is changing it all. 

My mother, I-- she-- she had to change also in a kind of Polish village woman. And in such a way, she as a Pole, and she as a, um, village woman. And me, fear and anxiety that we encounter-- is encounter the Gestapo will come and order. And we had not at all identity cards. And we came, and we came to-- to Wieliczka. Well, to make the long story short, in Wieliczka, I-- it was also the question that you had some money, and you have some bijouterie. And you had to sell to eat. And to all sort of situations, that is very difficult. You cannot work. 

I tried to work, um, and always we had to-- to-- to buy our life. First to the Jewish, um. Kultursgemeinde is a Jewish, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Community center. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Community center. Because the Germans ask them the monies, this nice Stadthauptman still he had need a lot of money to bribe. And we bribed him. So, uh, a-- always it was some new action, new actions who took everything from us. But the same time, they have been meetings of colleagues, of friend. And we have been-- always there had been razzias to take us to work. And always you had to run away to forest until they took me again to-- to this same Juden-- in Juden Juden Lager, Julag Plaszow. Plaszow. And they had been Plaszow, Biezanow, Prokocim, different camps. 

And again, I stayed there a few months until I have heard-- and I had also meet communication with my parents, and also with my brother, that said what happened, rumors as they were liquidate. So-called liquidate the Jewish community there. And I remember two days before, I have been--or, not-- I run away from the-- from Julag. And you develop different kind of techniques how, and so on from the work. And it was-- you know, you had to be all the time very much aware about everything. And I'm going through the fields because not on normal way in, uh-- in the night. 

And then I met a German from, um, Organization Todt. And he's asking me, "Identitatspapier?" My identity card. I have been known as a Jew. Nein. I knew that it's a question of death and life. And I am-- as if, as nothing to see here, and so on. And I am, as if bringing to my jacket, and then I give him a beat and kick. And it-- it was darkness. It was about 5 o'clock in the morning because I walk all the night. And I run away. And these kind of moments have been very important for me for my memory later on, that I could kick a German. It was not heroic. It was somehow defense. And, uh-- and all the anger because I know that the parents that-- that's-- that is-- I have heard as liquidation. 

And I came in the morning, and I remember as now. It was a very important moment for me, which is always in my memory, coming again and again this picture. We sit. Was about 6:00. And I said to them, and they had been looking. We had also naught to eat. And so, I brought them something for each from the camps. And I said that I see them the last time. And I began-- and we all, we began to cry. My mother said "Gott wird helfen" But it was-- it was only a performa. It was the last meeting with-- I had the feeling this is the last time. It wasn't the last time. I had-- but it was the last times that we have sitting together. 

And really, I had to go back. And then I tried to-- we have-- that was not a ghetto. We had-- in village, there was a town. And we lived in it with Poles. And we pay them quite good, so they took us. And through one of the daughters of them-- I knew because she had a friend, a Pol-- a Polish policeman that's real. And she told me, she came to the working place where I work. And she told me, said there are rumors about the liquidation. So it was this meeting. And I had to go back. I had to go back because everyone wished to work. If you have work, so you-- because that was a kind of a as-if safety situation. 

And I spoke with the Poles, and we give them what we had, diamonds. Said my-- they had a kind of, uh-- how would just say dir khazirim? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, pig barn. 

HILLEL KLEIN: And they built something, a kind of bunker so that my father would be there when the Germans are coming, and Polish, when it would be liquidation. Oh, and I c-- and I came back one day again later. Rumors said-- not only rumors, but knowledge, because we have been in touch with Poles, said the village car, they are killing people and Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's what year now? 

HILLEL KLEIN: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year? 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1940. 

HILLEL KLEIN: [SIGHS] That was '42. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '42. 

HILLEL KLEIN: '42, it was, near Rosh Hashanah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All this time you had been in and out of camps, and running, and been able to maintain yourself for two years. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Oh, this-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Two years. 

HILLEL KLEIN: Yes, it-- oh, one year. It was one year. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One year. 

HILLEL KLEIN: One, from '41 to '42 before I was rehab in Dobczyce. But, um-- and, uh, still, you had your vigor, and, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

HILLEL KLEIN: I-- again, I took a train. A train, which was to Wieliczka. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have false identity papers? 

HILLEL KLEIN: Without. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No? 

HILLEL KLEIN: And there was a police, and so on. And it was always for us that, uh-- as a boy, son of my teacher, Markheim. I remember this to date. He was-- has-- he had red hair. And we are coming to the station with us. It's a Polsha saying, oh, they are killing, destroying. And some of them didn't wish to go. And, uh, some of them on the other station took out. I had to go. And now it is seem to each other. And I came onto s-- to the station. I see my mother. And of course, SS and Pol-- Polish policemen all around. And Baudienst, they have being different. Also Polish organization who cooperated with the Germans. 

And my mother also is a Polish woman. Uh, and they had the kind of tradition, uh, folkloristic kind of, um, uh, clothes-es. And with a neighbor-- with this Polish neighbor. And they are saying Hilush, my names, that I should run away. And like, where is father? Father will be there. And she told me, she said, my brother also with his children came back from the small town, from Dobczyce. So they took from all small towns to a more central town, and they are together. And I-- it will be fine. And I took the train alone, uh, again. And on the way, the-- one of Poles that-- who discovers that I'm Jewish, and maybe that had good, um, intentions that I should run away to the-- to the Polish underground. But this Polish underground killed also Jews later on, which he said was a forest not far from Krakow. And we pushed [? [SPEAKING  POLISH ?] And they-- they said that they are some underground. 

Well, to makes long story short, I came back again in the-- you c-- you didn't come to a camp, you know, that you are coming through the gate. But they had to wait till the night, and under the Stacheldraht and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

HILLEL KLEIN: Yes. And I came in. And all night and all day long, I have been seeing base work, how the Jews, they are taking them away. Um, and again, this, you know, this is a game to tell-- to how I ran-- I run away from the Kommando, and try to find my parents. Somehow it didn't work. And, um, I-- later on, I run away from the same Julag to get to Plaszow. And that-- to get to Podgorze. And Krakow was a ghetto. And there I found my mother. My mother run away from the same small town. And my father was discovered by the Germans and killed. And my mother said that she wished to stay for me because she knew that I am alive. And she thought that father would be, uh-- that she had a very secure place. 

So we have been part of the time in, uh, ghetto Krakow. And I began to work in a Wehrmacht unterstelle for the German, uh, army. Uh, and it's-- always they're having selections every few months. And I remember this difference of atmosphere. With me worked one, uh, girlfriend of me. And in ghetto, we, um, tried to organize also resistance movement. It is a long story. [? [SPEAKING YIDDISH/POLISH] ?] It is organization of fighters from Zionistic organizations. And it was organization which were-- first was interested to help the friends from different Zionistic organizations to smuggle out them from the dan-- uh, from the endangered townlets to ghetto. And to come in touch with the Polish underground, which was very difficult. And to organize Aryan papers, et cetera. 

And in one, we lived. In one in the kitchen, we lived about-- the kitchen was a very small room. 20 people we sleep. So each-- uh, one on each other. My mother couldn't get work. So it was dependent. If you work, you know-- so you had the Zeckenkarte. And always when I had to go away to work, and I was afraid if I will find my mother not-- and that happened the most. I think the ghetto was much more a place of-- if I am thinking now, of conflict than the concentration camp. Here you had the place, some illusion of choice, of freedom, what to do, to run away on the Aryan paper, uh, to stay in the-- in ghetto, to work, to be with mother, not to be with mother. And it was a very difficult situation for decision-making. 

And I remember one day when there was, obviously, Aussiedlung Aktion And my mother had no Zechenkarte. And she stayed in one of the bunkers which we made. And I get out, and there was-- what do you say? You say [INAUDIBLE] There was a-- the gate. And you are going out. And the German police, Gestapo, and the Wehrmacht, and Police police, and SS, they have been onto us on two sides. And you had to go five, nine, and left, right. That was first s-- selection. And somehow-- well, I sit alive. I am here. And such strong people, you know, proletarians have been there, et cetera. 

And so, it was also feeling a-- I went to-- to work, and I remember it was my friend who was a poet. She's alive. She wrote one of the most important books about Holocaust, even here in United States. And we--I remembered we went to so-called Soldatenheim. We work house of soldiers. We had to clean, we had to do things. And she cried, and Azacus cried. And most majority of Germans have not been-- 

[VIDEO CUTS OUT] 

