[BROADCAST TONE] [SIDE CONVERSATION] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ready? Please begin with identifying yourself. [? Are you ?] ready? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: [SIGHS] My name is Erich Goldhagen. I teach at Harvard University. And I teach, among others, the course on the Holocaust at Harvard. Um-- what is it that-- uh, special that you would like me to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have been watching a tape now-- a tape now session. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You might have had some thoughts about it. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Um, well, the experience of the previous, um, uh, recounter, survivor, is a bit atypical. And, uh, it's atypical in many respects. 

First, uh, it-- it is-- the experience of Hungarian Jewry was unlike-- quite different from the experiences of other Jewries in Europe. The catastrophe came upon them rather suddenly, without any preceding preparation, without any preceding, um, uh, large-scale and severe persecution. 

They lived a relatively settled and relatively comfortable life until, ah, '44 when suddenly the catastrophe fell upon them. And they were seized and hurled into Auschwitz. And most of them were gassed. 

Uh, many of them did not know till the very last moment when they stood on the threshold of the gas chambers that they were about to be killed. So that it was not a community which-- like the Polish Jewish community-- or, or, as the, uh, some ways, the German Jewish community underwent severe privations and traumas before the final hour of liquidation. It, uh, was, so to speak, seized from a relatively comfortable setting and suddenly hurled into hell. 

Um, uh, this gentleman, Mr. Davidowitz, moreover, was not in hell proper. He was-- escaped, he hid, he had, so to speak, close encounters with the-- with death. But he was not in Auschwitz. He was not in the very inner circle of hell. 

So in many ways, his experience is atypical. And, uh, the experience of Hungarian Jewry is, in many respects, atypical. I'm surprised-- I was surprised to hear that his grandfather knew what was expecting them. Because most Hungarian Jews went to their death not knowing that at the end of that railway trip that the final destination is gassing. They went ignorant, uh, and-- ignorant into their death. 

[SIGHS] 

Um, the, um, uh, Mr. Davidowitz really never encountered a Nazi in the sense in which Polish Jewry encountered the Nazis, Polish Jews, or Soviet Jews encountered the Nazis. He did not-- uh, he did not confront-- uh, meet with that-- that singular sadism by which the Nazis were distinguished in their treatment of the Jews. Uh, so, uh, it was, in many ways, atypical. 

I think this, perhaps, brings us to, um, a little known or a little studied phenomenon of the Holocaust. Namely, the relationship between the executioner-- the Nazis-- and the Jew, the mutual visions of one another and the, um, attitudes towards one another. The student of, uh, of the Nazi period is struck by the, uh, unexampled cruelty of the Nazis, the sadism, the wanton, uh, torture, humiliation, and degradation. 

The Nazis did not only kill Jews. If they had killed Jews-- i-- i-- if they had only killed Jews, they would have been outright murderers. And their actions would be more easily explicable than, uh, they-- ah, ah, than they are. 

Because the death of the Jews was preceded by what I call purposeless torture, non-instrumental-- non-instrumental, um, uh, cruelty, which, uh, as the word purposeless suggests, had no purpose at all. It's-- uh, it was, uh, torture for torture's sake, humiliation for-- humiliation for humiliation's sake. 

Um, this-- most writers on the Holocaust simply recorded as though it was a natural thing, as though it required no explanation, as though it was the nature of things for Nazis to torture, to beat, and to humiliate, and to degrade. But when you compare the behavior of the Nazis, say, with that of the Soviets in their camps, you will-- will be immediately struck by the contrast. 

That is, the Soviets, in the Soviet camps, most people were chattel. They were slaves to be worked to exhaustion. And many perished. But the Soviet camps were not-- did not know this systematic cruelty which the Nazis-- which the Nazis displayed. Now, to interpret this cruelty is not an easy thing. It would require many, many lectures to-- and even then, I'm not sure whether I could offer a wholly s-- intellectually satisfying explanation, uh, for it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were in Romania. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Weren't the Romanians also cruel? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: No. The Romanians were not cruel, certainly not to the same extent as the Nazis. Uh, those-- the Germans, uh, or to be more exact, the Nazis, infected those who were closely associated with them, their henchmen, the auxiliary East European policemen and troops, with the same sort of cruelty. The Ukrainians-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I've heard that-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: --who served the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --the Romanian Iron-- Iron Guard were the most-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: The Romanian Iron Guard, it was episodic cruel-- well, the cruelty, the Romanian Iron Guard-- the most notorious act of cruelty of the Romanian Iron Guard was the hanging of Jews on meat hooks in the south of Romania. But I'm not referring to that. That was only a relatively brief episode which lasted some days. 

I'm referring to, um, uh, to, uh, the, uh, purposeless labor which people had to do in concentration, carrying stones from one part of the camp to the other. The jumping off to the merriment of the SS men from high-- uh, from, um, uh, cliffs or from, ah, high points into a valley to their death. And that was called parachute. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you witness that? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Uh, that is not important, whether-- that is recorded in the literature. That is, uh, abundantly recorded in the literature. 

The very first gassing of Auschwitz, which was accompanied by laughter, in which the people were lured into the concen-- into the gas chamber. And then the SS men shouted, do not-- don't scald yourself. Be careful when you take the shower. The shearing of-- the cutting off of beards of Jews, to the merriment of the SS men. Dipping their heads-- having them put their heads into water. 

I mean, the instances of cruelty are-- are-- are innumerable. I mean, every-- what is interesting is that virtually every Nazi who encountered Jews behaved that way. If you took a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: --a list-- uh, if you took a list of all the Nazis in the major ghettos, European ghettos-- the administrators, the slave-- the slave drivers, the policemen-- and studied them individually, so to speak, microcosm-- uh, uh, microscopically, uh, their behavior, you will find that all of them, regardless of their background, displayed the same-- displayed cruelty. Beating Jews, spitting on them, trampling upon them, shooting them in cold blood. Alternating extreme courtesy and apparent solicitude with wanton cruelty. 

What is-- what is remarkable is that if you examined, for instance, the men, the background, you find that they come from various backgrounds. They are Bourgeois people. Let's take, for instance, a few examples. 

The head of the ghetto of Lodz, or the commander of the Jews in Vilna, a man by the name of Kittel, who was an opera singer. The-- the commander of Lodz, who was a Bourgeois who came from a-- a-- a man who came from a respectable German commercial family from Louisburg. The family and his own background recalls the Buddenbrooks , sort of novel of Thomas-- Thomas Mann. 

And this man displayed the same cruelty. And he even did something which very few Nazis did. He raped a 16-year-old girl towards the very-- towards the end. 

Kittel burned Jews alive, sh-- killed them, shot them. And this is-- was-- it was a pattern. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I-- I-- I-- I have to 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --interject-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --at this point. There was a man in the Lodz ghetto which we hear a great deal about by the name of Rumkowski. He was Jewish. And yet he was attributed with the same cruelty that you're saying infli-- infected the German Nazis. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yeah, well, the Jewish police displayed similar cruelty. Again, in part, under the influence of-- under the influence-- like, he himself, uh, slapped Jews from time to time. Uh, it is true the Jew-- J-- the Jewish police was extremely cruel. It beat-- 

And beating was very rare in the Jewish community. Jew-- the Jews of Eastern Europe were a relatively nonviolent community. Fighting and physical violence were rare occurrences among Jews in Eastern Europe. And yet, now, the Jewish police began to beat Jews, many of the Juden alteste, Juden, many of the Jewish leaders slapped, beat, flogged, whipped, and so on. So they, too, became infected with it. 

In general, in the ghettos of Eastern Europe, as in the concentration camps, physical violence became the almost ready means of expressing aggression. In our society, we express aggression in many other ways-- verbally, by gestures. In that-- in-- in-- in-- in-- in the Hitlerian world, in the Nazi world, almost every expression of aggression, both by the killers and by the victims themselves, took violent, physical forms. 

There was a great deal of violence, even among Jews, too. And above all, by the Jewish police against-- against their own-- their own brothers. So violent were the Jewish police that Hitler himself in one of his table talks remarked on it. The Jewish police treats their own Jews in a very cruel way. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: In other words, this is a world-- this is a world of extreme, uh, cruelty, uh, and aggref-- aggressiveness. And that, therein, it is distinguished from-- it is singular. It has no parallel in modern European history. And it has very but few parallels in the history-- in the history of the world. 

It was-- I mean, the closest approximation was sort of-- was an individual, not a-- not a society, Marquis de Sade. If you read Marquis de Sade, you-- you are sometimes impressed by the fact that he-- that his writings and his actions-- if you read his biography-- sort of anticipate the Nazis. I could even f-- show you some passages from his writings which bear a striking resemblance to certain Nazi orders and Nazi practices. The question why this is so is not easy to answer. 

To be very brief, I c-- I can say the following only. That, uh, Nazi ideology and the whole Nazi ethos was, uh, one which encouraged, sanctioned, and glorified violence and the expression of brutality for a number of reasons. In other words, it is-- it was really a system which sort of trans-valued values, which established sort of an ideal role model that was the very opposite of the prevailing, uh, Judeo-Christian, if you wish, ethos. 

To give you-- to give-- but this leads us very, very far away. But-- perhaps I shouldn't-- I shouldn't elaborate upon this and-- but merely state that this was a singular feature of the Holocaust. Taking for granted, uninterpreted, unexplained, simply Nazis are brutal. The-- 

It is easy to explain why the Nazis killed Jews. The Nazis were obsessed with a vision of the Jews which was hallucinatory, phantasmagoric. The killing of the Jews had a certain logic and rationality. If you believe what the Nazis believed about the Jews, then the Jews had to be killed. Because the very-- the very life of-- on this planet could not continue without-- w-- w-- without the extermination of the Jews. 

But the wanton brutality, the purposeless-- this is very important. Torture is very often instrumental. Police forces torture, you know, to extract confessions. 

But this was wanton cruelty. It had no purpose. And-- and this is not easy to interpret. I merely alluded, sort of, in general terms, to the fact that this was an ideology which gloried in violence, which consciously rejected the Judeo-Christian ethos, and which-- and which preached an ideal of-- of heartlessness, coldness, pitilessness. 

It's very significant that pity was a temptation-- very few regimes in modern Euro-- in European history condemned pity so often as the Nazis did. Pity is weakness, et cetera. Well, you-- let me give you just-- just illustrate to you, when Heydrich died after the-- he had been wounded in an attempt to assassinate him in 1941, he, at the funeral oration, Himmler said that Heydrich was a remarkable man. He was the purest embodiment of Nazism. 

And wherein was he the purest embodiment of Nazism? He had a heart of steel-- of stone. He was utterly pitiless. That is a role model, a man who is utterly pitiless. 

And this-- this explains the traumas which so many Jews endured at the-- at the hands of the-- of the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, 40 years later, it has happened. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is the residue such a regime, such an event took place? We can say it-- it never-- people people are not capable of it. Regimes are not capable of it. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, what is remarkable is that most of these men, many of whom are still alive today, and with some of whom I've spoken, relapsed into the Bourgeois placidity. It was as if their whole personality underwent a sort of a mutation. But not a permanent mutation, only a temporary mutation. 

And then a different disposition came into being. And they relapsed into their former-- into their-- into-- to-- to their Bourgeois existence. Harmless citizens, obedient citizens of the German govern-- of-- of Germany. Harmless, incapable by themselves of committing any crime or of inflicting any pain upon everybody. 

This is not to say that their cruelty was a practice, the cruelty during the war was practiced only at the command of superiors. Because most of this cruelty was not ordered. On the contrary, there was even a vague unease in the leadership that this sort of cruelty may not remain confined to the Jews, but will overspill and become dangerous to German themselves. There was a certain ambivalence towards the practice of this cruelty, in the leadership of the SS. 

And now they're back into-- into-- into their Bourgeois lives, perfectly peaceable, and some of them very friendly and congenial individuals. 

INTERVIEWER 2: If you read the diary of somebody like Hess, was it, who was commander of Auschwitz? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The aspect of pitiless is inconsistent. Because he did have empathy for his dogs, his horses, his children, his flower garden. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: No. This-- this is one of the common misapprehensions about the Nazis. If the Na-- the Nazis were these killers, this mutation in their personalities was not diffused and generalized. If it was, they wouldn't be social beings. They would have to be shot or put in an insane asylum if they acted towards their fellow Germans that way. 

It was confined and unloosed only towards certain categories of human beings-- Jews, subhumans, Slavs, and others. They led a sort of a schizoid-- if I can use loosely as a term-- existence. And their role as concentration camp guards or administrators, towards Jews, they were cruel. 

When they left-- when they left the camp or the ghetto and returned to their families, to their German surroundings, they behaved in perfectly, what you would call normal way. It's not unusual. We find, very often, people play roles. But in certain roles, they're very cruel. In other roles, they would behave differently. 

In other words, they did not become antisocial beings. If they had indeed become totally sadistic towards everybody in their country, they wouldn't be useless-- they would be useless even to the-- and dangerous to the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, I think this is a rare opportunity to gain insights we don't ordinarily get. There have been contradictions, from what I have heard, that I don't understand. For example, I have heard that in Auschwitz, they had a swimming pool and recreation facilities. Now, explain that in terms of the cruelty, if you will, cruelty, unremitting torture-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: At Auschwitz Auschwitz was a vast camp. And I assure you, the swimming pool was not for the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, the bands, the music, the-- the orchestra. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: This-- this in itself was in-- was a form of cruelty. The bands, the music was not there to amuse and entertain, or to provide aesthetic gratification for the inmates, for the-- certainly not for the Jews. This in itself was very bizarre, that you kill the Jews, you march 'em into the gas chambers, you torture them to the accompaniment of Beethoven's music. This in itself-- well-- uh, it's-- so the music, this-- the existence of music at Auschwitz does not contradict what I've just said. On the contrary, it only confirms it. 

Incidentally, the only writer who has been interested in this and who has even actually made it to the center of his philosophical system was Sartre. Sartre has-- has devoted some of his writings to this question. He was very much impressed by the behavior of the Nazis. And he made it a central theme of his whole philosophy. 

So to come back, now, to the-- to the executioners, the-- and the-- their-- their-- their schizoid behavior, you have-- Himmler was very kind, for instance, towards children. He loved children. He could be very sentimental, et cetera. But he could watch with equanimity, almost unfeelingly, a spectacle in which 300 Jewish women chosen for their beauty were gassed in his honor. 

So this is not-- this is not unusual. Yeah. But what is significant, to return to the-- to your question, what happened after the war, 40 years after-- we know that-- that in times of war, soldiers are-- sort of become licensed killers. 

As you know, Freud was very much impressed by this and wrote an essay called "Thoughts on War and Death." And he said that what happens in war is that many of the aggressive impulses which have been restrained by civilization are given free rein. And not only are they given free rein, but they are rewarded, glo-- and glorified. 

Now, something of that kind of a much la-- on a much larger scale happened here. The Nazi regime began to preach a doctrine-- preached a doctrine, which for a few years altered the sort of psychic structure of many individuals within that system. It-- black was white. White was black. It was a truly satanic doctrine. 

Pity is softness. Cruelty-- and bad. Cruelty and violence is good. War is good. Peace is bad. And so on and so on. 

It was a topsy-turvy world. And they knew it was topsy-turvy. And they gloried in it. And they thought that theirs was a-- was a just and right system, that the world-- that it had lived the old system was mistaken, of the wrong pa-- on the wrong path, and-- and had to fallen off the ways of nature. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Erich-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: So this is one of the important lessons of the Holocaust. The ease with which relatively-- a relatively-- individual-- well, see, there's a common misconception that those who manned the concentration camps or shot the Jews in the east, the so-called Einsatzkommandos-- Einsatzgruppen-- were carefully chosen for their jobs after careful psychological screening, only those who seemed fit for the job were selected and sent. 

This is a misconception. They were chosen at random. No psychological tests were given to them. First, there were no tests at the time. The Germans-- psychology in that-- in those days, and especially in Germany, under the Nazis, was hardly existing. 

And yet, all these men, chosen at random, representing all sorts of personality types, all sects of German society, more or less, all of them-- with some exceptions-- were transmuted into brutes and were induced to commit cruelties of a kind and on a scale which had not been known before in European history. Now, and this is how the victim viewed the-- the-- the-- the Nazi, the executioner. The very decency alone on the part of a Nazi was so rare that it was treated as saintly conduct would be treated in normal times. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you repeat that? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: As decency among the Nazis was so rare that it was treated like-- s-- as the conduct of a saint would be treated in normal times. There were rumors that there were-- there were-- in some part of the ghetto there was a decent German. So it was-- that was miraculous. And legends were told about this man, and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: About a good Nazi. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: About a good Nazi, yes. Now, it is significant-- this is very interesting-- that those Nazis who did not inwardly ascend to this cruelty had to pretend that they do. It was extremely dangerous to-- not only to dissent, but not to join in the general cruel treatment of the Jews. For instance, it was known to many Jews in Sobibor-- another camp-- that there are some Nazis who pretend to beat but do not hurt. They had to pretend to beat. 

And it's also significant that-- that almost all Nazis in all the camps had whips. In the Soviet camps, there were no whips. A whip was a natural tool, the working tool, so to speak, of a Nazi. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about the dogs? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Dogs less so. I mean, you didn't have dogs in the ghetto. Dogs only in camps, where you had to guard, et cetera. 

Hitler himself carried, for some years, a whip, all the time with him. In Sobibor, they had whips-- they kept a few Jewish goldsmith alive to monogram, in gold, their whips. The whips were always with them. And they used them all the time, symbolically. 

When one of the-- the principal officers at Treblinka was arrested in the early 60s-- he was a cook in a hotel in Dusseldorf-- the police came into his home. He was a bachelor. He lived in-- in one room. 

And hanging on the wall was the whip he had used at Treblinka. And also they found a-- a-- a album of Treblinka, of pictures, of photographs. And inscribed on the album was the-- the sentence, Die schönsten Tage meines Lebens, The most beautiful days of my life. 

But that's rather unusual. Because most of the executioners regard their past-- do not glory in their past. They try to forget as many of the [INAUDIBLE] beset by guilt feelings. But that's another large topic. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is it much more difficult to describe the experience of the victim? I think you're so-- you have so much rich data on the executioner's mind. And for the victim, it's only the one comment about the saintliness of the good Naz-- of the-- occasional good N-- benign Nazi. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Uh, in a, uh, certain way, it is far more difficult. Because, um, in some ways, we have-- the-- the Nazis were reduced to sort of one-dimensional existence, psychic existence. There was very little complexity about the Nazis. 

They were executioners. There were torturers. They are not very difficult to grasp and understand. And there was a great deal of homogeneity in-- in their conduct. 

The victims had various li-- experiences. I mean, there was no uniform experience of the victims throughout-- throughout Europe. And the reactions were quite-- there were great variations, except in very extreme situations. But there were very great, great variations. 

A-- another difficulty is that we tend-- our scholarly inquiry into the condition of the victims is somewhat hampered by the natural tendency-- I'm not saying it at all in a condemnatory way-- by the natural tendency to, um, idealize them, to regard all of them as martyrs, uh, to, uh, confer upon them collective sainthood, kedoshim, et cetera. 

And that is sort of an impediment to hard scholarly study of the reaction of, uh, of, uh, the victim. Uh, uh, the tendency to heroize them, the tendency to ascribe to all of them great acts of resistance, et cetera. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- I have to ask you several questions-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --which have been perplexing me for a long time. Number one, we never hear about the kapos. No one was a kapo. Yet we know that there were kapos in the camps. 

Two, Sobibor. You mentioned it. There was an outbreak from Sobibor as I understand it. 600 people. Very few survived, but 600 people did manage to break out. 

And that was a rigid death extermination camp. Can you explain it? Well, maybe I better stop there. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, those who would appear here before-- I don't know what s-- where your-- the survivors whom you interview come from. Uh, but surely, if they had come from camps, they must have told you stories about kapo. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But no one ever was one. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, nobody would want to admit to being a kapo. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-huh. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: And he wouldn't come to appear here before you. Because he could be recognized [LAUGHS] and, uh, no kapo would appear on such a program. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Um, uh, the-- uh, there were uprisings. There was an uprising in Sobibor and one in Treblinka. And there was even an attempted uprising a-- at-- at the-- the destruction of the-- of the crematoria at Auschwitz, uh, et cetera. Yes. 

But to come back to-- to the point of-- um, uh, i-- it's a-- a study of the-- the ethos of the ghettos and of the concentration camps has not yet been underta-- has not yet been done in a very thorough, uh, in a very thorough manner. [INAUDIBLE] tried to do it. But [INAUDIBLE] doesn't know Yiddish. He doesn't know Hebrew. And, uh, he cannot study the-- the vast literature which, uh, which reveals the-- uh, the mind of-- of the, uh-- the-- 

First of all, I mean, wh-- what you have, uh, the thought is, of course, that the ins-- the-- the common thing is-- the instinct of self-preservation becomes very powerful. There's a-- there's a certain reduction to, um, uh, a process of, sort of, of desocialization sets in. And-- well, these are very large themes. So perhaps we should not pursue them. Uh, do you have any other questions? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank-- yes. [CLEARS THROAT] You know, you alluded before, when you were talking about, uh, Professor Davidowitz, about the inner circle and inner hell. Obviously, you have had some contact with it. What is it like to be a scholar of the inner hell? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, uh, you must develop clinical detachment. As a physician, you know that. This is a certain numbing must-- must be a characteristic of a physician as well as of a scholar of this period. If you don't, you just can't do it. You have to give up. 

You have to develop a certain hard shell. From time to time, you come upon an episode in which this hard shell is-- collapses. And, uh, and the event your study is of such a singular and powerful nature that it stirs you and it evokes tremendous pity and feeling in you. 

This is usually-- it's interesting-- it usually happens with children. The torture or death of children is, uh, is-- as you know, there's a very powerful taboo in Western culture against the killing of children. All cultures are against the killing of children. 

And I was told, for example, at-- I worked for some time at the headquarters for the prosecution of Nazi war crimes in Germany in Ludwigsburg. And the, uh, German attorneys and police officers who worked there told me that it is very hard to keep secretaries there. German secretaries who work there find them material they have to type so intolerable especially when it deals with children that they leave their job. And they had great turnover of German secretaries there. 

So the first thing is-- is you have to become clinically-- clinically, uh, detached. Uh, I have, uh, uh, again and again, uh, um, this detachment was shattered by certain episodes I enc-- uh, I encountered in the material. I'll just give you a few examples. 

Um, uh, one occurred in a courthouse in Munich. I was working in Munich in a courthouse studying the minutes of a trial that had been held in that court. And I came across an episode which sort of left me absolutely-- this is a cliche-- speechless. It-- it-- I became so bewildered that I couldn't understand what I was doing at the time. 

On April 20, 1943, a-- an SS man-- that was Hitler's birthday. And a Russian village celebrated Hitler's birthday by taking out 20 Jews and killing them ceremoniously. [INAUDIBLE] primeval sacrifice to the charismatic leader. I was just speeches when I read that, after having seen all the horrors, et cetera. 

Uh, another episode was when I read a Polish document-- I had written about it recently, an article, and Harvard published a s-- a lecture of mine which contains this episode. A yo-- a little Jewish-- a Jewish girl aged five asks an SS man, sir, is it true that soap will be made out of me? 

It was a-- there was a rumor in the ghetto, which wasn't true, that the Jews-- that the Germans make soap out of the bodily fat of the Jews. This is the only untrue rumor. This is not true. Uh, but a child aged five is frightened that she might be converted into soap. And similar incidents in which-- uh, in which children were involved. 

I'll tell you an interesting episode, uh, I came across. Um, in one town in, um, in southern-- in the southern Ukraine, as a Jewish community was being killed, a, uh-- one of the children over there in that community, which had been brought alongside with a woman who was her mother, uh, was blond. And the mother was a cold-blooded mother, a mother who had a-- a sort of presence of mind. 

And she goes over to the SS man and tells him, you know, this child is blond, as you see. She is not my child. She's not a Jewish child. She is a Gentile, an Aryan. She happened to be in my house when we were seized and taken here. 

She was then set aside. Not only was she not killed, but that unit adopted that child. And the man who had set her aside-- the SS man-- was a bachelor. He brought her home to Munich. 

And she was very, very young. She was less than 10 years old. And she was brought up in the home of his mother. And she's still alive today. 

When I was in Munich some years ago, the police was looking for her. They-- sh-- they couldn't find her. They lost her trail somewhere in East Germany. Because they wanted her as a witness, if-- if she remembered anything of that-- of that period. 

And, uh, the man himself who had set her aside was a butcher by profession. And he committed suic-- when they arrested him and they b-- put him on trial, he committed suicide in, ah, in-- in Munich. 

It was a very moving story. I saw the picture of that girl with braids. The police showed me the picture of that girl. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You talked with us and [INAUDIBLE] essential detachment. How do you teach it to students? How do you teach this material? What-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, it's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --do-- how do they respond? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Uh, the student know when they-- on the first day of the class, I tell them that this is not a recital of horrors. My course is a-- sort of strict academic course in which I, uh, I assume that the student will read the factual material, I don't have to dwell upon Auschwitz, et cetera. [? You ?] can read up. It's not my business to tell that-- the-- the-- the-- the factual details, to give a detailed description of-- of-- of hell. 

Uh, the course is very analytical. The course asks certain fundamental questions. Where did the ideology come from out of which this Holocaust [? eschews? ?] Why was this ideology embraced by so many people? Uh, why were the Nazis so cruel? What can we learn about human aggressiveness from this? What can we learn about, then, when we turn to the ghettos and the concentration camps, what do we learn about human societies in catastrophic situations? 

A great deal can be learned about-- about the ghettos-- from the ghetto and concent-- concentration camp about catastrophic situations. So it's a very theoretical course and, uh, not a mere narrative of horrors. It would not be very instructive, you know? Well, what-- the student can read a book instead of coming to the course. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think that the Nazis were different than other people who perpetrate cruelty? Are you suggesting that Nazi behavior is distinctive in terms of its ability to, um, inflict pain? 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: No. I did not-- I said that their cruelty was almost unexampled. Certainly unexampled on that scale. 

Uh, the question you probably wanted to ask me, or you implied in your question, was is there anything peculiarly German about it? This is very hard to answer. Um, I have just lectured on this in Germany at the German Military Academy and the University of Freiburg. 

Sometimes I find Germans-- German scholars and German students-- judge themselves much more harshly than even I would judge them. Um, I-- there were certain specific German features. But we have suggested before that the same cruelty was displayed by Ukrainians, by Poles, in the service of the Nazis. By other auxiliaries. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you said episodically and not so-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Because they only served episodically. It was not a Ukrainian Holocaust against the Jews. It was not a Polish Holocaust against the Jews. It was a Nazi Holocaust. 

Uh, there was nothing-- there was nothing peculiar-- I don't think. In other words, I think that the aggressiveness displayed by the-- uh, by the Nazis, the-- the infinite cruelty is something that sort of lurks in the human breast. It's a pan-human propensity, not a particularly German propensity. Um, there were certain German features. But they can be exaggerated. 

Interestingly enough that if-- when-- in talking to the executioners, I asked them, who could not have done what you do-- have done? Which nation could not have done? And when I spoke to them, it was during the Vietnam War, the last phases of the es-- Vietnam War. I gave them a list of nations. The Americans ranked very high as capable of every barbarity, espe-- and this was especially so against the background of the war in Vietnam. 

There was one nation in Europe who was thought to be least capable of producing man of their own kind. And that was the Italian nation. Italians-- I asked them, could you imagine Italians killing children? They said, well, it's hard to imagine doing that. 

Uh, but Americans, they are-- had the reputation of being sort of, by nature, genocidal. Ah, they will immediately tell you, look what you did to the Indians. [? And ?] that was very, very vivid in their mind. It's this-- the-- the argument from the Indians. You know, and there was the-- you remember the Wounded Knee episode? Uh, the Germans took a very great interest in that episode and [? made ?] film cameras and German television cameras there, and so on. 

So the Holocaust has, uh, very many-- many things to teach us. But above all, it shows us-- it shows us many things. First of all, how easily a highly cultured nation with the highest degree of literacy in Europe, with great cultural or intellectual attainments, could so easily succumb to a [INAUDIBLE]. And no amount of education seems to ensure, uh, uh, seems to, uh, guarantee immunity against such an myth. 

And secondly, it showed us the tremendous barbarity and aggressiveness that lies stored in-- in our civilization. We live in a volcano. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you understand the interest of stud-- and I mean the serious interest of students today to accept this brutality that-- that existed, to ask questions about it, not just the narrative? In comparison with, perhaps, a decade ago, I think it was much more shunned. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, this is, uh, because it has bec-- come to the forefront of their attention. For a number of reasons, to which I do not-- uh, cannot easily explain, interest in the Holocaust developed four decades after the event. Um, and with the general interest, students simply were alerted to it. 

An event in history which had been beyond their [INAUDIBLE] which was not in the forefront of their attention could not elicit any questions in them. But when books began to appear about it, films shown about it, and so on, they simply became interested in it. It's as simple as that. Before that, the culture-- it was not a prominent item in the public or the public culture. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you-- this is maybe s-- a simplistic question. But I'd like to ask it [INAUDIBLE] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Le-- le-- let me just continue. In Hilberg, this-- you know, Hilberg's very famous book, et cetera. Hilberg at first, when the book-- when he finished the book, I-- I'm not sure, but it seemed to me that publishers were not very interested in publishing that book at first. Nowadays, if a man had come out with such a book, it would've been published immediately. 

In other words, within Western culture for a number of reasons, which are not easy to explain, interest in the Holocaust developed 40 years afterwards. And with that in-- general interest, students become also interested. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When one visits-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. [? I'm sorry. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: When one visits Dachau, for example-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: It is very spruced up today. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I don't mean inside. I meant outside. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And, uh, it's hard to understand how people say in Germany that they didn't know what went on inside those walls. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Uh, if anyone said that he didn't know what was going [? on-- ?] within Dachau said he doesn't know what was going on within Dachau, uh, he is either an idiot-- he was either an idiot at the time-- or he is lying. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you hear this ubiquitously. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Let-- Uh, yeah. Well, let me say something about-- if you want me to say something about the knowledge in Germany of, um, the killings. Um, many German-- Germans, probably the majority of the Germans, knew the Jews were being killed. It was known to them from various [INAUDIBLE] sources. Above all, from soldiers who returned on furlough from the east. 

In the east, the killing could not be kept secret. Because it was not done behind a few-- in a few concentration camps in utmost secrecy. It was done in thousands of places. Every Jewish community in Russia was separately liquidated within the view of the German army. 

Millions of German soldiers saw the killing of Jews. They came home and they told us more about it. Very few Germans knew-- and were in a position to know-- that there was a systematic campaign to exterminate every living Jew in Europe. Only a German in a very high position could have known that. 

So when a German says he didn't know that the Jews were being exterminated, he is-- literally, he is-- he-- he is-- he's lying and not lying. That is, when you-- [COUGHS] when you probe him, you will find that had heard things was happening. But he's truthful when he says he didn't know there was a program for the final solution [? to this question. ?] 

Uh, nor did he know the details of the extermination. He knew Jews were being shot. And there were some rumors-- there were wild rumors in Germany. The Jews were being killed, being electrocuted on plates. It was such a rumor in Germany. 

So knowledge of the killing was widespread. Knowledge of the final solution was confined to a relatively small group of people who had insight into the oppression of the Nazi government. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I guess what I'm really asking you is that people who had lived in a town for 700 years were suddenly deported, taken away, uh, and the neighbors stood by and watched women walk down the street naked, totally naked, uh, weighing 90, 80, 70 pounds, while neighbors went to church. No one did anything. No one said anything. I guess that's the-- 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Yeah. Well, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Well, first of all, it's-- was dangerous to say anything. Only, uh, persons who really were prepared to risk a great deal, in some-- in the east, to risk their lives, could say anything. 

But one of the, uh, most frightening aspects of the Holocaust was the fact that anti-Semitism all over Europe did not diminish [INAUDIBLE] the country. In some countries, it increased. It increased, uh, during the war and even after the war. 

In other words, the spectacle of the extermination of the Jews did not induce in the witnesses, in the Gentile witnesses, a sense of great compassion with the Jews, did not lay to rest the traditional hatred of Jews. The traditional hatre-- hatred remained unchanged, at the same level, or was even increased. 

The Poles were no less anti-Semitic. One could even say they were more anti-Semitic during the war than after the-- than before the war. That is true of the Ukrainians on the whole. That's true of almost all European peoples, with the exception of the Italians and the Danes. 

That anti-Semitism was so widespread, in-- in Holland, where it was virtually unknown before the war-- so widespread after the war, the Dutch government appointed a special commission to-- to the question, this is one of the most frightening aspects of anti--Semitism-- of-- of the Holocaust, usually not discussed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [SIGHS] Wow. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: OK? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Fine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, where are you, uh, in your teaching? Where-- I'm-- I'm sorry. I came into this and I really didn't get your background at all. 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: Where am I teaching? 

INTERVIEWER 2: I just knew you were [? Dory's ?] cousin. Where do you teach? 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] [? stop ?] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: At H-- I've just said, at the beginning. Oh, you came in late. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, yes, [INAUDIBLE] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: I teach at Harvard. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You are a really incredible resource for us. 

CREW: Joan. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. OK. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] [? stop tape, Joan. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. Uh, you are really a-- 

CREW: Stop tape, [? Joan. ?] 

ERICH GOLDHAGEN: I'm off the-- 