INTERVIEWER 1: Began. 

SUBJECT: How it began? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, the beginning of the year-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1944. 

SUBJECT: --of 1944, I think it was in January, the Germans occupied Hungary completely. We didn't see any Germans, but we heard about it, and we knew. And suddenly, things began to get worse for the Jews naturally. And around March, they issued, I believe, the order of wearing the yellow bands. And we weren't allowed to travel. Now my mother had, for instance, brother in a bigger town. And they couldn't buy food. 

We still had our own. So they sent me or they sent another child. And they took a chance to take food to my uncle, for instance. And of course, my mother was terribly anxious by the time I got back. But we did it, sacrifice for each other. And I think it was just about after Passover, a day after Passover when they had placards posted all over, saying that everyone should stay in their homes, because they will come to take us. 

And we got very, very sick from the whole idea. Because we didn't think it will come to that. My mother was beginning to worry a little bit earlier. And she always said, I hope they are not going to do to us what they did to the Polish and German Jews. And then she said, well, somehow, the war is going so, you know, well and rapidly for the Russians that they may not have the time to do-- to take us away any place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She knew what was done to the Polish? 

SUBJECT: It seems to me that she knew much more than we. We were children. As a matter or fact, she was beginning to think of hiding us with Gentile families, at least the couple. And she voiced it. And I was so frightened of that. I didn't want to even hear of such a thing to-- to remain without my family. 

And it was not-- she just put it out of her head. Because she also didn't-- I don't think that she would have been able to. Because our village was very small, and it was very difficult to hide anyone. Plus, they weren't that cooperative and that nice. And my father-- she-- she used to be anxious and talk about it, but my father was much more optimistic. He always believed that things will come out all right, and they probably will never get to do this. And then-- you know, to get to that point. 

But of course, they took us away. And when they came into the house, they wanted all the money and jewelry. My father gave up the money. He hid some of the jewelry, because he thought-- they thought, well, maybe when we come back, we'll need something. This is-- this was the thinking. We didn't have any idea that they would kill us, even if they thought of punishment. But I don't think my mother ever knew what really happened. She just knew that they took people away. 

And then we were gathered in a school house for three days. And after three days-- and also my brother, the littlest brother, had a very high fever. He was sick when they took us. And we were so worried what's going to happen to him. And by the time they took us, he was still sick on horse and wagon to about 40 kilometers to the next city to Munkacs And there, we were in this brick factory, a very crowded place. There is no facilities for washing or taking bath. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No bathrooms? 

SUBJECT: No. Well, there must have been bathrooms, some outhouses, but certainly did not so many people have indoor running water in those days anyway. But they just simply didn't have facilities because we were together. Everybody was on one floor. And we were on the floor, sleeping on the floor. The conditions were not good. 

And there, we saw for the first time the Germans. The Germans as well as the Hungarian, they were called [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] They were like the SS. They were taking care of us, and they were mean. And they had all kinds-- they posted all kinds of rules and laws by which we had to abide. And if not, they-- they would harshly punish the parents for, even if the children did something, which happened, of course, very often. 

They had a rule, for instance, to-- every-- every-- girl, every child have to go to-- to have her head shaven or cut the hair short on the age 15. I don't remember anymore the age. And my sister didn't ask any questions. She went and she had it done, because she didn't want my father to be punished. 

And my mother cried bitterly when she saw it. And she said, why didn't you-- why didn't you tell me? I would have used a scarf and hidden your hair. You know, she used to wash her blonde hair with all kinds of things to-- it should remain blond. So she was-- by the way, I was the only brunette. And all the children in my family were blonde, and she took very good care of that blond hair. 

But we were so worried, because it did happen that parents were-- and even if it didn't, we believed it. So you didn't want to take a chance. And then we were there four weeks. Oh, and of course, because of the situation, because of the dirt, we all had-- we were beginning to have lice. And there was just no way of combating it of course. There was no way of, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of keeping-- 

SUBJECT: Of keeping clean. As far as food was concerned, we had food somehow. Because there was a ghetto, and the relatives were able somehow to send in some food when we were running low. They gave us very little food. But that somehow didn't seem to matter yet, because it was still in the very beginning. 

Now of course, it was painful to us. Because we had-- I had an aunt, my father's sister, who always lived with us. And she was like a second mother. And she was so devoted to us, and we were devoted to her. She was very, very sick. And in that ghetto, she died. And in a way later, we were very glad that she died because of what came next. It would have been unbearable to see her die, let's say, on the way or to be taken away. She was a wonderful person. 

So after four weeks, which was-- they took us away, I think, April 16 from home. And May 18, we were taken to Auschwitz in this boxcar. And it was-- I don't know how many people they had in one of these-- but it was very crowded. They didn't give us anything to eat or drink. And people were constantly fainting. There were-- in our car, it didn't happen. But in some others, there were some people, dead people. But there was no one to look in on anybody. So they were just traveling with the dead people all the way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was your father with you at this time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So the whole family went together? 

SUBJECT: The whole family was together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know where you were going? 

SUBJECT: No, absolutely no idea. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just somewhere. 

SUBJECT: No idea. Nobody said anything. Nobody would ask questions. And that was it. When we arrived to Auschwitz-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the arrival like? Can you slow-- can you remember? 

SUBJECT: The arrival-- that we looked out, well, we were just going and going. And we had no idea where we were. We didn't know that we were in Poland, for instance. And as a matter of fact, before, when these-- the Jews were running to each other before they even took us away from home. Suddenly, everybody realized something terrible was going to happen. 

And they were trying to console each other, talk to each other, and ask each other, what do you think? Where are we taken? Where are we being? What are they going to do to us? But nobody had an answer. Nobody seemed to know anything. Even the smartest people had no inkling whatsoever. We just heard slightly, because the newspapers, really, and the radio were censored. So we didn't get the news. 

And when we arrived to Auschwitz, there was a little window. And we looked out, and we saw a lot of men running around. And then, they opened up about-- I think we were for hours in there still, half a day maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Day, night, daytime? 

SUBJECT: It was daytime. We arrived in the daytime. But they kept us in this boxcars for a half a-- half a day more on the tracks. And then, they opened up the cars, and they rushed us out. 

Everything was done very, very fast, so fast that you couldn't think. And before I knew it, the men and women were separated so quickly that I never had a chance to say goodbye bye, let's say, to my father. All of a sudden, they were just gone. My brother and my father on one side. And my mother and the littler children on the other side, the three and my sister too. And I was-- and somebody was waving me to one side, and my mother remained behind. 

And all of a sudden, as I was marching with all these people, somebody was running and crying. And I looked around and that was my sister. And I was so upset, because she was only 12.5 years old. And I said to her, well, why didn't you stay with mother? You would have had it better. She would taken care of you. Before that, children and-- and-- and mothers were probably-- will probably be treated better and will be put into a nicer place. 

But she cried bitterly, and so there she was. And I think what really saved her was that when they told us to leave everything, we dressed up so well. We dressed up. I had on maybe two pairs of underwear and three dresses and a coat. And so did she. So we looked a little bit bigger. Because she was really a little girl. And then we-- they took us to a bath house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you didn't-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. So I never-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see your mother walking to the other side? Or-- 

SUBJECT: I just left her there standing with the children. But my father-- I can't recall anything of where my father was, because they separated us so fast that we just barely had a chance to realize what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It was like he disappeared. 

SUBJECT: We did not expect to be separated. Therefore, the-- it didn't-- it was just difficult to realize that that's what was happening. But they were doing that. They had so much experience and constantly day and night. They had a crew there and went very, very quickly, and that was it. And so this is how we got separated. 

And of course, some people didn't find out till much, much later. It may have been sometimes even a whole year in a concentration camp. And people didn't know that what happened to their families, even in the concentration camp, depending on where you were. But it came to us very, very quickly. Because we were taken to Auschwitz to Birkenau. And Birkenau was a horrible place. We only stayed there one night, and then we were taken to a different part of that camp to the A-Lager. 

And we had a woman in charge who was there already from Slovakia maybe three years. And she was bitter and angry, and we thought that she was the meanest person-- person. And we couldn't understand how people can be that mean. Because if we didn't-- if we weren't quiet, if we made noise, which she didn't want us to do, then she told us right away that, are you having fun here? Do you know where your parents are? Right now, they are burning them. 

And we all went hysterical. We were screaming and carrying on. And we didn't know, and we called her mean that she was-- that she will do such a thing to us. Even though, you know, we didn't want to believe it. But we thought that she was so horribly mean to even say it. 

And there were a lot of these-- these people from Denmark and Belgium. And they really were-- they didn't become that. And because they didn't, they never occupied any position of leadership in the camps. They would just die very quietly, all of them, from suffering, from hunger. Because they didn't know to be aggressive and to fight for-- for anything. And they used to walk by our window when we were sitting in our bed. And-- 

And we would ask, is that true what they say? That-- that our parents are being burnt and everybody's being burnt? And they would say, of course not. You know how mean these people are. Of course not, that's not true. So they quieted us. But that didn't last long either. Because we found out shortly, since it was in Auschwitz, that it was true. 

And I also found out a group of people were selected from the-- from the women to go to work near the crematoria to Brzezinka. And they went in the morning and came back at night. And they wore white. To identify them, they wore white kerchiefs on their heads. And they found-- they were the ones who separated all the food-- all these bundles of clothing and food that people brought with them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you familiar with the name of that group? 

SUBJECT: Yes, um, they were called Canada or something. Canada, I think they were called. Because-- I think because of-- on the good life-- otherwise-- in other words, the things that they found in those packages. If they wanted a pair of shoes, they could take it or clothing too. And food, they have plentiful. As a matter of fact, they used to bring it back to us. 

And-- and there were a few. There was one particular girl. There were some cousins, and if you needed a pair of shoes, they did it too, who came regularly. There was one cousin who never ate her dinner, because she would eat there and bring back to us. And she also left behind what she got in her ration. 

So then I found out from one of those, one girl told me that somebody sent the message out of the crematoria that my father was working inside. And I didn't know then that this-- working in that-- what it meant to really work inside. I didn't know that this was a death sentence immediately. So the next time, when they asked for volunteers, we all volunteered. 

Oh, by the way, when they brought us into the A-Lager accidentally-- and this was a coincidence. They brought us into one of these barracks where my mother's two sisters were. And I think that in the long run, we can probably say that they saved our lives. Because we were young, and we weren't used to being pushed around. And everybody became very selfish and fought for his own life. If you couldn't fight for it, then you died in some way or another-- got sick and nobody took care of you. 

But they were older, and they-- and we depended on them to take care of us. Also, there was another person who was very, very good to us. She was a very poor girl from our village. And my mother taught her how to be a professional maid. Her mother-- this girl's mother used to be a cook in her younger years and a maid. And she was-- they were so poor that they didn't really have food in the house. They had seven children. 

So she couldn't teach her daughter how to be a good cook, even though she knew how to do it. So she asked my mother if it would be-- if she could come to us. And my mother would teach her how to do things. So she was with us, and she was, you know, she didn't-- she cooked and she cleaned a little. But we always had help besides that did the heavy work. She didn't. And she felt-- she felt very close to us. 

So when we came, she also was in that barrack. And it was a tremendous help. As soon as they yelled out in the morning, appell, then she would jump down from her bed and run to get our shoes-- my sister and mine. Because if you didn't find your shoes, then-- then that was the end too to stand for three, four hours on appell outside in the rain. 

And also, she was so good to us that she would hug us outside and warm us with her body, took turns with myself and my sister many, many times. She happens to be here in America now in Brooklyn. But she was in Russia for many, many years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were almost a group of five? 

SUBJECT: We were a group of five. And we always tried to be together. It was so important that people should have each other. But we were afraid to say that we were sisters. Because they'd deliberately separate the sisters. My sister was so small that it occurred to us that maybe she would look like a little child to the German. 

And they used to canvas every-- every day when they counted us. And if somebody didn't appeal to them for whatever reason, they would just take somebody out of the group and-- and take them to be gassed. And we thought maybe that won't be good that she's so short. So many times she stood up a little bit on a stone in the middle, that she should appear a little bit higher. 

If the Germans came and counted, they didn't look so closely. To save each other, but we were always afraid. That was our biggest fear to be separated. And so wherever we went, we were together, and we worked together. And eventually, we volunteered to go to the Brzezinka. 

And at that point, my aunt became friendly and helpful to this very mean couple-- not couple, this very mean lady to the Blockaltester. She used to help with the food. So she liked her, and she asked her, what do you think of-- what do you think about us going to the Brzezinka. 

So she told her the truth. She said, you know, it's a place where you will get enough food. But it's-- it's hell on earth. Well, we didn't know what hell on earth was, so we volunteered anyway. And my-- and my most important reason was that I really thought I would see my father. And that was so important to me that I dismissed everything else. 

So we got there. And she arranged it. Everyone couldn't just volunteer and get-- get to be accepted, but she did it. So we-- we-- we were there, and then I start to ask everyone about my father. My father was already dead. Because when my family came, and he was immediately taken to work to that, you know, to that crematoria-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sonderkommando? 

SUBJECT: Sonderkommando. He found the-- the bodies of his own family, his children and my mother. So he couldn't stand it mentally, and they shot him. Everybody else who could stand it, usually they changed a sonderkommando every three months. So I thought-- and everyone who appeared-- and we were only separated by a fence-- everyone that I ever saw, I would yell out his name, and do you know him? Do you see him? 

There was one boy from our town who also worked there. And he told my aunt, but he didn't tell me and my sister how my father died. And he even told her the date. Once or twice, they brought over the sonderkommando for some reason to the Brzezinka for some kind of supplies. And I missed him, and I didn't see him, so I was very upset and very aggravated. Because I couldn't understand that how come my father was there that he wasn't there anymore. That somehow or other nobody knew where he was. 

You know that it was very simple to figure it out. But I didn't want to, I suppose, accept it. So it was better to believe that maybe he was still alive. And it was really, as they said, hell on earth. Because we saw these transports coming constantly, day in and day out. And they didn't-- in the beginning, they used to use the oven. And later, they didn't have enough. They wanted to speed it up very much. 

They gassed more than they could burn. So they had these open pits. And we looked out from where we were staying and sleeping. And the flames were constantly going, you know, and the smell was terrible are sometimes choking. And these people who were marching in always asked-- they were shouting to us asking questions, where are we going? 

So at that point, they were a few feet away. The best thing was to say that don't worry. Everything will be just fine. And we knew where they were going. And-- and we also thought that, you know, that, of course, we lost faith not only in our religion. We lost faith in God. Sometimes we wanted to believe in a miracle. And sometimes we just felt that there cannot be a God when he kills, you know, so many innocent people. And this went on for the entire time almost. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the face or a particular person asking or turning to you in those transports? Are there certain images that stay with you? 

SUBJECT: Certain images? Well, there was one incident where somebody-- somebody looked out and saw her sister going. And because they were hidden someplace. And they found them and they brought them. And we all ran to look and we saw. 

And this girl was kept back from-- from even talking to her sister, who was screaming out. I remember. But they weren't-- they were very-- they were sad, but they were not hysterical. They went very peacefully. Because they were told that they were going to take bath. And in that crematoria, they were careful to tell them. There were big signs all over to make sure to put their things in a small pile, because they should find it when they come out into a neat pile. 

And we knew, too, that they were giving them much less gas than-- than it was enough to kill people just purposely. That's most-- that many times they were just stunned, and then they were burnt. And we heard screams. And there, you know, there came a time there was called a C-Lager, Zigeunenlager. A lot of children were in that camp. And one nice day, we realized that they took in the entire Zigeunenlager. They thought they were going on transport with their couples, with their-- with their Blockaltesters. 

Everybody was killed. This was somehow a terrible, terrible feeling for us. Because we hoped against hope that perhaps there would be a miracle. And those who are in that camp will be eventually saved. But it didn't happen. And then we saw when this happened, we thought now it could happen to us any day too. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What would you say was the worst experience that you had in the camps, in the camp? 

SUBJECT: Well, this was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Watching the children-- 

SUBJECT: The worst experience-- watching the people going into the crematoria. Because we knew where they were going and what would happen to them. This was our worst experience. I had terrible personal experiences later. Physically it was bad, and mentally too. But mentally, I think this was the worst for us, because we knew much more than most inmates in other camps. They just heard about it and we saw it. 

Although, there were other places too that had crematorias. But still, I think that this was our worst-- and also because it lasted such a long time. And we saw that many people actually became insane-- young people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: We thought that it will happen to us, first of all. And sometimes we were wondering if it didn't already happen. And those people that were insane were taken away, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In-- 

SUBJECT: Among us, young girls, yes. You just became-- ill and someone said it was all right, so secretly they were taken care of. But mentally ill, they were instantly taken away. And we were-- first of all, sometimes we felt-- felt that the head couldn't take anymore so much and that maybe we were also going insane. You know all these things were very, very terrible. 

And there came a time when there was, of course, an actual revolt in the crematoria too. It happened on October 7. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '44? 

SUBJECT: '44. These people knew-- the men-- that they were going to be shot. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The sonderkommando? 

SUBJECT: The sonderkommando knew that they were going to be eliminated. So they had nothing to lose. They made contact somehow through a German. They paid him off with-- actually, you know that we found a lot of gold and diamonds and everything in these packages. In the beginning, everything was turned over to the Germans. But later on, some of that was given secretly-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: By you, by the people? 

SUBJECT: By the people, yes. It was given more by the men than by the women somehow, given to secretly to people who bought dynamite, weapons. And these men sent out messages that the others should also try to organize a little bit and help them. Then the time will come that they will blow up the crematoria. 

We didn't know anything. All we knew is that, all of a sudden, we saw the gates open and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw? 

SUBJECT: We saw, yes. The gates opened, man running from there, and all the four crematoria at one time blew up. And-- and of course, these man knew that this would probably be the end for them, but they thought that perhaps they might prolong the fight a little bit if the outside, the others will help. 

But there was no chance. Instantly they descended, you know, the Germans, the SS with machine guns and everything. They killed every man. Two SS died in that incident. And they rounded us up. And of course, the will to live was great. We thought they would kill us instantly, and we wished that they wouldn't. And they didn't, but they got very nervous. And from that time on, they did not gas in those four crematoria anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So there was no guessing in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: No more-- no more gassing in Auschwitz after that. And we were very glad, because we didn't know that there were so many other gas chambers. But even this slowed down a lot. You see, at that point in October already, they liquidated all of the Hungarian Jews. And they brought now Jews in from Poland from these leftover ghettos and people that they found hiding. 

And I think that it slowed down a little bit the killing. And it was a method really to play for time already. Because the Russians were getting so close to-- to us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the-- the [INAUDIBLE] the jewels, the gold were smuggled by men in the care of the kommando? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Smuggled to others. They were smuggled. We didn't know the chain of-- we didn't know exactly who was involved, because they just accumulated enough to pay off the German who supplied them with the dynamite and also weapons. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you fam-- do know that Jewish girls worked in a munition factory in a grenade and smuggled out the powder that was used for that? 

SUBJECT: No, we knew there was a munition factory. But we thought only men were-- I thought only men-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jewish girls-- in their vaginas. 

SUBJECT: I did not know. Is that right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And their mouths. Smuggled out, and that's how they-- 

SUBJECT: I did not know how it went. I only knew that it happened. Yes. But we were very proud that it happened. And it gave us a lift. And we were also very glad when they bombed the-- not the camp, of course. There was bombing all around. 

We had a feeling that maybe this will come to an end soon-- the war. Maybe they will somehow manage to cripple them enough that they wouldn't be so busy with us constantly, or that it will speed up. But towards the end-- I think it was in November or so-- they saw that the Russians were coming closer. So they started to liquidate the entire camp little by little. 

They were sending out constantly groups to different factories and to other camps to work. And each time, they asked for-- first, we an Obersturmfuhrer who was somehow or other not as cruel at times as some of the others. And he preferred to ask for volunteers rather than to make people go. So he always asked for volunteers. And the old-timers used to tell us, never ever volunteer. Because you don't know whether you are going to work or to your death. So just be satisfied that they don't take you until you can't stay. 

So we didn't volunteer. And we stayed till the very end. And of course, we found out later it was better for those who went away earlier. Because they really did get to work in factories. And it was-- they were saved by it. And we, on the other hand, by January, had to march in the winter, the dead of winter. 

It was bitter cold for three days and three nights. And we couldn't see, we couldn't feel. We just pulled each other along and shouted each other's names, because it was so terrible. And of course, there was a friend with us, a young lady. She was 16, much bigger than I and much stronger. And she was constantly sliding and slipping and wanted to sit down, which meant death. 

And I was-- I don't know where I got the energy to pull her, took turns on holding onto her that she shouldn't sit down. And finally, after three days and three nights, we came to a place. And they herded us into some kind of-- some kind of-- I don't know what it was-- a big barrack. And we just dropped on the floor. 

We didn't see food. We didn't see water at all. And-- and we were trying-- we fell asleep. And an hour later, they woke us up, and they continued the march. We couldn't believe it. We couldn't even get up. We pulled each other up somehow and continued. 

And after that-- I don't remember how long-- we didn't march very long. But they took us someplace and by train, by boxcars again that had-- to Ravensbruck. There were so many thousands of people, extra people that they, you know, when they liquidated camps. First of all, we marched in a 20,000 man column. And to every 10 people, I think they had an SS. And they watched us. They looked to see that we were too weak to march. And then it was your end. 

In Ravensbruck, nobody asked anything. We were just around-- no food, again no water. And so we decided that we would just sleep on the ground. But it was already cold and winter time. And we settled down, and then they were chasing us to get up. And this went on for a few days. 

And then we were in a-- they put us in a tremendous place. There was-- we were on top of each other. And again, we had plenty of water at that point. We could just go and get it somehow, but no food, no bread. I don't know how we survived. And we stayed there three weeks. 

After three weeks, they gave us suddenly a ration of bread. It was really a starvation kind of punishment, thing that they wanted to achieve, they didn't care. They wanted. As a matter of fact, in Ravensbruck, we found out, we saw from far away that they tried to bring coffee or some kind of liquid soup. And people were so hungry, they became so wild that they threw themselves at them. And it was all spilled rather than eaten. Because people were just too hungry. 

And then, they took us from Ravensbruck in boxcars-- open cars-- that were dirty from coal. And they jammed in about-- I think about 120 with an SSA, a very mean one, and a dog, and his girlfriend. And he told us we weren't allowed to even-- even make a sound. Because otherwise, he was going to shoot or beat us. And we were so dehydrated-- we got a ration of bread but no water-- that we just couldn't stand it anymore. 

So we were praying that maybe it would snow and we could have a little liquid even to sleep. As a matter of fact, my aunt stood up-- one of the two-- and we saw people, you know, from the boxcars-- not inmates-- and she wanted to quietly to ask for a little water. And this SS noticed her, and he kicked her in the face. And he had these, you know, nails. And she was bleeding from all over. And from that point on, we didn't even open our mouth. 

So we went to sleep, and in the morning, then we woke up. There was snow on us. And we practically fought each other that nobody should take from mine. We were licking the dirty snow. And eventually-- I don't remember how long we traveled from Ravensbruck anymore, how many days. I think it was three days. And we arrived someplace. It was cold. I think Leslau. It didn't have a meaning. It was just called Leslau. 

And then, we were taken to a place where they had a mixture of inmates-- Polish, Ukrainian, Germans-- that were there for various crimes-- murder and robbery and all kinds. And we couldn't-- we didn't have room in there. there were-- it wasn't big enough. So the soldier, the SS, was standing and beating us, whether you deserved it or not, whether you were going or not, with the butt of the rifle. And eventually, everybody somehow had room on top of each other. 

By then, we were getting very sick. I had constantly fever. We had a thermometer from Auschwitz, from Brzezinka, that we carried around with us. My aunt-- both of them-- were even sicker. My fever was lower. Their fever was higher. She must have-- one of my aunts must have had-- the one that was here-- pneumonia. And the other one-- typhoid fever. But we didn't know. We were extremely sick. She was half unconscious all the time. 

And there were no bathrooms. The bathroom facilities were big barrels or pots or whatever outside. And if you had to go out, then you had to go over a mass of people, stepping practically on them. And as you were going and leaving, they were-- they would scream and hit you and pull you. 

And the danger was that you might not find your way back to your own group. Because it was almost impossible, especially if it got dark. We didn't dare to leave. But it was a necessity, and it was terrible. 

My aunts were too sick to even-- even move. And they didn't give us food. Again no food, no water. There were-- it was, you know, a field. And things were growing there-- potatoes and stuff. And I don't know how anymore. I got hold of a potato. I was eating it raw. I became very ill with dysent-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dysentery. 

SUBJECT: Dysentery. So all of us were really in very bad shape. Except my sister was pretty good, even though she was the youngest. Finally, after-- I don't know how long we were in that anymore, in that place-- they took us away from there. And we saw normal trains, passenger trains. And we could not believe it. And we thought that-- that-- you know, it was just not believable. 

So they took us further, and we got to Neustadtiglewe, which was the last place where we were. And we thought-- I don't know how my aunts ever made it really. They were that sick. But we did. And when we got to Neustadtiglewe we thought, well, nothing can be worse anymore than what we had until now. It turned out that this was a very small factor place or whatever and had room maybe for 500 people. And by then, they had 5,000 people. 

And they pushed us into rooms. 96-- it was small room, with a former-- with a woman who was in for either murdering her husband or her child. And she was to take care of us. So she took up a corner, and she told us, make sure that we are not going to disturb her night's sleep. And if anyone said something, then out they went. 

So we would sit down and pull our legs up. And that's how we sat. If we had to lie down, it was on our side next to each other. Nobody could move. And my aunt, at that point, was so very sick that I would sit and hold her hand in my lap. And I was begging. I would go out and beg even the Germans that my aunt was sick, and she had to get to a hospital. 

And they didn't have a hospital in that place. But soon, they built a makeshift type of a hospital. They built something. The beds-- they didn't give any-- any medication really. But at least it was a bed. And both of my aunts got in there. The one with the typhoid fever was quarantined separately. You know, I could never-- I couldn't get to her. And the other one was in the front of the hospital. 

I didn't know-- you weren't allowed to go there-- but I really wanted to know if they were still alive. So every day almost, I took a chance, and I ran to the-- I ran to the hospital hiding. And when I got to the door, I made a run for it to see if my aunt was on the bed. Of course, they would chase me from every side. But I was satisfied that I saw her. And very often, I would go to the back of the hospital to see through the window my aunt who had typhoid fever. And she always motioned to me that she was hungry. And I couldn't do anything of course. 

And then, one nice day, and then somehow or other, they came around and they-- that was in March. We thought from all the bombing that we heard around, we knew that the war was coming to an end shortly. And we didn't think that they had-- first of all, we didn't know there was a crematoria in Ravensbruck. We had no idea. And secondly, we didn't think that they were doing that anymore, that they were gassing anymore. Because the war was going so badly for them. 

So one nice day, the SS started to pick out all the pregnant women who were still pregnant. And we knew that that was a very bad sign. And two days later, they were gone very quietly. So I got very nervous, and I told my aunt-- the one who had pneumonia-- that maybe she ought to sign herself out, just come out of that hospital. And she did, and sure enough, they went to select next day, the hospital. 

They took my aunt with the typhoid fever, who was already recovering. And we watched her being put on the truck with all the others. And that was it. And then, they selected from among us. There we stood on line. My aunt was so sick. But at that point already, she was sick. But she always had color in her face somehow. And her face was larger than mine. She never-- even when she was very sick, she never looked as bad as when I got to the end of the situation. 

And at that point, I started to give up. I couldn't stand on my feet anymore. I was const-- I constantly had fever. So when I came out for appell, I would just plop down on the floor. And my sister would cry, please, stand, please, please. And everybody said-- And I said I didn't care anymore. I can't and that's it. But they propped me up somehow and I was standing. 

And then he came around-- the SS-- and told us to take our kerchiefs off. And took me, selected me out from the crowd, not my aunt and not my sister. My sister said she wanted her name on the list as well. And everybody was whispering when we came back to our room, because they knew that this was it for us. 

And everybody estimated-- anyway, I estimated that I couldn't live longer than a week anyhow. And others thought that maybe I could still survive another two weeks perhaps. But as it turned out, we were selected-- I was selected, and my sister came with me. Then suddenly, the bombing increased, and the Russians took over Ravensbruck. 

And then, we were locked in for a day. And-- and the next day, our couple, this woman guard disappeared. And everybody was shouting that the war is over, and we came out and saw all those uniforms scattered on the floor. There was a big place with food that was going bad. It was meant for us. Everybody broke into that place. And there were things from the Red Cross. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was in Ravensbruck. 

SUBJECT: No, in Neustadtiglewe, at the very end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what you're describing happened in Neustadtiglewe? 

SUBJECT: In Neustadtiglewe. The very end in Neustadtiglewe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The selection and everything? 

SUBJECT: Yes, the selection. But Ravensbruck, was the place where they took people after selection from us. Because this is where they had an underground crematoria, which we didn't even realize. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, one question. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, what is left over today for you? You see, you may have noticed you said it all very quickly. You were very efficient in saying a great deal in a short time. And I wondered to myself why you didn't-- in what way all this has some impact on today. Why you were so-- 

SUBJECT: In a hurry to wind up my experiences, you mean? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Maybe I said it so quickly because perhaps-- we repeatedly talk about it at least once a year on Passover. So it's-- this is the only time that I-- first of all, for many years, I didn't talk about it to my children at all. I wanted to spare them the agony of experiencing such bad things or to worry about it. I really wanted to spare them. 

But then they got older. And the first time when we started to talk about it was during the Eichmann trial. And from then on, we decided every Passover to talk and tell them what happened to us. But generally, so it's still-- even though it happened a long time ago, but we remember. I remember it. I don't know why I'm saying it, you know, why-- I just don't know what it means today. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So to go quickly is to not feel pain? Is that the-- 

SUBJECT: I-- maybe. Maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever-- 

SUBJECT: To go quickly is to-- to get it out of the system, go away from it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go away from it. Have you-- 

SUBJECT: It doesn't mean that I don't think about it sometimes, you know. I tell my husband, for instance, this place that I told him that I think we should not talk about it anymore. And if we will talk about it, it should be one thing and no more. I feel that we covered this ground enough. And it always brings back motions that-- 

You know, I feel also that somehow the children get affected too much if we talk about it constantly, even once a year on a Passover. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's also too constant. 

SUBJECT: I feel it's too constant. After seeing so many things on television, reading so many books, I cannot read about it. I do not read about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said to your husband to talk about one thing, meaning one episode only? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In detail or what? 

SUBJECT: No, I just don't want us to spend our Passovers about sad things. Then we send the tone-- in other words, my Passovers were spent in my father's home as a very happy occasion always. Because my father was a very, very good storyteller. And he made everything sound so wonderful. 

And if our Passovers are spent in this kind of mood year in and year out, even though it's true, and even though our children should know, but I feel that we shouldn't somehow set this kind of a mood every Passover. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So perhaps the quick telling is an attempt to make it into a lighter-- 

SUBJECT: Maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever sat down with your sister and talked about it in detail or-- 

SUBJECT: I found that I really don't cry when I talk about it most of the time. And we do talk about it. But my sister spends many Passovers with us. So everybody has something to say. But I found that when I talk to my sister about home and about-- about the concentration camp even, it seems to me that-- that she's telling me things that I don't even-- I don't-- I don't think it happened. 

Some of the things that she remembers doesn't seem to me that it happened. I think, for instance, that she remembers certain things, um wrong, not factually so much. Because she was that much younger. And she insists that it happened. And I insist that it didn't happen, you see? And I don't really know. I look at her, and she has 3.5 years younger than I. And I should remember. And she insists that she remembers that certain things happened and I don't. So I don't know. 

But we don't-- we talk about that. But most of the time very occasionally. I don't think we ever talk about it really unless more people are together, you know? She, for instance, tells me that she doesn't even remember how our parents looked. I remember very clearly. 3.5 years is a very big difference in that respect. And I never asked her, for instance, details. 

I was terribly, terribly close to my father's sister. I was the oldest one. And she was very sick lady and divorced. And she always lived with us. And divorce was not something that-- that was ever told or mentioned. I happened to find this out only secretly. And she used to tell me things secretly if I swore that I wouldn't say. Because everything children weren't supposed to know. So therefore, I know that my sister didn't share in certain things that I did at the time, because she was much younger. 

And she was also a very happy child, my sister. And suddenly, she became a very serious grownup, terribly serious and never became anything else afterwards at age 12.5 or 12, while I feel that I had more of a childhood before, more of a happy childhood. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 12.5 was the-- 

SUBJECT: 12.5. She was 12.5. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Well, she was born in November. And they took us away in April. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: So she was 12.5 years. And that was past among the young. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She was born in 1930? 

SUBJECT: 1930. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was 1944. 

SUBJECT: Wait a minute. She was born 1930. So she was 13.5, wasn't she? Why do I always say that? Always. I always say it. And I always thought she was 12.5. 13.5. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At least 13.5. 

SUBJECT: 13.5 she was. But she still was almost among the youngest children in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She must be wrong, right? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She must be wrong. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm asking a-- I'm just dropping a though. 

SUBJECT: Wrong in what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: She must not remember right, because she must have been young, a little child. 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, she remembers certain things. But I feel that certain things from home yet faded a little bit from her memory. And she tells me that. She doesn't remember certain names. And I always say, don't you remember? And she says she can't remember. 

And then all of a sudden, comes a time when she seems to remember more than I remember. And I'm always amazed. And I just look at her. So these are things from our childhood really, not so much from the concentration camp. Because in the concentration camp, whether you remember a little bit more or less, it was the same horrible experience. So we didn't-- you know, it doesn't err. It doesn't matter. Because the whole thing was so bad that whether you remember a little bit less of it, it was still terrible. This is-- 

But from our childhood, the things that each of us took away, she was very, very attached still to my mother. And then when we were taken to the A-Lager, she practically constantly cried for her mother-- my mother, and I didn't. I mean, I just felt sick inside about the whole thing. But she was actually acting like a child. And it was lucky that we had our aunts with us, you know, our older ones. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We will have to stop here. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you very much. 

SUBJECT: How much did we take? A long time? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not long enough perhaps. 

SUBJECT: Long enough. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not long enough. 

SUBJECT: No, I know. There are many things that happened in the-- in that course of the year. Details. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't forget to pick yours. 

SUBJECT: Oh, my sister's note. Thank you. I suppose I should take this off. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, yeah. Let me help you with that. 

SUBJECT: So you had an exhausting day probably. All of you listening to these stories. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The work is mostly the one that you do to keep telling. 

SUBJECT: Yes, but it's nice of you to do it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, thank you. 

SUBJECT: It was nice meeting you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You too. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. 