SUBJECT: You knew and asked me this. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And the third thing is the witness of your father, the story that what you heard about your father's death. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: That's-- I want to know. I don't know anything else. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else I should know? 

SUBJECT: No. I got a lot of things to tell, because I want to go stick to my-- to my paragraphs. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, finish your paragraphs. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I come-- I want to come now that I have-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, finish all your cut paragraphs. 

SUBJECT: And I want to know-- I want-- my wife was sick. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, you're now-- and the only thing that are left in your paragraphs are three things. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: There is the concentration camp and the hospital. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: The little brother and the burdens of your father. If there are other things, tell them. I don't know anything about them. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Not only the camera, I don't anything about it. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, you know, you know, it's, it's-- you get emotio-- emotional. 

INTERVIEWER: Of course. 

SUBJECT: But you cannot, cannot arrive there-- 

INTERVIEWER: No. Mr.-- 

SUBJECT: --arriving at the college when I get-- 

INTERVIEWER: There is something-- 

SUBJECT: Try to grab. 

INTERVIEWER: There is something-- 

SUBJECT: Grab. 

INTERVIEWER: --later on that-- 

And the concentration camp was HASAG and it was 1943. You ready? 

CREW: Roll tape, John. 

SUBJECT: So when the, the, the small ghetto was liquidated and we were marching with the Gestapo, they took us seven miles to the concentration camp, to HASAG-Pelcery. That was the concentration camp which they make over the metal. They make eh, bullets. They made generators for instead of fuel, they make on wood. 

And when we marched to over there, they gave us a barrack. That's the way you're going to live over here. That many people was-- it was maybe 100 in a barrack, I would say. Because it was three floors. Was about 100 in a barrack. 

And we tried to go every day to work. Day by day, it was normal. It was nothing usually happened. But we saw once in a while, the Germans came and make a liquidation selection. 

Somebody is sick, they take him away. I saw a mother was taken away from a daughter, and the daughter was screaming. And nothing happened. They slapped her in the face, the Germans. And they took her away. And they took her away to the camp, and that's it. 

So after a while, we met, I want to see my wife. I heard that she is sick. This was in 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: Men were separate from women? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, men was in separate barracks. The women are separate barrack, because there was even a barrack hospital. In fact, there were two hospitals. One was a typhoid hospital. One was accidents, you know, accident hospital? And they cure you for a few days. But there were bar fall down on the leg, whatever happened. 

So I find out through-- and during the day, you meet with your wife, you know? She had some potatoes. Because my brother-in-law went out in the outside from the concentration camp to work for the Germans. He was a furrier. And he took him out to do furrier work. 

The meantime, when he came back, he brought back bread, potatoes. So my wife was cooking illegal on the bricks, under the bricks. If the Germans saw that they are making some cooking, they distinguish the whole thing and close the place. But we were watching, you know? 

So finally, I one day, three months after, after we were there already living there in the camp, the facilities was not so good. Because the, the sanitary toilets was with urine, everything was running around, and it was smelling all around. You couldn't, you did-- you did the flea eat you up, because they gave us a little bit straw to put it in. So we changed the straw, and with the cold, you covered yourself. 

So one day, finally, I heard that my wife is sick, which is stated by the guard of my wife, a German. And he said, my wife is sick, I would like to see her, but I could help. He said, no men allowed. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you want to go see her? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I want to see her. He said, no men allowed. And I said please for one minute. And he said, not even for a second. Somehow, he went away to chase away somebody. I snitched in to the right, and I get up. I took the chance, and I went up. 

When I went up, she was sick. She has fever. So while she-- I talk to her and everything like that, she take her hand to my forehead and said, Jack, I think I'm sick, but you are really sick. She took the forehead to me, and I was fever. 

I was over there, and they took me in to the typhoid hospital. Barbed wired around. There is not too many there. There was maybe about four bunk beds. As soon I came in, a guy has died. That's our welcome, a guy died. 

You cannot stay no more than three days. They start to cut the hair. They start to come in next day to cut my hair off. So while the doctor was going to the bathroom, he left his, his coat, the white coat. 

INTERVIEWER: They cut your hair, and-- 

SUBJECT: They cut the hair. When you were in that typhoid hospital, they cut you off the hair. But next day, not right away. But I escape before they cut my hair. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't you them-- want them to cut your hair? 

SUBJECT: Because they want to know if anyone is going to escape. Without hair, this means he has typhoid. The Germans would know right away. 

INTERVIEWER: I see. 

SUBJECT: They will know right away that, that you have typhoid. 

INTERVIEWER: So after your hair is cut, you cannot escape any longer? 

SUBJECT: That's right. That's right. After my hair is cut, I'm licked. I stay three days and that's it, and then-- 

INTERVIEWER: What's that's it? 

SUBJECT: This means they are going to kill me after three days. 

INTERVIEWER: And how-- 

SUBJECT: They take you-- they take you, and they take you to the cemetery, they kill you. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know that? 

SUBJECT: Because we saw it. 

INTERVIEWER: While you were there, you-- 

SUBJECT: While I was there, I saw it. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: I see they take out the men. The put the men with the Germans. They put them on the, on the, on the, the, jib, and they take him away, and you never see him again. So I see that he-- he left [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: So you realized that if you stayed a bit longer, if your hair is cut, you would be killed after three days? 

SUBJECT: Definitely, 100%. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. What did you decide to do? 

SUBJECT: I took the chance, and I put on this coat. 

INTERVIEWER: Whose coat? 

SUBJECT: Doctors. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes? 

SUBJECT: And the glasses. And I make believe an actor. I play, I play actor, I'm a doctor. And I walked out from the hospital. And I came in the barracks, and I throw away the coat with the glasses. So where do I go? I went to the barracks, and I have over there my brother. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- but you were still sick? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Oh, I got fever, no question about it. My brother knew doctors which-- you would know the doctors, you would think they are beggars in the concentration camps. They look like beggars. And my brother knew these doctors, and they helped me. They got somehow through that hospital medication. They, they helped me. 

In the meantime, there was a guard in the outside in case somebody goes in or something. I covered that, because it's working time. I don't suppose to lay in the barrack when is working time. So that's the way I, I made it. 

And I, and I saved my life in that way. If I was to stay another few days, I, I'm gone. I couldn't-- and I couldn't do it. Then I went back to work. I built back in the generators, and I helped myself and then I'm a tailor. I patched it with some tailoring, and I survived somehow. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened with your brother, your little brother? 

SUBJECT: My little brother-- it happened this way. We knew in the big ghetto now before the war, we worked for Christian people that got farms. They knew my father, because he made a lot of suits for them, and they-- when they passed by the road from the ghetto, they have a sack of potatoes, and they throw us, and they run again, you know? Like make believe nothing happened. 

So we gave that boy with my sister for hiding, you know? In case we don't live over the war, at least my brother was 10 years old, and the sister was 12 years old-- at least they will live over the war. And that's all what we know. They live. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1940-- 

SUBJECT: In 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Two. 

SUBJECT: 1942. That's all what we know, they live. Because communication-- you cannot write letter. You can't have a telephone. You don't know. 

So when in 1945, when we were liberated, I went to that people that I gave my brother, which this is, this is-- if you see this picture, in the white, little-- in the black little suit over here. This is my little brother. You could see the horses. You could see the farm. 

And they liked him, though, but they have a law. And they-- and the farm, whoever hides a Jewish kid, they going to be-- the farm destroyed. So at that point, they were afraid, because all the farm of the town knew my father. They knew the kids. 

So in order that they should survive, and they knew that the ghetto-- the big ghetto is still are, in 1942, which was about eight miles to walk. So they gave him two bread and they walked home. And while they were walking home there was no more people over there. Because the big ghetto was liquidated. So they saw barbed wires, so they crossed over the barbed wires and they got shot on the barbed wires. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother? 

SUBJECT: My brother and my sister. For when I was freed, liberated, I went back to my house over there, which customers knew us from that area where we lived. Oh, Mr. Pepper, you're alive, how-- how are you? Where is your father? Where is your brother? Where is anybody? 

I said, well, I'm going to the farm where I gave my brother and the sister to hiding. And I want to pick them up. She said, Mr. Pepper, don't you go. I saw the way they got shot on the barbed wire on that there little mark. They really got shot. And she took me over there to the grave, and I-- and I said that's it. 

Because I know that woman because she was a very good woman. She lives across the street. And then the Germans said that time to give, uh, to give out, to, to the furs, the diamonds, the gold up to the Germans. So instead, we should give to the Germans, we gave it to her. 

You know? We didn't care, so we gave it to her. When I was freed, I saw that woman, and she told me all about it. So this picture of what I had is when I came and talked to that man, which my father even make that suit. 

INTERVIEWER: To which man? 

SUBJECT: Farmer. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to the farmer? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: After you spoke to the woman, you did go to the farmer? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did go to the farmer. I want to see him myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: I want to talk myself. He snapped that picture when I started left home. And he snapped that picture. He said, Mr. Pepper, I know it's going to hurt you, but I give up I made a picture of him, and here, you have the picture. And that's the only picture what I have of my little brother. 

INTERVIEWER: And he told you that-- 

SUBJECT: He told you that he-- they squeal at him. The people what they lived in the farm, they were afraid for the Germans. Because they were looking for the Jewish-- for whoever is a Jew, they want to catch him or something. So he was really afraid. He was scared. And I really thought that he is going to be safe. On the end of it, I lost him, I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say to the farmer when he told you the story? 

SUBJECT: Well, I believed him, because they take so many chances to take us-- to bring illegal bread to us in the house. Illegal potatoes, illegal butter. They risked their life for us, you know? And I'm sure if he wouldn't let them go-- which if he would know that the big ghetto were liquidated, he might do another way to do. 

But he didn't know at that time that the big ghetto was liquidated. Because there were no radio. There was no paper. There's nothing. Whoever, they are afraid themselves. So that's the point that he didn't-- we didn't know. And he gave him two breads and off away they went. When they went home, they shot them. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember who remained from your family? 

SUBJECT: Mine is only three. And one brother I got in New York, Benny, and one is William here, William Pepper, three for out of eight. 

INTERVIEWER: Survived from the whole-- 

SUBJECT: From the whole family. 

INTERVIEWER: --family? 

SUBJECT: I got uncles and cousins, but '47, they all got killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Now what you know of the death of any of your other family members, your father, for example? 

SUBJECT: My father was happen-- which at that time, I didn't know where he is, or what. But my brother-in-law-- what he is now in England-- my sister's husband. Which when I said that she had a baby, and they took her and they shot her because she didn't want to give up the baby, you know? So at that time, my brother-in-law-- 

INTERVIEWER: They shot-- 

SUBJECT: --was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: My brother-in-law was burying people. He got his department was to bury people. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: In the-- in that [INAUDIBLE], in that place that they put us after right inside. They remained there for till the end of it, for burying. For burying all the people. So once my brother-in-law has to go to work furrier-- as a furrier. He said to my father, why your father-in-law, you go replace me, and you bury the people? So you will replace me instead to sit around here. It's no good for you. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Now that was-- 

SUBJECT: In 1943. 

INTERVIEWER: In '43, your father was still in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: And I didn't know that. After the war, my, my, my-- 

INTERVIEWER: So your father also was sent to the right. 

SUBJECT: That's right. My father was to the right, and I didn't even know about it. 

INTERVIEWER: And only your mother went to left? 

SUBJECT: My mother, I saw. 

INTERVIEWER: Went to the left? 

SUBJECT: My mother went to the left. This I saw. 

INTERVIEWER: To Treblinka? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, because was a very dangerous panic that-- you-- it was a, a mix up. 

INTERVIEWER: And your father was still alive? 

SUBJECT: He was still alive. 

INTERVIEWER: In the big ghetto? 

SUBJECT: In the big ghetto, the big ghetto-- 

INTERVIEWER: And in the small-- 

SUBJECT: The ghetto liquidation. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, and-- 

SUBJECT: The small ghetto, no. 

INTERVIEWER: In the-- 

SUBJECT: The big ghetto, that's the where he got liquidated. 

INTERVIEWER: He was alive? 

SUBJECT: Burying people. 

INTERVIEWER: He was alive in the metallurgical-- 

SUBJECT: In the metallurgical place where they kept us. 

INTERVIEWER: And you didn't? 

SUBJECT: And I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER: You were near him? 

SUBJECT: No, I was 10 miles away. Because we were in concentration camp. And at that time, the remains were still there. We didn't-- you couldn't know, because there was no communication. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened to your father? 

SUBJECT: So my brother-in-law said to my father, you go and replace me, because I'm going to work furrier. So my father said, I am not going to go bury people. So how long could they remain in that place when they was no more bury-- to bury people no more, they took the rest of them, and they buried him too. And he got shot. 

INTERVIEWER: After he buried-- 

SUBJECT: After they buried all of them, the remains got shot too. That's-- that's what happened with my father. So I remain with two brothers. 

INTERVIEWER: Now you could have escaped the Nazi occupation? 

SUBJECT: I escaped the Nazi occupation. In 1939, we knew that the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] was coming, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: The angel of death? 

SUBJECT: The angel of death is coming. So at that time, but the Germans, the first week or four weeks you could still travel, you know, the trains. Was not the law as strict for Jews like this. So what happened is we escape from Czestochowa to five hours to Kraków. 

Now a big city Kraków too. You know that to escape where the Russians are, which is many, many miles. I cannot say, but is many, many miles. And this was already November, you know? And at that time, I was there in a hotel. 

INTERVIEWER: You and who? 

SUBJECT: Me and my brother, the one what he was killed by exchange. The one that he was exchanged. He was with me. Because we both was tailors. We would stay together. We kept us together all the time. 

So when we escaped to Russia, over there for two years. Then the Germans came over there, you know? So when the Germans came over there, I, I really had not bad. 

But my mind was why did I left my parents in a situation like that, that they need me? I was the oldest son, and I was the man, but I, I was the bread giver saying. And now under that circumstances, I left them. I couldn't get it over. So when I came over there, I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: --to Russian. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes? 

SUBJECT: Under occupied Lemberg, Laberberg, Chernihiv. And I come over to the Russian zone. I said, why did I left my parents in a situation like that? Which for me, if I would be selfish, would be good. Why? Because I was making suits in, in, in-- for generals. I got the good food from the, from the Russians. The Russians, they give me a lot of tips. And I was really good. 

But in 1941, you know, the [INAUDIBLE], they got a beating. The Russians got a beating, so the Germans took over. You remember when they went to Moscow, you know, that time, it was 1941? It was danger. So I was 700 miles away. How could you go back 700 miles, which the bridges was bombed? The trains-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were 700 miles in-- 

SUBJECT: From my father away. 

INTERVIEWER: From your father, but under German occupation now? 

SUBJECT: Under German occupation. So might as well, if I'm already under the German occupation, why not be with them together and help them out to get ends to meet. So after 1941, I stayed over there, and I worked tailoring. 

INTERVIEWER: Tailoring. 

SUBJECT: I had a good living. I make a good living. But in 1941, I didn't want to go to deep Russian, because I would never come back. So I figure while the Germans are already, you know here, might as well go back. 

Then when I worked over there by farms. I worked three months in farms, and I got good food and everything. And, and one Christian said he got our necks by his door. I mean, we made him suits for the kids, and for the, for them, and to work everything out. 

And one day, my brother went out, and the Germans were already in. 5:00 in the morning, he saw some truck is something somewhere. I don't know why-- why he get up 5 o'clock in the morning? I will never understand. He went out. 

What do you think? He know he saw over there Jews smuggling back to the-- 700 miles back to the other side. You know, they got wives over there. They got children over there. So they want to go from the German-- to the Germans to back home. 

So this is the way we smuggled back to Poland, which was a tough going. We were frozen. We stay over there on that truck, which was snowed in. And they shoveled the snow. They talk, and I see they coming nearer, the Ukrainian people, they come nearer, nearer. 

And when they going to see a truck with Jews-- which why is that truck sent over there? Because one Jew had a factory from candies. He was the most main man for the Germans, but he made candies. His son was caught, and they sent them away for work on the road. 

So he chopped stones on the road. His feet was frozen. So he get a telegram that he is here. He is alive. So this father put a half a million dollar to a Gestapo. Like I say, bribery. And he took a truck, and he went particularly to bring this son. 

While he was bringing this son, he snitched in another 12. So from every one, he got some more money. You know, one girl when, when, when, we, we were already 5:00 in the morning. So I go in. I said, my gosh, how could I trust you? To the German, I said. I got some money. How could I trust you? 

He said, wenn du fahrst mit mir, brauchst du kein' Angst haben. If you go with with me, then you don't have to worry, you safe. How could you trust? You taking a chance. Which I did. And which, and which we made it. 

He delivered this son alive, because he made-- said to the German. If you bring my son alive, you will get that what I pledge the money. And I snitched in with that boy. Together we came to the house. And from there, I took the train, I-- and I came to my father. 

INTERVIEWER: And the truck was frozen, and Ukrainians-- 

SUBJECT: The truck, the truck at that time was so frozen that we went and-- he passed a forest. And the snow was snowed in, that this rear wheels from the truck went in, in a hole. And he couldn't get up, and forget about it. That's it. So he remained there with the truck a whole night. 

What he did, they come, a guard, they come and post, you know? So this German that says he took with that, with that post, what he went back and forth. He took a little girl with him, 10 years old. You know, for saving her? He took her the 10 years old in a hotel. 

And we staying and freezing. And I start to go sleep. And this brother said, don't you sleep, because, you know, when you freeze in your sleep, that's where death comes. 

And he-- and one fa-- one son said to the father, Daddy, he said, I'm freezing. What shall I do? He said, the only thing what you could do, put your feet between my feet, and I put my feet between your feet. And that's the way we going to warm each other on the truck. He was-- we were frozen a whole night. We couldn't get. 

But and then in the morning, after so many hours, they have a law in the small towns that they have to shovel the snow to make the road. From that Aryan region to here, from this region to there. And we are Jews sitting in the truck with no daddy, with no German, with nobody to help us. We-- the truck had a tent, you know? And we looked through little holes. And we saw they talking. And God help us if they come to that truck and they see Jews, tha-- that-- that's it. 

So it was a miracle happen, we hear a big tractor coming. And this was the German what he left us with the truck. And he brought back this little girl. He took the tractor and pulled that, that truck six miles, you know, to the main road. He took us six miles to the main road. 

We were hungry. We were frozen. You could put in a nail in my hand, I wouldn't even feel it. Was in the forest, was dead. We couldn't do work or nothing. We were helpless. No end, the end of it. 

And at that time, he, he had a can kerosene. The Gestapo had a can of kerosene. He went into, into a house. And he said, here is coffee, you know, the beans? He got beans. 

And here he said, you have a kerosene, which was not kerosene at that time. And you make coffee for these people. Which she made coffee. It was really all right. But she made the coffee. 

And he took my brother out to warm up that motor, you know? And then we spent maybe about two hours till we get ourselves together, then frozen from the getting together. And then he went up with that boy what the father asked for him. And we delivered him to that, to that place. 

And then from that town, I had to go by train as a, as Christian. Because I saw the Jews walking with the Star of David, which with fur coats and shoveling snow. And here I am on the railroad station, you know? 

I'm on the railroad station, and I see a retarded uh, uh, woman with a straitjacket. She was a lawyer. She went-- she went like a mental. She talked, and you know, she was-- they take her away somehow. 

When we came there 9:00 in the morning, you know, to Kraków. 9:00 in the morning, the train went from 12:00 at night, midnight. You imagine to stay from 9:00 in the morning to be, to be thinking you are Jew, which you cannot walk on the street, but you have to walk on the street. 

My brother was not shaved. I got to give him a shawl that he look like real typical Jew. And I have to go in the restaurant and to buy bread, and to talk perfect Polish. Otherwise, they going to catch me right away that I'm Jewish. 

So I, I brought him to the waiting in in, in the railroad station. I brought him bread, and so on to wait to kill that, that till 9:00 at night. Which we did. The meantime, I looked around. I walked around. I didn't want him walk, because he looked, he looked typical, you know, with the-- they would see right away something happened, they would. 

If the gentlemen see him, they ask him right away so a Jew doesn't have to go out on the train. So at that time, in 12, in 12:00, we learned we came 9:00 in the morning. And my father at that time, they all in the ghetto sleeping. 

And I come. I come, there was, there was snow around. Snow in 1941 was like Christmas time, January or so. Snow all the-- You see a German on the place in the center which he went wide. He went in the hole to warm himself up. 

I used to go, I know my city, the shortcut. I took the shortcut, which was at night. Nobody see. And I went home in the ghetto where they were hiding. When I came at night-- you know, Europe, they have the-- they have janitors. You've got the ring the bell. 

I had no chance to ring the bell. I, I climb over the fence. Because if a janitor could catch me fooling around too much what do I do at night. So I climbed the fence. And I made four or five steps up to my father, which he didn't know that we're coming. He didn't know about us till two years altogether. 

And then when I get to by knock a little by the door, because I know they're going to be scared. I knock a little by the door, I said, open. So my mother said, [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] and I open the door. So my father said, [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] You open up the door. 

So finally, my mother opened up the door. And what do you know? I felled and then she screamed. She thought it was a dream. And all my brothers and sisters was there. And they screamed. 

And in the meantime, in our rooms living three families. And like I said, every room have to have a family. So they all come. They say, Mr. Pepper, what happened here? Well, he said, I'm sorry, what happened, my kids came back from death, you know? 

It was illegal. We smuggled over. And at that point, we stood with them till the end of the-- of the ghetto. And then I went through hell again. With them together. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, thank you. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Good. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

