MAN: INAUDIBLE...lalechet? 

MAN: Bevakasha 

WOMAN: [INAUDIBLE] 

MAN: [INAUDIBLE] 

WOMAN: OK. We're ready. 

INTERVIEWER: Muchan (ready?) 

MAN: Bevakasha (please) . 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

Mrs. Emma Shaver, with your usual persuasiveness and charm, please tell us what happened here a few days ago. 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I attended a meeting, where a report was given of the 40th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto, and after the meeting, a woman came up to me and said, uh, are you Emma Shaver? I said, yes. She said, I heard you sing when I was in the hospital in Munich. And of course, that was a very touching thing for me. Of course, I remember, I recall the, uh, the concert very well. 

And the important thing, without going into too much of, uh, ex-- of-- of an explanation of the thing, she said to me, do you know that you were the first woman, or the first person that made me cry since I've come out of the, uh, of the, uh, concentration camps? And you were the first one to, uh, make me feel as though I was a human being, that I belonged to someone in the past and there was something for me in the future. Of course, it was very touching for me to hear that. 

And, uh, because it also reminded me, at the same concert, when I looked out into the audience, and I was singing a lullaby, and I saw a man quite-- he looked rather hefty. And I could see him heaving and sobbing. And I thought to myself-- as I was singing, I thought to myself, am I doing the right thing or not? Is that my purpose, of coming here to make people cry? 

And, uh, and I kept on singing my song, which was a-- it happened to be a lullaby. But afterwards, I realized that it was the right thing, because it was a sort of a catharsis, where the people who have sort of stored things up, you know, inside of them and could-- would not and could not express emotion again. And, uh, that also reminds me of a, uh, paragraph that I've just-- looking through my archives, in quotes, where Chaim Greenberg, in introducing me to an audience said many very nice things, but the last sentence was something to the effect, one must remember that the Jews of the concentration camps have not only forgotten how to laugh, they have also forgotten how to cry. And, he says, Emma Shaver taught them how to cry again. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. And I believe that you recently received an article from an American magazine. Can you explain what this article was about? And perhaps, could you read us some passages from it? 

EMMA SHAVER: I'll try to. This was an article that came to me by mail from the States. It was an article written in the, uh, a Jewish magazine, a Yiddish magazine called "The Tsukunft," The Future. And it was printed in-- printed in the October issue in 1983, and the writer, whom I don't know-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry, say that again, '82. 

EMMA SHAVER: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: '82. You said 1983. 

EMMA SHAVER: 1983, yes. The writer was Mr. Goodman from Phoenix, Arizona. I don't remember-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry. Just start again. It was October '82, because '83 hadn't happened. 

EMMA SHAVER: It was written-- do you want me to start again? 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

EMMA SHAVER: It was written in the Jewish magazine, Yiddish magazine, very prestigious one. It started in 1893 or '94. And it was printed in the issue of October 1983. 

INTERVIEWER: '82. 

EMMA SHAVER: Written-- the man that wrote it was Mr. Goodman, from Phoenix, Arizona. I don't know the man, and I have no-- but what he writes touched me very deeply. Do you want me to read parts of it? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, please. 

EMMA SHAVER: He says, "when she appeared on stage, the audience was electrified. Her wonderful singing penetrated to the depths of the-- of the disturbed and aching hearts. She lifted up their souls and moved them to tears. She sang ghetto songs, songs from poets who had been exterminated, songs from the other side of the world," meaning songs from American poets. "Not one word was lost on the listening ear. 

In some songs, she lifted people on wings of joy and gave them hope for better times to come, for a people who had suffered so much from the Nazis. Apart from her wonderful singing and the grace of her appearance, which captured her-- the hearts of people in the camps wherever she appeared, she had another mission. She took it upon herself to share the pain of those people, most of them who are the only survivors of large families. 

Emma Shaver understood that their experiences were still fresh, and their pain and suffering were far from being healed. Survivors, many of whom had only been children when the Nazis overflowed the Jewish towns, poured out their hearts to their older sister from America. They told her how they had been pulled away from their parents, sisters, brothers by the Nazis. They told her of the way they had been tortured and suffered terribly in the extermination camps and the ghettos. 

They told her of the dangers fighting in the forests as partisans. Emma's eyes were steadily fixed on the blue numbers tattooed into their arms. She held them, each of them, kissed them, and cried. I am not exaggerating when I say that I, personally--" meaning, I suppose, Mr. Goodman-- "thanks to her performances, found my way back to myself after what I went through in the concentration camps, and I was not the only one affected in this way." 

Of course, when I read this, I was touched very much, and it reminded me of a scene in the Fiddler on the Roof. I'll not go through the whole scene, but there is one wonderful scene in it, where Tevye says to Golda, after he speaks to her about the second daughter falling in love with a poor teacher, and she wants to marry him. And the mother says-- Golda says to him, what do you mean, by love? All that. Then Tevye says to her, Golda, do you love me? 

And she goes on a tirade. And what? After so many years, I've made your bed, I've had-- had your children, I've sewed for you, I've cleaned and did everything. What? But he keeps on. He says, but Golda, do you love me? Et cetera, et cetera. At the end, he, again, asks her, and she has-- has said about everything that she could, so she says, well, I suppose I do. And Tevye answers her. He says, well, after 25 years, it's good to know. 

And I felt, when I read this article, after 37 years, because that's the time span, it's good to know that whatever was done at that time is remembered. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, you obviously made a colossal impression on thousands of people that you sang to in the camps throughout Europe. Let's go back a bit and discuss how it all came about. How was the trip initiated? I believe you initiated it. Can you tell us why, why you felt it was important? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I, uh-- first of all, my first contact with-- with displaced persons was in Oswego, New York state. When the first 1,000 refugees came to the United States, President Roosevelt arranged it. And I had a desire then to go to-- uh, to this place, to Oswego, and I sang there, uh, sang these, uh, Jewish and Hebrew songs. 

And I felt the response, the warmth, from the people, and I had a feeling that after what they have gone through, the uncertainty, the-- the fear of life, and the fear of, uh, of-- the feeling of hunger and, uh, when they were freed, you know, when liberation came about, naturally, these things were taken care of immediately. They had food. They had, uh-- they had, uh-- wearing apparel. They were not, uh, uh, at any time, had fear of, uh, of, uh, being tortured again. 

And my feeling was, that when these things that are primary were taken care of, that it was equally as important-- not equally, but next in importance, was to give them sort of what I call food for the soul. And I felt these people who have gone through and made to feel that they were lower than the-- the lowest, like, dirt or whatever, and that we were a people who were parasites. We never did anything. That's what they were told. That's what they were made to believe. 

I felt that to go to the camps and to sing or to bring them our rich heritage that we have, that that would do for them-- it would, uh, enrich their lives and give them also a feeling of-- of being, as this woman said, somebody. We were somebody, and we have some-- something to be proud of and something to go on for. So that is how it started. 

And then the World Jewish Congress, they, uh-- they thought the same way, and they made this-- they arranged for the first cultural delegation that consisted of a Hebrew poet, a Jewish poet, who was probably the greatest Jewish poet at the time Hei Leivick. And I was the Jewish the singer who sang the Jewish and Hebrew songs 

INTERVIEWER: Was it difficult to get permission to go? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, at first we thought it was very simple, you know? But, uh, when we got-- when they started to make negotiations, it wasn't as simple as that. There were-- we had to be approved by all the conquering nation, uh, like the French and the, uh, and the, uh, uh, the American and the Russian Zone and all these other-- they had to-- the-- the Supreme Council, uh, of these, uh, nations had-- had to approve it, and we were-- had to be approved by UNRRA, U-, U-N-R-R-A. And, uh, they were our hosts, and they were supposed to supply the means by which we could go from camp to camp. But it seemed at the-- it seemed at the time that we were having unusual difficulties, but now that there is a span of so many years since that-- oh. 

INTERVIEWER: All right? Can you tell us when you arrived in Europe, where? 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes. Uh, we left New York by plane and came to London, stayed there a while to get more papers and approvals. And then we went from London to Frankfurt in an Army transport plane. And arriving in Frankfurt was our really first, uh, shocking realization of what the war had done, because Frankfurt was completely demolished. And from Frankfurt, we had papers to go to Munich, which was supposed to be our headquarters. There was no one there to meet us, and so we, uh, we found where our-- the president of the-- chairman of the displaced persons people was at that time in Garmisch, because it was Pesach, and they were celebrating Pesach there. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us what year this was and whether you were traveling as civilians? 

EMMA SHAVER: No. We had to be dressed in, uh, in Army uniform because, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Which Army? 

EMMA SHAVER: United States Army, of course. And, uh, and, uh, the year was, and, uh, the-- the, uh, date was April 1946. We finally came to Garmisch and found the people that were-- that knew that we were supposed to arrive, but some of the arrangements were sort of crisscrossed. 

And when the, um, when the people that-- the, uh, some of the DPs that were in Garmisch heard of the cultural delegation arriving, they insisted that we appear that evening, impromptu, you know? And, of course, that was our first contact with the DP-- with the displaced person, and that was the-- they were our-- that was the object, you know? And we started to realize, this is the moment, you know, we are now going to face the people that we wanted to and people that we came to do what we were-- uh, was-- what we felt was important. 

Well, that evening, they arranged an evening in some-- in some hall. And it was crowded, you know? Everyone came. And I think we all were afraid to lift our eyes up, you know, to look directly into the faces of the displaced persons. But, uh, of course, we had to sort of do whatever we could. 

Well, the two gentlemen I mentioned before, they were-- they were writers, so they could get up and speak and they-- whatever. With my case, I had to have a, uh, a piano or an accompanist, which was not there. So I sat down at the piano and sang the very first song. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

Evening that-- 

EMMA SHAVER: We arrived. 

INTERVIEWER: Wait, wait, wait, wait. 

CREW: OK. OK. 

EMMA SHAVER: We arrived at-- at the, uh, place that was designated for the gathering, and it was-- it was crowded. And, as I mentioned before, we-- it was the-- the moment of truth for us, and we were very emotional about it. But the-- Leivick and Ephros they spoke, and, of course, it was, uh, very, very much from the heart. And then after they were through speaking, uh, it was-- it was just expected of me to do something, to sing, that's what I came to do. 

So they did have a piano on the platform but no accompanist, so I, uh, decided I would sing some Jewish folk song that was written by Chaim Nachman Bialik And the song has to do with, uh, Jewish children growing up. I hope-- I'll try to do a-- a, uh, a bit of it, and I hope the words will be meaningful to you as it was-- as it is to me, and it was to the audience. 

[PLAYING PIANO] 

Unter di grininke beymelekh shpiln zikh Moyshelekh, Shloymelekh, Tsites, kapotkelekh, shtreymelekh, Yidelekh, frish fun di eyelekh. Gufimlekh shtroy, roykh un federlekh,  Khotsh nem un tsebloz zey oyf gliderlekh,  Khapn zey oyf gringe vintelekh  un es tsetrogn zikh feygelekh. 

And so forth and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: You must have sang [INAUDIBLE]. Will you sing [INAUDIBLE], please. 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes, I could sing just a few phrases of it. And the important thing of this little song was, I think, the finishing of it about-- 

Oy, mir zol zayn, yidishe kinderlekh, far ayere koshere eygelekh! 

INTERVIEWER: What does it mean? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, it's really a description of young children growing up with tsitse and kapotkelekh and payelach and, uh, and, uh, one thing that they possess are eyes, and the eyes possess a little sparkle in them. And through this sparkle, you could almost feel a sort of a prophetic, something prophetic in them. And then he says very simply, at the end. Oh, we should be-- let us all be Jewish, or yiddishe, children because of your kosher, you know, koshere eygelekh your kosher eyes. 

INTERVIEWER: How did the audience react to this? 

EMMA SHAVER: Oh, well, of course, they were very moved by that, because they were the-- they felt that they were also, you know, the yiddishs kinderlach the little Jewish boys and girls that were growing up, and-- and, uh, they were touched by it, because probably remembering some of their own children that have-- have not been there. 

The other song that I sang, and why I chose it, I don't know, because it was Pesach. And I sang Kol Nidre for them. And of course, I would not attempt to do the whole thing but just maybe a few opening phrases. 

[PLAYING PIANO] 

[CLEARS THROAT] 

Kol Nidre. Ve'esarei, Ush'vuei, Vacharamei, Vekonamei, Vekinusei, Vechinuyei. 

That is it. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: What other songs did you sing later? 

EMMA SHAVER: Huh? Oh, after that, I sang, uh, folk songs, songs that, uh, uh, were written by very well-- good poets, and songs that they were acquainted with. I-- I think those that had any Jewish background. Songs based on-- on religious motifs, and then I also sang songs of-- of-- Hebrew songs, singing about the shepherds and the sheep on the-- on the hills, and how they walk across the hills, and you can hear the tinkling of the bells of the sheep, and songs of that sort. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, I believe that one-- 

CREW: OK. You are not in the light right now. So if-- OK. 

EMMA SHAVER: Uh, at our first official, uh, appearance in the Camp Landsberg, I sang these songs that I have told you about, the, uh, folk songs and Hebrew songs, and then, they asked for more. And the only song that I knew of at that time was the song, the partisan song that sort of came to me in the United States. And I thought that it would be very-- something very, uh, sort of, uh, interesting if I-- I would sing one of the songs that was-- that-- a song that was born in the-- in this period of the-- the ghetto period. And this partisan song, well, when I heard it, of course, it was very moving. And I-- when I sang it for the-- that audience, I sang it, you know, with a sort of a tear, with a break, very emotionally. and I sang it almost like a dirge. 

Zog nish kein mol az du geyst dem letstn veg 

And I sang it in a way that you know I was sort of crying at every note. That evening after the concert, one of the, uh, people, one of the, uh, displaced persons came up to me and thanked me in a very nice way that thought that it-- it was a wonderful evening, and it was great. But he says, I-- I want to suggest something to you. I would say that you should not sing the partisan song. And that, I-- it sort of-- it could-- if he could have shocked me at the moment, I think, couldn't, you know, shake me up as-- as he did when he said. And all I could ask him, I said is why? And he said to me in Yiddish, he says, veil azoy zingt man es nit Because that's not the way it should be sung. 

And I didn't want to get into any further discussion, so I went back to where I was staying overnight in the camp, and-- and needless to say, I didn't sleep that night. I was very, very much upset by that remark. But the next day, we walked around the camp, Landsberg, and this will also give you a picture of what the camp was like already at eleven, at that time, 11 months after liberation. It was really sprudeling you know, it was full of-- of activity. 

And you had, the Jews were already organized from the extreme left to the extreme right and from the youngest to the oldest and the religious groups. And they had-- they had schools, the art schools were already started, and they were teaching them how to, uh, do various things. They even had a beauty shop. They had a tailor shop. And at, uh, uh, towards evening, we-- it was Friday night. So they had an oneg shabbat. Each group had their own, and we would visit them. 

And we came into one group, by the way, where Zivia Lubetkin, who was one of the heroines of the Warsaw Ghetto, she was here in this kibbutz with Lohamei hagetaot She died just about two years ago. But when I saw Zivia, who, I've heard about her, it was a very, very moving thing for us. 

Well, anyway, the whole evening, just, uh, we listened to them, but to-- getting back to the partisan song, they closed the evening by singing the partisan song. And when I heard them sing the partisan song, I realized what the man meant. That, that's not the way it should be sung, because the way I sang it, it was a dirge. The way they sang it, it was a call to determination of will. Regardless of what happens, we will survive-- and survive. 

And they sang it in a very martial, you know, 

Zog nish kein mol az du geyst dem letstn veg, himlen blayene farshteln bloye teg 

Well, when I heard that, I knew what he meant, and, of course, that was the way I sang it from then on. 

INTERVIEWER: What effect did you have on the audience? How would you explain their emotional state before-- 

CREW: Hang on. All right. 

INTERVIEWER: Ready? What effect did your singing have on the survivors? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I can speak not only of the fact that I had, but the effect that the Cultural Committee had on the survivors. They were, uh, I've-- I've read it, and I've heard it. We were the first ones to come to them from America. So that was a sort of a-- a contact with-- with fellow Jews from across the sea, and they were-- it was a first, so they were very much, uh, uh, touched by-- by our-- by our being there. And also, that we brought to them this, uh, message of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, being, of what we possess in our-- in our Jewish heritage. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they call you [INAUDIBLE]? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I-- I was called many-- mine-- I don't think I've ever seen my name really pronounced correctly, but I never took-- I didn't-- an it wasn't the-- it wasn't my object, anyway, to come there to make a career. So they called me-- they mispronounced my last name in, many, many, ways. So the simplest one was that they would call me the Americana Zingeron, the American singer, you see? 

And, uh, there are-- I have many stories on that, but this is not the time for it. 

[PHONE RINGS] 

INTERVIEWER: What's that, your phone? 

EMMA SHAVER: Yeah. 

CREW: Go on, go on, go on. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the reaction of the survivors to your singing? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, uh, I think it, uh, it sort of reawakened in them a sort of a human-- a-- a human-- uh, that they were human. And so they reacted to sad songs by crying, which they haven't forgotten how to. There are songs, the children's songs that have a sort of a playful-- a playful motif, and they would sort of react to that and laugh in the proper places. And, of course. If I wouldn't get a laugh at certain, uh, songs that had, you know, uh, uh, you have songs that have a-- the word has a double meaning, and-- and or unexpected-- an unexpected turn or twist. And they would react to it. So then I knew I was coming over to them. 

And then if I would sing a song like-- a song that I always remember, Reyzele which was, you know, very, very simple little love song in a-- in a little shtetl, you know? And it's very sweet and charming and very naive. And, uh, the next morning, when I'd walk in the camp, and I could hear from all sides, you know, young people going around, [SINGING] Ya, ma, ma, ma, ya, da, da, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba ba. Made me feel very good, of course, that they would remember the songs. 

INTERVIEWER: You caused a riot once. Can you explain that to--remind us about that? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I didn't cause the riot. There was a riot in the Landsberg Camp. The-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, no. I mean about the mob that cam to hear you on the second-- 

EMMA SHAVER: Ah, that was, yes, when I sang in Stuttgart. I gave a regular performance in Stuttgart at the Opera House, if you will. And after the concert, we went back to where the-- where they were-- the area where the displaced persons were living. And there, they were not living in camps, but they lived in little-- in the-- in sort of three-story houses. And the, uh, the, uh, chairman of the Stuttgart Committee was-- lived in one of these houses, and I stayed with them, and that was on the third floor. 

And we came back after the concert, and they had a little mesibah, where we drank and talked. And suddenly, we heard, from the street, you know, sort of-- sort of noises that were coming up. Somebody went to the window and looked out, and the street was just filled with people, black, you know? They were-- and they kept on saying, we want-- we want the singer. We want the singer. 

So I came to the window, and the pianist I had at that time also played the accordion. And they insisted that I sing something. So I sang from the window. I sang a song, shabbos nach mincha It's Saturday, you know, there's a certain after-- after the third-- the third prayer, and it's very descriptive of-- of that-- of that time of Sabbath. And it ends with a very, very dramatic high cry, you know? mi ce-yamcha yisroel 

INTERVIEWER: Which means? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, and who is like-- like land to Israel, and like your people, Israel. And that sort of rang across the-- the whole-- the whole street down below. It was a very, very dramatic moment for me. I hope and I believe it was for them, too. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you explain the song Ani ma'amin to us? And can you sing some of it for us? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, I don't know if I can sing it, but the Ani ma'amin was a song that is really associated with the Warsaw Ghetto. And although it's taken as one of the concepts or precepts Maimonides, yet it was sung by all, religious Jews, and there were Jews that were, you know, not exactly the, uh, religious like, and, uh, yet, that was their song. And Ani ma'amin mean is just simply I believe. I believe in full-- in full, uh, faith that the Messiah will come. And I may not be there, but it might happen. But I still believe the Messiah will come. And that became a sort of the-- the song of the Warsaw Ghetto, and then it was taken on by many-- you've heard it. 

Ani ma'amin- ani ma'amin-ani ma'amin 

INTERVIEWER: Can you try it again? 

EMMA SHAVER: I can't. [CLEARS THROAT] 

Ani ma'amin 

CREW: OK. 

[PLAYING PIANO] 

[? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

CREW: Please. 

[PLAYING PIANO] 

EMMA SHAVER: Unter di grininke beymelekh shpiln zikh Moyshelekh, Shloymelekh, Tsites, kapotkelekh, shtreymelekh, Yidelekh, frish fun di eyelekh. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you sing something for us? 

EMMA SHAVER: Unter di grininke beymelekh shpiln zikh Moyshelekh, Shloymelekh, Tsites, kapotkelekh, payelekh, Yidelekh, frish fun di eyelekh. 

INTERVIEWER: So I'll ask you again, what was the reaction of the people when you sang in the camp? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, as I told you, they were very-- 

CREW: Start again. 

INTERVIEWER: Don't-- don't-- no. Don't say what you said, just talk. This is not-- this is not for sound, this is for pictures, OK? Can you tell me about the reaction of the people when you sang? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, when I sang joyous songs, it was-- I felt that it went through. When I sang the sad songs, I could feel the heaviness, the tears, the crying. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did they call you? 

EMMA SHAVER: Oh, they called me many things, but I think I wound up with it being called the American Singer, or the Singer from America, would be correct in English, but in Yiddish it's, uh, the Americana Zinger, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: Anything else? 

CREW: Now, can you put your left hand on the piano? 

INTERVIEWER: Put your left hand on the piano. 

CREW: No, up. On top of the piano. 

INTERVIEWER: Lean forward. Just talk to me. 

EMMA SHAVER: Talk to me? Say something. 

CREW: Only your left hand. 

INTERVIEWER: Do it again. OK. Now, wouldn't you like to talk to me. 

EMMA SHAVER: Of course. No one else that I care to speak to more than I would to you, yes. Anything else? 

INTERVIEWER: OK. So-- 

EMMA SHAVER: I would like to say that-- but-- some words. I mean, when we will have an opportunity to express that how I felt about being chosen to go to-- on this mission. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Can you explain to us under what conditions you sang? 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes, I think I could. As I've mentioned before, the cultural delegation was sent but the arrangements were rather sort of haphazard. So we appeared in big barracks and in some smaller places, some like a soup kitchen. I had one or two concerts in very beautiful place, regular auditoriums. 

And in one camp, I remember distinctly when I came there, and it was raining. It was pouring, and I didn't think anyone would come to the-- to the-- to the concert, but they did come. And-- and all I could see, it was just people with blankets over their-- and just eyes, you know, looking up. And the rain was pouring down from the, you know, the shattered ceilings on the piano, on me, but it was a marvelous concert. And I just said, if they're willing to sit and listen, I'll be there and I'll sing. 

And another thing, I always try to make the, uh, the, uh, concert, it should not bear like a-- like the-- the-- that I wore a uniform, because that would remind them of where they came from. And so I would, for the concert, sort of put on a skirt or a little blouse and so to make it more festive. And my approach to the-- to the concert was as though each place, no matter where it is, as I said, soup kitchen or barracks or beautiful halls, all of them, for me, it was Carnegie Hall. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did you stay? And when did the other members of the delegation leave? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, we had a visa to stay for six weeks, you know, a military visa. And then shortly after our arrival, as I told you, we became-- this incident in Landsberg, the riot there, we became, that is the cultural delegation, became personae non grata and the-- and the, uh, the powers that be did not want to prolong our-- our visa. But I felt that I was going to stay on no matter what. And I told Leivick that he, as a poet and as a man that sees Jewish history from-- from where we came from and where we're going to, if he appeared in 10 camps, then that was it, and we-- because the others would be a little nuanced different here and there. But I felt that I would be very, very as sort of-- not-- I would have not done all that I could do if I would leave with them, because knowing that there were, let's say, 200,000 people in the America Zone, and if I sang for 50,000 then I would be frustrated. So I would make every effort to-- to-- to-- to remain there and I stayed on for six months doing this. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were Leivick's parting words to you? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, when we went, I-- we sort of went to the, uh-- to the, uh-- to the, uh, station as a group, as the cultural delegation. I wanted to give them-- make the impression that we were solidarity between the three of us. And-- but I did not leave with them, but when I shook hands with Leivick as we parted, he said to me, he says, Emma zei a man you know, be a man, you know? Which was a very-- for him, if you know him, he was a very reserved person and he sort of congratulated me . And then I continued to go on, because I had to be official and be-- to be sponsored by some official group. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the whole experience mean to you? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, it was a-- a-- I considered it an unusual privilege. Privilege is not-- it is-- it's too-- it doesn't even cover it. In Hebrew, we say azkhut a privilege that I was-- that I was there to sing at that time and to do what I felt was a, uh, the little that I could do to ease people that have come out of such a hell. And it was very meaningful to me, and then by listening to them and hearing their songs that were-- that were born under those conditions, when I came back to the States, I decided to-- to gather these-- this material, to have it rearranged, and to have it-- and to have them, uh, recorded with the-- with an excellent orchestra and chorus. 

And then, as a result of that, I was asked to-- to-- to go to many communities, as far as even to South America just to sing the ghetto songs and which was very-- 

INTERVIEWER: There is something about the children that particularly affected you. 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, we're going back again. That was, I remember, that was in a camp called Aschaw. And that was a camp that just had, I think, 400 or 500 children that I sang for. And, uh, the director, in introducing me to the children, said-- he said to them, and, of course, it was also directed to me. He says, I want you to know that you're singing perhaps for the largest audience or the greatest audience or in numbers that you've ever sung for in your life. And I was wondering what he meant, because there were only about 400, 500 children. He says because each one of these children represent-- one child represents 100. So that was a very meaningful, and it sort of brought the whole picture back to me. How many of our young-- how many young children were lost during that-- that period, and amongst those children more probably future, great geniuses or, uh, poets or scientific people. And even if they were just plain, good Jews, they were lost to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you explain to us about how you helped the refugees out of the camps in convoys? What was your role in helping the refugees out of the camps? 

EMMA SHAVER: Well, while I was there, I felt that I would like to partake or to be a part of one of these illegal transports, you know, that we had, that the Bricha arranged. And being that I was, uh, uh, in the-- connected with the people from the Sochnut from the Jewish agency, and they were-- we had a sort of a legal department and a group that was doing illegal work. There you will find they're making all sorts of stamps and-- and passport, visas, and all that sort of thing. And periodically, there was a convoy leaving from-- from Germany to go to France to-- to go on to-- on one of these illegal boats that went to Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: To Palestine then. 

EMMA SHAVER: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: It was Palestine then? Was it Israel already? 

EMMA SHAVER: Yes, it was still Palestine, yes, because it was 1946. And, uh, I asked, uh, whether-- if I could, uh, be a part of one of these transports. Of course, I didn't want to be in any-- to jeopardize the transport, but if they could find something for me to do, I would want to very much. And, uh, they agreed to it, and so I had that experience too, of going out on one of the transports that left from Munich and then another group would leave from-- left from another part, you know, and we had to meet at certain points and from there go further, and then cross the-- the, uh-- the, uh, uh, from-- from-- from the American Zone into the French Zone, and then from the French Zone on to-- to Marseilles, you know, where they-- where they got off. Well, that, too, was an unusual experience for me, you know, because, uh, to see how the-- how they were told to travel with no baggage, nothing. Just to take one thing along, and sure enough, everyone would carry along all their whatever, their belongings. And it was a-- it was a very interesting experience. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. We stop. We change cassette. 