CREW: And if you'll just watch the question, if you would. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you give us your name, your place of birth, and the country in which you were living at the outbreak of World War II? 

ABE: My name is Abe Fleicker. 

CREW: Just one moment. 

ABE: My is Abe Fleicker. 

CREW: We're going to have to stop because we're getting an awful lot of noise upstairs. 

ABE: Yeah, they're walking, I guess. 

CREW: Time. 

CREW: OK, we'll just begin again. Wait five seconds please, then anytime. 

ABE: My name is-- you want to ask me? 

INTERVIEWER: What is your name, your place and date of birth? 

ABE: My name is Abe Fleicker. I was born in Poland, outside of Warsaw, a little town. The September, 1929. 

DAVID: My name is David Fleicker. I was born in Poland. 

CREW: OK, now. 

DAVID: My name is David Flecher. I was born in Poland, in a small town near Warsaw. And my age is-- I was born in 1928. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you-- were you living in this town at the outbreak of the war? 

ABE: Yes. The war broke out, uh, that was exactly, uh, September 1, 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was your last street address, do you remember? 

ABE: Yes, I still remember the address. The address was, uh-- 

DAVID: 19-- 

ABE: 1400-- Pilsudski Place. Which that was the name of the Polish Marshal. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember something about the early years of this period? Can you tell us a little bit about it? From the time that the Germans came into Warsaw, into Poland. 

ABE: I remember exactly, because in September, school was still out, because it was the vacation. And we were supposed to start going back to school and the war had broken out the 1st of September. And it took us like four weeks till the-- the war was over. 

And then I was in fourth-- I graduated in fourth grade, I believe it was. And I picked up my books and school started, you know, after the bombs, you know, quit falling. And after they-- they occupied, they took over the country, school opened up. And the kids were supposed to go back to school. And I did. But when I showed up, they told me I couldn't go to school anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened after that? What happened when the ghetto was established? Can you-- how soon after this-- 

DAVID: Well, the ghetto wasn't established right away. 

ABE: Took about a year later. 

DAVID: Yeah, that's about right. 

ABE: About a year later. It was 1940 when they started to getting the people together, and they put it in certain neighborhoods. 

INTERVIEWER: Can the two of you give us some background as to-- 

DAVID: Well, of course-- 

INTERVIEWER: --as to the events that led to this, and what happened after that? 

DAVID: Well, of course we couldn't go back to school anymore, because no Jews were allowed, no Jewish children. And after a while, they started taking us to work, like rounding up all the Jewish kids, most of them. 

ABE: Mostly for clean-up. 

DAVID: For clean-up details and-- 

ABE: Snow removal. 

DAVID: --snow removal. 

ABE: And it got to be ridiculous, because they would be grabbing everybody in off the streets. So that's where they formed what they called the Jewish, eh, community. And they agreed to supply so many people each day so they wouldn't have to grab the same guy every day. So they could still go ahead and work, whatever their endeavor. 

But this what-- every other day or so, you could stay home and do your job while you gave away most of the time to the Germans. This way that was more orderly, because they supplied as many as they asked for. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when the ghetto was established? 

DAVID: Well, when the ghetto was established, everything stood still and people couldn't go out to work. And everybody stayed in their house, if they had a house. And of course, soon after this, people started starving to death because they didn't have any food. They couldn't bring it in and-- 

ABE: What they did-- what they did, they just marked off certain streets. And said from here on, this is the area inside. No Jew can cross. And of course, when he couldn't cross to the other side, that was the place where he made his living. 

And he couldn't make a living by staying at home. So whatever supplies they had in the house, of course, that-- after that was gone, people started getting hungry. 

DAVID: They started taking chances going over to the-- 

ABE: They started taking chances. 

DAVID: --other side. 

ABE: And anytime he was caught crossing the line, he was shot. Even if he wasn't noticed at the time, but if somebody informed that he had crossed the line, they came later and took him out of the house and-- and shot him. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to the two of you and to your family during this period of time? 

DAVID: Well, at that time, he was on the street, actually. I think it was playing or something. I'm sure you didn't do anything else, so running around. He was picked up by-- by the Germans. Of course, put on a truck. And quite a few more-- 

ABE: Well, actually, I didn't think they were going to pick me, because I was-- you know, I didn't think they would take youngsters. So I was safer to run the streets. But the older boys, you know, had been taken away already. So they went-- they already came down to picking up kids because most of them were already employed in certain industries, you see. 

So when they-- when they caught me, I thought they would just let me go back home because I was too young. Well, anyway, my mother kind of followed, and they put me on this truck. And she realized that they're going to take me away. 

And she started crying, of course, and I told her to keep away from me, because I saw what they did to people if they didn't want to release their children, so to speak. And I was afraid they were going to shoot her. So I kept telling her to keep a distance. 

And sure enough, I saw the guard pick up the rifle to go after her. And about that time, the truck pulled off, and that's the last time I ever saw her. And they put me, of course, in an ammunition factory. And we started working there. And they put me at first on the night shift. 

I had no idea what night shift was, because I wasn't used to being up at night. And if they caught you sleeping at your job, of course, they shot you right at the-- on the spot. So we had lookouts. When they-- somebody would come or a guard would show up, you know, they'd give you a sign, make some odd noise, you know. That was the sign that somebody was coming. Of course, you'd wake up and go about your work. 

And I was-- that-- I was the only one-- all by myself then. I didn't know anything about my family, because I'd left-- still left everybody at home yet. The following day, I noticed they brought in a whole bunch of new people. And they all lined up to go through the showers and take their clothes away, you know. They give you new ones. 

I saw my brother coming through. And I was glad to see him, because I was first time-- only for one day I was all by myself, but then when I saw him, I figured, well, the two of us, we could get along a lot better that way. 

INTERVIEWER: This was in Poland. 

ABE: In Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: At a labor camp in Poland. 

DAVID: At a labor camp, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they pick you up? 

DAVID: Well, I was hiding in the attic. And of course, there was a certain, uh, guy, a Polish man, he knew there were some Jewish kids hiding in the attic. And he, of course, told the Germans and they came up, rushed us, and took us away. 

When I came into the same-- so happened they put me in the same camp, which I saw him down there. And they put me to work, but-- of course, I didn't tell them that I had a brother down there, because usually, you know, it-- 

ABE: When they found out you had, you know, a relative, they'd separate you-- 

DAVID: They'd separate you. 

ABE: So from that day on, they didn't know we were brothers. And that's how we could stay together. And another thing, they could always separate you when they needed their detail. They would always count off so many and cut off at the-- here. So this way, we all stood-- always managed to stay in the same row. So when they cut off there, either they cut in front of us or the back of us, but somehow we always manage to stay together. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened after that? 

DAVID: Well, after this, of course, I went to work at the same night shift, day shift, whatever, like 14, 18 hours a day. And then, of course, we came home in barracks, cold barracks. I mean cold. 

ABE: That's right. There was no heat at all. 

INTERVIEWER: And I brought myself-- remember, a bathrobe from home, which it didn't last long, because they tried to take it away from you. 

ABE: But it kept us alive for a while, because with the cold-- 

DAVID: And as far as I remember, I was doing a lot better than him because I was older and I could handle things a little bit better, I think. And-- 

ABE: And he took care of me, actually, you know, because the big guys would beat up on the little guys-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

DAVID: --was down. 

ABE: Everybody was taking care of himself. So when you had somebody like a brother, you know, it was a lot easier, because they wouldn't fool with the guy that you see you had two of them instead of one. 

DAVID: And then at the-- at that place, that particular place, I made a particular thing. What do you call it? That part at the end of the-- on the rifle. 

ABE: Wasn't the muzzle [INAUDIBLE]. 

DAVID: Yeah, anyway. And some guy came up and he says, why don't everybody steal a piece of a gun? Do you remember that? Of course, I stole the part of-- 

ABE: The sight. 

DAVID: The sight, that's right. And another guy got another piece, another piece of-- 

ABE: And we started getting them together in the warehouses. 

DAVID: And then there was a couple guys, a couple kids. They couldn't have been more than 14. 

ABE: 14, yeah. 

DAVID: And they assembled the gun. And they worked in the basement, so if-- 

ABE: In the warehouses. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES]. 

DAVID: Out of the way places, so I mean, there was no Germans coming there, because it was like a warehouse. Finally, they discovered there was a gun. 

ABE: It was a-- a sort of-- a sort of-- like a sort of-- 

DAVID: It was like half of it. You know, not a whole-- 

ABE: But it worked. 

DAVID: So they found out who done it. Of course, they found out only those two guys, because they were there, those two kids. 

ABE: At the time. 

DAVID: At the time. And then they started asking them who done it. Who helped you, who stole all those parts? You couldn't have done it yourself, because you couldn't have get to that particular department yourself. Well, of course, they knew that they're going to get shot anyway. So they told them, nobody but us. Remember? 

ABE: The way they tortured these two kids that I'll never forget. They took this [? Hawk, ?] that was his name. 

DAVID: They broke his arms. 

ABE: They-- between the doors. And they slammed the door on his arms, on every part, separate. After the limb was broken, and then they took his legs and they did the same. And he was still alive. 

We looked at him. And then to make sure that everybody saw that what they did to him, when the shift changed, they had both shifts come by to this spot where they took them against the wall where that-- remember that warehouse. And they put him against the wall. And he was like a sack of potatoes already, you know. All his bones were broken, but he was still alive. 

He could still-- I could see his mouth was moving and actually begging to be shot. And that's when they shot him. But not before-- so both shifts were assembled. There's the night shift and the day shift so that everybody could see what they do to a guy that would attempt and steal a gun. 

It was while we were working in this ammunition factory. And we stayed there for almost two years till the Russian front started getting closer, moving from the-- after Stalingrad. They started moving westward. So one day, the order came that they had to close down this factory. Then they closed the factory. They marched us to Auschwitz. 

And when we came to Auschwitz-- we didn't know where we're going. First of all, they marched us-- uh, but then they took-- about halfway. And then they got some trains somehow. And they put us on a train. And I remember in the early morning, when we looked through those cracks in the cattle car, I saw the stat-- well, we didn't know where we were going. 

I saw the station, the railroad station, and the sign of the railway station said Osweicim, which in Polish is spelled different. It's Auschwitz. I felt kind of bad, because everybody knew what Aush-- everybody knew, because they were always threatening. Yeah, if you think it's bad here, we'll send you to Auschwitz. 

After almost four years of suffering, I finally made the big house. And that kind of was sad, because we could see the Russians already moving. The Americans are coming from the other side. And the war is coming to an end. And here, they took us to Auschwitz. 

DAVID: But-- but you remember there, when they took us to Auschwitz. Remember the selection? 

ABE: Well, yeah, that's why I was coming to. 

DAVID: Uh, he was-- of course, he wasn't old enough. But I mean, he wasn't old, he was 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

ABE: Well, that was everybody-- 

DAVID: But he was short. 

ABE: I was young. And they took all the kids right away. They took them away. So I mean, right away, I couldn't go through the-- 

DAVID: Yeah, so the-- the point is, the kids, because we knew right away. So I took him and I put him on my-- you know, he was standing up on my feet, sort of, to give him another inch. 

ABE: Plus they-- they switched around so I wouldn't stand behind a six-footer. 

DAVID: So he wouldn't be, you know, 

[INTERPOSING VOICES]. 

ABE: And then we had-- remember the barber? He was an old man. An old man. He was 40 probably at the time, so this was an old man at the time. 

DAVID: I think-- he had a beard. 

ABE: And he had a-- a pair of barber clippers in his pocket. He always carried the clippers. And the-- in lineup as we're marching to the selection, he clipped my hair so I'd look more like a human being, you know. And I pinched my cheeks and made me look alive, so maybe they'll pick for work, you see. 

But I've noticed that they were picking the big guys, and then the kids they'd take away to a separate place. And of course, the women are separated right away. 

DAVID: Yep, mm-hmm. 

ABE: So as I come through the line, I found out that there was this famous Doctor Mengele, he was doing the selection. And as we were-- an in single file, you had to go right facing, straight in his eyes. And I noticed he-- he never said anything, he just pointed the finger, you know, left or right. And when you notice, when the big guys were standing, the healthy, so to speak, you knew you were still going for some kind of a detail work. 

But if you saw when they took you to the older people and the young kids, so you knew you were-- you know, that you were going to die. And of course, I-- you know, marching in that line, you can imagine the thoughts. When I already see my friends lined up on the other side. 

DAVID: They started started changing places all of a sudden. 

ABE: And I noticed when they're already on the truck, then the kids are trying to wave to their-- some of them even had their parents with them. Like a father, remember [?Brink's?] son? And you see that happen. And I'm waiting for this one point of his finger, you see. 

And he comes up to me. He never said anything to anybody. All of a sudden, he asked me how old I was. And I was always 16, of course, because we had-- we didn't have any identifications or anything. We have a number and that's all. 

He says, can you work? I say, yes, sir. And he reached over and he felt my muscle. And he put me to the-- where the bigger guys were. So I knew I had that made already. And then after this selection, of course, they needed some people in Germany. 

So we only stayed there like a 24 hours. 

DAVID: Overnight. 

ABE: Overnight. So we got through the selection and they put us the next day on a train again and they sent us into Germany. That's what I remember about Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you came to Germany? 

DAVID: Where did-- where did we land? 

ABE: The first place we came to Germany-- 

DAVID: Heusenstamm wasn't it? 

ABE: No, Weinheim. 

DAVID: Weinheim. 

ABE: Somehow, they always found a place for us that-- 

DAVID: At the stone quarry. 

ABE: Quarries. The quarries, they were building like underground shelters. And of course, they used the rock to build the roads. 

DAVID: And of course used to chop the big rocks, made little ones. And at one time, I was sitting, chopping my way at that rock for about two weeks. You can imagine how much rocks there were, like the size of this house. 

And a guy comes over, he says, how long you been chopping that rock? I said, I better not say for two weeks. And I say, well, about two days. So I took the whip and hit me right over the mouth. 

Now, nobody could have done this in two days. If I'd done it in two weeks, that means nobody could have done it in four weeks. But when I said two days, he still hit me, because I should have done this maybe in a day. 

ABE: He always looked for an excuse to-- to hit anybody anyway. So it didn't make any difference. So they put me in these quarries. And I noticed then, in those quarries, I wouldn't last too long. 

Of course, I got-- they put him in the tunnels with the air hammers. And they had no masks on. And the guys would start spitting blood. And-- and they died after about 3 to-- 3 months, because without any fresh air and all this dust accumulated on the lungs. And I could tell how they were wheezing, coughing, and-- and they put me in-- I was picked for that spot. 

So I figured, how do you get out of this deal? Every morning you had to line up, so many people went for this detail, so many went to this detail. So I-- I just didn't report for work. I just hid myself before the, you know, marched them off. And I didn't report. 

So they marched off anyway and I was left inside the camp. Like I disappeared, you know, they thought, you know, somebody escaped. Well, there's nowhere to escape. I had no place to go. 

So after the detail left, I had to report to the office, actually, to the inside office, which was run by our own prisoners, you see. If I don't report, I don't get, you know, my ration, which was not much, but that's all we had. You know, they served about once a day after you came home from work, you know, for the next day. 

DAVID: For the next day. 

ABE: Yeah. So I walked into this office and I says, here I am. I didn't go to work today. Everybody looks at me, it's funny. What do you mean you didn't go to work? I said, no, I didn't go to work. I says, now do what you like. I says, I know I'm going to die over there in the tunnels. I says, I'd rather get shot over here, so do what you like. And then they-- 

So I noticed they started-- this was our own people-- they started whispering and deciding what they're going to do. But every morning at 10:00 o'clock after the details left, the SS man in charge of the work detail was-- remember his name? Schmidt? Fact that he was in Dachau after the war. He comes in and takes the report. 

And when they open the gates, they-- you always hear the noise. They salute and they-- and they give him the report. Then he rides in in a bicycle, you see, and he goes straight for this arbeitsamt, which is the labor office. 

DAVID: Labor office, yeah. 

ABE: He comes in-- so I noticed-- so I was just thinking, if he would see me in this office, the first thing he would ask, what is he doing here? And if they tell him that I didn't report for work, that would be it. 

So I'm just waiting to hear the sound of the gates, because it wasn't too far from the office. And it was summer, the windows were open. And I'm waiting to hear for him to come through. But when they whispered, I thought I heard that they were going to turn me in. 

So when the gate opened up, the window was open, and the barracks stood on stilts like a regular-- it had those stilts. And I dove through the window. It must have been, oh, I don't know, about 8, 10 feet above ground. And I dove underneath the barrack. 

And they started going under the barracks. So I ended up in the latrine barrack, because I figured this is the place that won't be too pleasant for them to look. So I hid out there till the SS guy took his report and left. 

So after I heard him leave, I had to report again back to the same office. So I came through the office, and everybody, look at him. They're having fun. He-- he saw him coming and he escaped. I said, what'd you expect me to sit here and wait for him to shoot me? I guess want to do it, that's all right with me. 

So they make me stand and hold my, you know, fingers against the wall, you know. And every once in a while a guy comes in and hits you in the back, you know. He's trying to act like the Germans do already, that keeps his job. So they-- again, they started talking and I was-- in the beginning, they were-- they meant to throw me in. 

But for the second time, they figured, well, let's give the kid a break. So I had to promise them-- they're going to put me in a different detail. And I had to promise them that I'll never escape from work again. If I would, they personally take me to Schmidt. And I promised. And I became a good worker after that. And I stayed alive. And that was already like towards the end of the war. 

DAVID: Yeah, he was a pretty good worker. I don't think I was. Because I was oversleeping. Because, yeah, the more we worked, lay down, yeah, because it was two years later. I didn't-- you didn't eat so good, so you tried not to do as much as you should. 

Like, of course, when you work with the shovel, for instance, I used to have my foot on the shovel, you know, kind of resting, and watch the guards. You know, I watched them, they watched me. And I watched that particular guard. He was looking someplace else. But one guard behind me was watching me. 

ABE: This was an open pit quarry. He wasn't [INAUDIBLE]. 

DAVID: So uh, I took a look at him, and oh my god. So I started working. He takes his rifle and points at me. So I say, you're not going to shoot me for this. He pulled the trigger and I feel a piece of [INAUDIBLE] and it goes through, like, my nose. It didn't hit me. 

ABE: Hit the wall, I suppose. 

DAVID: At the time, I didn't know. Maybe I thought they hit me, but nothing to it. There was a next guy, he was studying to be a rabbi. Remember [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE: Yeah. In fact, he's still alive today. 

DAVID: He is. 

ABE: He was-- he was-- yeah, he was from a rabbinical college. And we were working on those loads, you know, loading rock. And the-- and the-- and the lorry fell off the track. And you really had to put your shoulder into to get it back down, because the lorry was loaded with rock. And it was tons. 

So everybody was-- put in a shoulder. But he thought that he didn't lean the shoulder as much as he should. So he put the rifle-- 

DAVID: He pointed the rifle at him, he shoots him. 

ABE: Straight at his belly. 

DAVID: He stays and works like nothing happened. 

ABE: I heard a shot, like I says-- and he's still standing there. So all of a sudden, I says, I think you got shot. He says, no, I didn't. 

DAVID: But the blood. 

ABE: But he looks down, the blood is coming, oozing out, you know. No, that was this other guy. And blood comes oozing out of his stomach. And when he saw that-- 

DAVID: Then he laid down. 

ABE: --then he fell. 

DAVID: He laid down. 

ABE: So after that, so we offered to take him to the hospital, you know. They had a hospital, so called. So, you know, it was like what? What? Three miles. So he says, no, I'll take him myself. The guy that shot him. And he was a Ukrainian guard that, you know, worked for the Germans. 

DAVID: Well, he wanted to finish him off-- finish him off, but we begged him, we'll take care of him, we'll heal him. 

ABE: So anyway, he told him-- he marched him for three miles himself. You know, and he held his stomach. And he fell, and he got up, and he kicked him, and he hit him with his rifle butt, affect-- and he got to his hospital-- hospital, you know, they just laid him down there. 

The bullet went in here and it came out here, you see. And the screams that we heard from that place where he was at, because it was hurting. They hadn't given him any kind-- 

DAVID: Yeah, at that time, we knew that you shouldn't give a guy water, you know, to drink, because he's got-- 

ABE: He was hollering for water. 

DAVID: He was hollering for water. 

ABE: And after about four weeks, it healed up. 

DAVID: I mean, no doctor, no anything. 

ABE: No doctor or anything. And he's alive today. I wish I know where he's at, 'cause I saw him right after the war. And that was because he didn't-- he didn't think that he leaned his shoulder enough to the load. 

And that was that already like where-- before the-- 

DAVID: Maybe like '44. 

ABE: Yeah, the end of '44. Yeah, there I suppose in '44. There again, an order comes that the Americans are pushing too far. We have to evacuate again. In the meantime, I catch the typhus fever. 

DAVID: Yeah. 

ABE: And they take me into this hospital. 

DAVID: This room, not hospital. 

ABE: They called it the hospital. And I noticed that people are dying. I mean, all around you. And typhus is like this. The fever hits you. It lasts for about a week. 

And if you come through the fever and it doesn't affect your brain, you can make it. So I'm laying over there and some guys get crazy from the fever and they scream and they holler and they fight and they throw things at you. They don't give you anything. You just lay there in the filth. 

They had to put me on top on the upper bunk. I didn't-- you have to go, you know, to the bathroom, so I had to throw my-- I couldn't walk and I couldn't even crawl. I have to throw myself bodily out of the bunk, because I figure if I'm going to lay in this bunk, I want to keep it as clean as I can. 

And threw myself to the floor. And from there, I crawled out and back. If it wouldn't be for him, I couldn't have made it, because he-- after work, he was always sneaking, you know. And I don't know, he didn't catch the fever, but he was there every day, and brought me whatever he could. At that time, you can't eat even, you know. 

But he brought me-- I believe one time, I don't know who he finagled from a German some sugar. 

DAVID: Sugar. 

ABE: And he brought it to me. And this, I suppose, gave me some energy, you know. For over a week, I didn't eat. And then when I got out of that hospital, when you already-- you know, the fever leaves you, you're beginning to feel better. But you get hungry. 

You know, there's nothing to eat. In fact, you chew your hands, your nails to the bone. Whatever he could, he brought. But he couldn't bring-- 

DAVID: But still, it wasn't enough because he was so skinny. I mean-- I mean, he could stand-- his legs were like-- like a finger. Then after this, again, we're pulling out. So the head man of the SS comes now and he says, whoever don't feel good, we're gonna-- 

ABE: Have transportation. 

DAVID: We're gonna have transportation. There was a horse and buggy. 

ABE: Yeah, put him on the-- 

DAVID: And all of a sudden, I see some people ready to go down-- he says, I'm going. I say, no you don't. I said, because they're going to knock him off. And you'll see, in no time, they'll kill him. He said, no, the sick people are gonna-- they're going to ride. 

ABE: That's what they told the sick people, ride [INAUDIBLE] 

DAVID: So I got to hold of him-- hold it out to him. And that was when we started working already. A few minutes later, took a machine gun and machine gunned down that whole-- that whole ward. Of course, I had nothing but trouble with him because he couldn't work. So I gave him that big stick like Moses. You know, it was-- 

ABE: The stick got to be too heavy for me. 

DAVID: So I held him up. 

ABE: So he-- you know, we were walking at night, because they didn't-- we were marching through towns, you see. They didn't want the civilians to see the-- 

DAVID: Yeah, to see what's going on. 

ABE: So they marched us through the night. In the daytime, they rested us in some barns. So he is dragging me along the highway, you see. My knees are bleeding. And another friend of ours from our hometown runs by us. And he sees him-- of course, he don't know who I am, because I didn't look like a human being anymore. 

So he looks at him, he says, why don't you leave him alone, because you know, you save your strength. He says, if you're going to do that, you know, you're going to die. You can't drag a guy all the way. Because we were marching like 30 miles a day-- night. 

So he says, can't you see who he is? He says, no, who is this? This is my brother. We lived in the same courtyard. We were raised together. The man lives in Cleveland, Ohio. He was here visiting me last year. 

He said, oh, this is Abe. We can't let him die. So he grabbed me, my one shoulder, and he took me on the other, and that's why they kept up-- and I kept up with him. And I was begging them, really, to leave me aside, because I felt so much pain. It would have been so much easier to get it over with, because you have no idea. These legs just don't do nothing for you. 

DAVID: Yeah, actually you didn't care much. 

ABE: They don't want to-- you know, I have to lug my legs. And that was-- 

DAVID: Yeah, then we walked again and again and again. Finally we went to a resting place, you know, on a big farm. There was a barn. 

ABE: A barn, yeah. 

DAVID: You can imagine 2,000 people-- 

ABE: In one small place. 

DAVID: --in one barn. So I was still-- I was still OK. 

ABE: I don't know, he kept his strength up all the time. 

DAVID: And I walk in that barn, I say, oh-oh, he'll never make it. 

ABE: Because if you would-- if you would stay in the barn and they'll trample you to death. 

DAVID: They'll trample you to death. 

ABE: So you had to get to the top somehow. 

DAVID: So when I got inside, so I says, Abe, just stay put right here. And I get upstairs. 

ABE: In the loft. 

DAVID: In the loft. And it's already full. Because down there, you could have gotten saved, because nobody will trample you. So there was-- So I take a spot. And there's a Russian near me. I said, look, see this spot, it's mine. And I'm going to bring my brother up. 

He says, I can't do that because they'll kill me, you know. The-- 

ABE: Somebody else will take the spot. 

DAVID: So I had the little-- homemade little knife. I said, look, if they won't, I'll kill you. That spot better be reserved. I come up, it was there. Finally, I couldn't get him up. You know, I couldn't lift him. Finally, we got up there. 

ABE: You know, we had to get way up there. 

DAVID: So anyway, the next morning, he gets something in his mind. Hey, how about digging in in that hay, and all the guys leave, we'll stay in the hay. Maybe we'll-- we'll get away. I say, how can you get away? First of all, you're in a German town. What are you going to do? 

He said, well, let's try this. I said, no I don't. And I said, on top of it, I bet you they're going-- they're going to go through with bayonets, taking the pitchforks into the hay and see if-- There was quite a few of them, wasn't there? Of course, they killed them-- I think they burned the barn after-- whoever was inside. 

ABE: Anytime you had an idea, they already thought of it. 

DAVID: They already thought of it. 

ABE: Like when we were walking on the highway, there was always a culvert came up. So a lot of guys would jump off the road and get under the culvert. Now, they got to be so that they never even bothered to look in the culvert anymore. They just took a machine gun and they sprayed the culvert with machine gun fire. 

So if somebody was there, so he didn't make it. If he wasn't, so then you wasted a few bullets. 

DAVID: A lot of people ask, why didn't you run away? That was in Radom, you know, we start marching toward Germany. So I had, of course, the blue and white-- 

ABE: Striped. 

DAVID: Blue and white striped clothes on. And I see one guy-- and I also had civilian clothes under me, always just in case. 

ABE: Pair of pants anyway. 

DAVID: So I see-- while marching, I see a guy had some shoe polish. In a civilian clothes, you had a star of David. Even his civilian clothes, he had some-- so he took a shoe polish and he starting polishing it of. 

And I see him, I've already got two pair of pants. And I started unbutton my pants and doing the same thing. My pants, already, I've got them in my feet and I almost fell down because I didn't take them off all the way. And I said, I'm going to make-- 

ABE: He had civilian pants underneath. 

DAVID: I'm going to make a break at the-- right in the city. You know, a lot of people on the sidewalks. And all of a sudden, one guy gets away. The guard saw him. He took the machine gun and shot him on the spot. 

ABE: But the guy right after got away. And I saw him walking-- 

DAVID: After got away. Another guy-- 

ABE: Because the guy had the sunglasses, the guard. You see, we were walking in the middle of the street. And in the sidewalks, the guards were-- you know, every four or five feet there was a guard. The sun was bright, and he had noticed the way he put these shades down that he might not notice. 

As soon as he passed him, he walked right by-- off-- stepped onto the sidewalk. And as he stepped onto the sidewalk, he had all his seams already opened up from the prison clothes. And he just laid his prison clothes away and he had a pair of civilian pants and a shirt on. 

And while we were watching-- and I could see him way in the distance. I could still see him walking. And he had never turned around, and he kept walking and walking. 

DAVID: Especially the guys who lived in that town. You see, to me that town was strange because I was from a different the town. But he knew right where to go. 

ABE: And he got away. And-- and the guy is in Israel today, and we always talk about it when I have visited him a couple of time. 

DAVID: But otherwise, there was no way to get away. You couldn't-- you'd get to the wires. Of course, you got electrocuted. And out, going where? So. 

ABE: But there's another thing I wanted-- I wanted to mention about Auschwitz. It's hard to explain what Auschwitz was like. I wasn't-- I was only there, like I said, through the selection. 

Everybody was talking about, before I got there, you know, there's a death camp and nobody comes out alive and all that. And I says, my goodness. But when they took us in there, all of a sudden, I see good looking guys, fed good, they look great. And they are prisoners too. 

I said, my god. I said, where I came from, everybody looked, you know, like, you know, dead. And here, they look good. They must be feeding them good. There was a swimming pool right there in Birkenau. This is where the trains came in. 

DAVID: It was a mud hole. 

ABE: It was a swimming pool. 

DAVID: Yeah, we went and swam in it. 

ABE: And they let us go in swimming even, because it was in July. It was a hot day. Then I look on this side, I see a stadium, a regular stadium. And all of a sudden, two teams come out in uniforms, and they play soccer. And you see thousands of prisoners around. 

DAVID: Of course, you also saw the orchestra. 

ABE: Yeah, and then you see an orchestra marching down the street. Brass orchestra with the batons twirling. I says, this place is crazy. This is not the death-- I mean, look at the people, the way they look. And they're enjoying themselves. So it's a Sunday afternoon, they're playing soccer. 

And a little further down, if you looked good, you see the naked women and children waiting in line to get into the crematory. And the screams you don't hear because this orchestra is blazing away on the top of their lungs on the brass. 

DAVID: Or you saw truckloads of kids, you know, they're hollering mother, mother. 

ABE: Yeah, but you didn't hear them through this music, you see. And these guys come in, they're called the Kanada. These are the detail that clears the trains. And I asked them, I says, what is going on? What is happening here? 

He says, why, don't you like us? You know, they're always funny, you know, these guys. I says, what is it over there? What-- what is going to happen to us? So he shows to us the crematorium, which was surrounded by a live fence, you know, shrub, but you saw the chimney only out of the place. He says, you see this place over there? 

He says, this is Kaminska's Theater. Kaminska's Theater in Poland was a famous theater in Warsaw. He say, you're going to get a front seat there. Funny. And-- and like I said, but I only stayed there like 24 hours. And then I said to myself, if I'll ever get out of this place, I'll have a chance to survive yet. Because what I saw, I didn't believe. It wasn't even happening. How could it? 

Finally, after 24 hours, I notice we went through this selection and they put us in a different train. They tell us that we're going to Germany. And he's with me, and I says, we're going to make it. And that was already July of '44. Right? 

DAVID: That was close to liberation. 

ABE: And the war ended in, for us, in April of '45. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened after the barn? After you-- after you left the barn? 

ABE: They took us, finally, to another place again. 

DAVID: To another camp. 

ABE: That camp, we were supposed to take care of the air force, build the bunkers for the airplanes. Hessental. 

DAVID: Hessental, right. 

ABE: Outside of Stuttgart. And it wasn't, you know, they run out already of SS people, so they convert the Luftwaffe, Air Force guys. They put on SS uniforms, because we are only supposed to be taking care by the SS, you see. And these guys don't really know how-- they're not trained. But they learn quick what they're supposed to do. 

DAVID: Do you remember when that girl got hurt one time, and all of a sudden, they're knocking our barracks and take us out-- 

ABE: Yeah, I was there too. 

DAVID: Four guys to take her to a hospital. 

ABE: To the base hospital. 

DAVID: To the base hospital, because we get into the air force place. 

ABE: Yeah, but the funny part was that we used the sled that we buried our dead with. You know, it's winter and it's cold and it's ice all the way. And we go up to the station. And they promised they're going to give us some extra food. 

DAVID: Something to eat. 

ABE: So we're taking this sled that we carried the-- you know, the dead bodies to the graves. And we take it all the way up to this base hospital. The base hospital, all the air force officers, you see. 

So we figure, this way, we're going to get something to eat. I mean, something's going to be around there to pick up. And while we're taking her, she's trembling inside. She's scared of us, because, you know, prisoners. And she was an air force woman. That's what she was. And the guard that's taking us-- 

DAVID: Remember this guard-- Frank, a Polak. 

ABE: No he was a-- a Lithuanian. 

DAVID: Or a Lithuanian or Ukrainian. 

ABE: And at the time, it wasn't so good for him either, because he didn't have even enough to eat, as a guard. And he found out that, you know, the Germans, so that's what they promised him. So he told them, he says, if you guys get over there to this hospital, and if you see anything, I'll look away, organize, and then we'll split. If we could steal something for him, you know-- as a friend, you gotta deal. 

So while we were getting to the hospital and we delivered this patient-- 

DAVID: Everybody looks. 

ABE: --and she looks-- and she looks. And she was afraid all this time. And we're hanging around, you see, we're not leaving, because there's nobody to give us orders to leave because we have only one guard here. And she lets out a scream to get these murderers away from her. 

And they take us back and the-- and we told Frank we couldn't do anything, you know. She was screaming like we were trying to kill her or something. And they took her into the hospital, you know, and then they give him the orders to take these prisoners back wherever they came from. 

So that night, he was mad so he told us, let's break into a German farm. And we broke in that night-- 

DAVID: [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE: --because as always-- you're always going to find in a German barn or whatever, you'll always find some food. They always, you know, had it in the storage so it won't freeze. So we broke in and we took it and we loaded up that sled, and we came to the gate and he let us in with some of it. And they took-- he took the rest. 

That was at that place after we got from Auschwitz. And we stayed there till like, uh, 48 or 45 The beginning of the month, right? And then they take us to Dachau. 

DAVID: Yeah, we got liberat-- liberated in April 29. 

ABE: 29. They take us to Dachau from there. And in Dachau, it's already a death camp, because you see, they have no details anymore. You can't go out. They don't need no people anymore because they're bringing from all over. And that's where the Hungarian people were, where they settled. You know, they brought them straight from Auschwitz to Dachau. 

So there it is, a place that only took like 3,000-- 30,000 people to begin with. We're already like 200,000, 300,000 at the time. We didn't even know how many were in there. And people were dying. 

And there again, there was a detail. They'll give you something extra if you bury the-- if you haul the dead bodies away. He volunteered. So-- 

DAVID: Well, so were you. But the point was, I-- I could never touch a dead body. I would do that kind of work. I told them that time, I said, I'll dig. I'll do anything. But I don't want to put them in the grave. 

We got-- we used to take them, like, 10, 12 at a time. You know, you used to wait a couple days till they accumulated, because, see, you couldn't take one or two. It was too-- uh, too much of a job. You had to wait until -. 

ABE: Besides, you put all of them in one grave. You didn't have to put them in separate. 

DAVID: Remember, we-- we went-- remember that hill down there we used to dig those ditches? 

ABE: Yeah, but that was frozen ground. 

DAVID: It was frozen, but-- and I mean, it was something. 

ABE: In winter, the ground is frozen. You have to dig three feet before you hit-- 

DAVID: So we used to dig the holes just enough, you know, to cover it, because we couldn't go any-- you know, you couldn't-- you didn't have the equipment to do it. 

ABE: Shovel didn't do it, and we had to do it with picks only. 

DAVID: And we made a few prayers for them. Remember, [INAUDIBLE]? 

ABE: That's right, you even said Kaddish too. 

DAVID: And we used to-- they used to, I didn't touch it. They used to throw them in like-- well. 

ABE: But you see, the stiffs were layer there and they were frozen. 

DAVID: They were frozen. 

ABE: Now, if they were frozen, you never know in what position a man died. So when he came up like this, he'd take up room for three bodies, you see. So we tried to straighten him out so we can stack more on top. 

DAVID: We used to transport them right through the city, remember? A lot of German people saw us. 

ABE: Yeah, but they didn't know, actually, because they were covered up in straw. 

DAVID: And right through, we'd get. And everybody watched us and nobody said anything. 

ABE: And that came, like-- and that-- just about night, at the end of April, we hear the news came across that Roosevelt died. All of a sudden, we found out. We never heard any news about this country, but they said-- figured it's another rumor. 

But over there, when you hear a leader dies, you figure the whole country dies, you see. You see, that was-- Stalin dies, everything changes. Hitler dies, the whole thing would be over too. So the Germans now, if Roosevelt is dead-- 

DAVID: You remember-- 

ABE: --it'll go their way again [INAUDIBLE]. 

DAVID: --I got kicked-- I got kicked one time by an SS man. I said, why, what did I do now? He says, Roosevelt is your uncle. 

ABE: Or something like that, it's always-- so the war's already-- you know, if Roosevelt died, I said, oh, he the war was going already that good. Now they give you the news that Roosevelt died. Now, Roosevelt died, you know, Hitler will take over the American half for sure. 

But not realizing they still kept up, you know. The fact is, the panic over there at the time you wouldn't believe, when we looked outside. So again, we have to move from Dachau. So they decide who is going to stay, because they can't move everybody. There's too many of us. 

So they decide who they're going to leave for the Americans and who they're going to take out again to the transport. So they said, they're going to leave the Americans. They had British there. They had Dutch. They had French. Had every-- so they figure, these people, give a break, and we'll keep them there in Dachau. Now, Poles, Jews, Russians, Slavs-- 

DAVID: Hungarians [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE: --they'll go and transport again. And that was like eight days before the war broke-- ended. And they put us in a train and they take us out to-- from Dachau to Munich is only like 15 miles, not more. And they-- the train stopped overnight at the substation in Munich. 

And the British bombed the city that night. And we had open cars, but there was barbed wire on top. So they pull us on a side track on that station. They bombed that station that we got up in the mor-- the cars actually jumped track-- track from concussion. And everything is dead around you. 

We woke up in the morning, we're still alive. I don't know how. The fact is, they had to plow under the whole station and get this all rubble together. That's why the-- the Olympics in '72 were held in that spot. 

DAVID: Yeah, but the-- don't you remember, an airplane dropped above 

[INTERPOSING VOICES]. 

ABE: No, but this was still in the station. But then they still managed to get an engine to pull us out. But every time they pulled away for a few miles, the fighters, the American fighters in the daytime, would come and-- 

DAVID: Machine gun bomb. 

ABE: Machine gun the engines, you see. So in eight days, we didn't make more than about 30 miles. 

DAVID: No. 

ABE: And finally, they had to-- because at one time, you see, they didn't know who was in the train, you see, and they started dropping bombs. And a lot of our people got killed. But as soon as they dropped the bombs, we opened-- you know, they tore the doors open, we started, you know, pouring out. 

DAVID: Well, they killed the -a third of us. 

ABE: Because they didn't know who was inside. But as soon as we came out, I saw the pilot come back and-- 

DAVID: And wave their wings, they made a mistake. 

ABE: --you know, lift his wings. He was sor-- I could see his face. Of course, the Germans had no defenses anymore then. I mean, they were just-- they came and went anytime they wanted to, the fighter pilots. Because they were experimenting at the time with the jet already, the Germans. But they couldn't stay up in the air too long. 

Every time a jet went up-- and that-- from that airport place, the first time I ever saw a jet. And I didn't realize what it was because I didn't see the-- what do you call that-- the propeller. And then he would go up, try to go up and fight these-- 

DAVID: Fighter planes. 

ABE: --the fighter planes. At the time it was the Tigers. And you could see almost when he's going to bail out, because he'd get shot down as soon as he hit the heights. And after that, they marched us-- like I says, they put us on a side track. 

There was-- they couldn't get any more locomotives to pull us. And we stayed there. And then we started hearing the artillery. And we start hearing the machine guns. And then, of course, everybody says, no, the Americans already close, or the Russians, whoever is coming. 

And I said, ah, that's all rumors. We've heard these rumors for years. And I says, eh, they're probably still having practice, you know. 

DAVID: Don't-- don't you remember, when that guard came over to me and asked me-- and he told me, said I was a good guy, was never-- 

ABE: Oh yeah, then we started taking off his SS insignias. 

DAVID: And he told me to cut off his-- 

ABE: SS insignias. 

DAVID: --SS insignias. So I says, I'm not going to do it. Because was scared to death. 

ABE: No, he was-- that was in the train, inside. 

DAVID: [INAUDIBLE]. 

ABE: You see, there were 60 on one side, 60 on the other side-- 

DAVID: And a machine gun in the middle. 

ABE: And a machine gun in the middle, and four guards inside. 

DAVID: Four guards, was it, yeah. 

ABE: Four guys inside our car. 

DAVID: They had the whole middle with a machine gun, plus those two pieces. 

ABE: And besides, they had towers on the outside. There was guards up there. This was the last day of the war, mind you. They had so many guards for us. 

DAVID: So anyway, at that time, I see something riding by a motorcycle, a different uniform I had never seen before. 

ABE: It was like 100-- about 100 yards from the trench. There was the highway here. 

DAVID: So I figured, this was something going on. But before this, do you remember, he was asking for a couple of strong guys to go pick up packages? And I was right there. 

ABE: You're getting ahead of yourself. You see, that guy showed up about three days before the war ended. A guy shows up in a civilian suit. And he talks nice. And he said-- and this was a man from the Swiss Red Cross. 

DAVID: Red Cross. 

ABE: Speaks good German. And he tells us he wants to help us. And we didn't realize that he had made a deal with the officer in charge of this train that he wants to deliver Red Cross packages to us. If they allow to give us one package, he'll every guard three packages. 

And this officer, on his own, made the deal with him. So he comes to the train and he's asking for volunteers to come to bring these packages towards the train. Believe me, there weren't to many that could walk, because we were sitting already, like eight days we hadn't eaten nothing. 

And we kept the dead bodies with us, the ones that died, because we figured, in case they're going to give us some food, they'll give us for the full amount that we had. So if they will say, oh, 10 dead, they'll give us 10 less portions. So we keep them all inside, you see. 

Even the guards are sitting here and there's some dead guys laying against the wall, you see. But We kept them. So finally-- but he was a little reluctant because he figures, now, he is going to give you something, you'll try to take it, and they'll shoot him for it. So he tells them, you must have a trick up your sleeve now. 

He says, no, I'm not a German. He says, I'm from the Swiss Red Cross. And he went over there. All of a sudden, he brings a loaf of bread. 

DAVID: Well, it was boxes here, remember? 

ABE: And then they start bringing the boxes. 

DAVID: Yeah. That was-- we didn't know what it was. We ate everything. 

ABE: You know, you open up a box. You don't know. There was a pack of cigarettes in the box. There was a-- a can of cheese. 

DAVID: And dry milk and chocolate. 

ABE: And vitamins. And everything you could put into a six pound package. So that was three days before this war. And after that, everybody's just sitting there, you know, figuring, well, what's going to happen now? 

All of-- but these guys still act like guards, you see. They give you three times a day that you have to get out of the train for your conveniences. And them when you couldn't get back on, they still hit you with the rifle butt, because you're not sitting in the station, you're sitting on a tie track. And from the ground to the car is a good five feet. And for me, I couldn't get up, because then you fall back on this crushed rock laying there. Till he gives me a boost. 

And these guards are still-- when the order comes to get back in the train, they still shoot and kill and hit and kick. And I said, my god, if the war is like they say and it's already ending, how come they're still acting like that? Don't they know? 

Well, that was the order, I suppose. And they didn't know anything else. That's the only way they were supposed to do things, you see. So finally, one morning, I see this officer in charge, you know. He walks down and his-- he had his wife and family with him. Of course, he pulled out from Dachau with us, with his whole family. 

Of course, he didn't know where we're going to end up, because he could see the war is coming to an end. So he comes up and he-- he tells us to gather around, remember? He wants to give a little speech. 

And there again, we started saluting, you know, like you stand at attention when you talk to a German and all that. He says, no, you don't have to do that anymore. That's-- I said, oh, there's another-- if you don't do it, the guard will stand there behind and shoot you. But he didn't. 

So he says, no. He says, I tell you, I'm going to tell you something. He says, this war's coming to an end, he says. And if you people will behave, we are not going to put up a fight. We're going to just hang out the white flag from the train. And we'll give up. That was like 10 o'clock in the morning. [INAUDIBLE]. 

DAVID: That was in the morning. 

ABE: Early in the morning. Yeah, sometime, before noon. And he said, so what I want you to do is just go back. When you close the train, and I'll give up. And he says, and they'll come in and you'll be free. Still didn't believe anything he was saying, of course. 

And we go back in the train. And they locked the train up again. And nobody knows-- from the outside, you wouldn't know what's inside. And that's when you saw the first patrol coming on that road. 

Now, he didn't know who was in there. So he radios back, or whatever, they bring tanks. And they set them up straight for the-- for the-- and there must have been-- we had 10,000 women attached to us at night we didn't know we had, you know. There must have been-- about at least 50,000, 60,000 prisoners are on this train. 

And this tank starts shooting at the train. So when we heard shooting, and these guys are sitting inside, they're already cutting off the insignias. So whoever could, like he went-- went for the door, you know, rammed the door open. And we started piling out. 

And that's when the guy-- the patrol that came from the road, the highway, started coming towards us, and saw they had-- they made a mistake. They didn't know who was inside. In fact, the first one I saw had tears in his eyes. 

And they kept coming closer and closer. And then they gave the order for us to come out. And there was always somebody that could speak-- there was a Brooklyn boy already spoke Yiddish to us. And there was an officer that could speak Polish, you know, from-- American boys. And-- 

