[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: You may have to go and tell them to keep quiet. I've lost track of the time. 

CREW: It's 3:43. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, that's better. I thought it was 4 o'clock. I was hysterical. 

CREW: We're rolling tape. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Start. 

SUBJECT: My name is Esther Kerner. I was born in Poland. My maiden name was Esther Fund, pronounced in Poland, Fund, F-U-N-D. 

I studied in Czechoslovakia and Prague. I got my medical degree. I got my dental degree. And during the war, I worked as a physician. When I came to this country, I didn't know English enough. I couldn't take the state board in medicine. 

I went back to Tufts Dental School to get my dental degree, and now I'm a working a dentist. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me about your family, Mrs. Kerner, in-- where you were born, in Poland, the circumstances in which you lived, and why you went to Czechoslovakia to study. 

SUBJECT: My parents were merchants. We were two children. Because in Poland was a so-called [POLISH]. Jews couldn't study medicine. Only one in hundred were accepted. So I went to Prague to study medicine. My brother went to France to study engineering. 

Then the war broke out in '39. I went back to Poland thinking that I can be a help to my parents because I studied at the German university, and I was a member of the German Jewish Culture Group. And I was sure I can help my parents in Poland. 

I came back to Poland in '39. The Russians came. I immediately enlisted in the Russian hospital, and I worked as a physician there till '41. In '41, the Russians had to leave. They were defeated by the Germans, and I remained. I remained in that part of Poland where I was born. Then the Germans came. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us the name of the town, again, where you were born in. 

SUBJECT: Yes the name of town was Nadworna. It's a small town in the Ukraine now, before it was Galicia. That part of Poland belongs now to Russia, and it's incorporated in the Ukraine. The name of the town has changed, and it's called Ivano-Frankivsk. 

In '31, when the Germans came, there were very few Polish physicians left. They herded up of all people, all Jewish people, and we were at that time-- we had the summer home in Yaremche. So it was about 40 miles from Nadworna. 

In that small resort, there were about 200 Jews. The Germans came and surrounded everybody, and we had to move from-- they made that village completely Judenfrei. We were all brought back to Nadworna where they built a ghetto. Nobody could get out or could come in. 

They made a small hospital, because there was a raging typhus epidemic. I was the physician for the hospital. My parents and I could live in that hospital in one of the small buildings, and every day, they would take 20 to 30 people away for prepared graves. 

INTERVIEWER: You, um, you said you couldn't get in or get out of the ghetto. 

SUBJECT: Nobody could get in and out except a physician. I could get out to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were there walls around it? 

SUBJECT: No, no. There were not walls, but there were policemen standing around, and there was some barbed wire. But it was-- there were trees. In the beginning, we had very small rations to eat, about 600 or 800 calories per person. After the hunger become a little bit-- got a little bit worse, people with strip the trees from the leaves and eat the leaves. And whenever a stray animal came in, it was also stripped. 

The hospital had a little bit better food, because people would die every day, 10 or 15, of typhus, and they were taken away, together these people alive. And one day, they took all the remaining people, including my parents, to a train, and nobody came back. I was taken out from the hospital by the Germans to be brought to a small city where I had the duties of a physician and a dentist. I had two degrees that time already. 

Also, when they had some veterinary problems, I had to help out, like a difficult birth for one of the animals. I was there for about three quarters of the year. I was the only Jew, and the pharmacist was a Jew too. 

In the evenings, I would go to the pharmacist and to his family, and we would sit and speak. One evening, a man came to the pharmacy, a Ukrainian, and said he just dug a few graves, and because nobody died that day, there would be new sets of graves out for us. 

I had strychnine, and I wanted to take it. And before I took it, a Ukrainian came in and told me he was a patient of mine from before. He told me his brother is very sick, that I could go and help him. 

I told him it doesn't make any sense to help him because I will be killed tomorrow, so he should better look for another physician. And I told him the name of a Polish physician who was about 40 or 50 miles away, and that he is still practicing. 

He hesitated and asked me to wait in the pharmacy. After two or three hours, he came back-- it was winter-- with a sled. On the sled was plenty of hay, and he said if I want, I could go under the hay, he could keep me in his bar with the cow, if I would consider living there and treat his brother, because it was impossible for him to go 40 or 50 miles, and he wasn't sure was that the Polish physician will come. But under one condition, that nobody should know, of course. 

He put me on this hay. I came to his house. His wife and daughter didn't know about it, and they went immediately into the barn. The barn was very small. It was only one cow. And it was a little opening on top where he kept the hay and the straw for the winter for the cow. 

It was a small ladder. He would go up once a day to take the straw or the hay back for the cow. At that time, he would bring me food. He would milk the cow in summer twice a day, so I would get food twice a day. In winter, he would-- in summer, it was three times a day, because the days are longer, but in the winter, it was only twice a day. 

I had European cloths. A peasant in that part of the city of the village, they wore only a white long shirt, and in winter, they would where sheepskin coats. He had two sheepskin coats, so he gave me one for the week that he wore on Sunday. And on Sunday, he would give me his coat that he wore every day, so I would have his coat so I wouldn't freeze. 

The milk that he brought me, I had to drink immediately, because if I didn't drink it after a half or two hours, it would freeze if it was very cold. The barn was quite small, and the roof was a thatched roof, and also very narrow, so I had to be in a sitting position or laying position. I was there for 14 months. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you treating the brother? 

SUBJECT: No. I didn't treat the brother, because he was afraid if I treat the brother, the brother would know, And if the Ukrainians would know that the Jew is still alive, they would-- they would kill him, and they would announce it to the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: He was willing to let you stay, even though-- 

SUBJECT: He was willing to let me stay risking his own life and the life of his family. One day, it was an announcement by the Germans that they heard there are a few Jews in the village, and they would go from house to house looking for Jews. If the peasants don't give up the Jews, they would burn their houses. 

The peasant took his wife, his daughter, his cow, and left for three days. I was left in the barn. He asked me not to commit suicide because the Earth was quite frozen, and he couldn't dig a grave. So I promised I wouldn't do anything, and whatever will be will be, not to endanger his life. 

The Germans came with dogs, went from house to house. They found one man in the village. They came to that house. The dog went up the ladder. I like dogs, and we had always dogs at home. When the dog came, I petted him very gently. The dog didn't bark, came down, and the German said, nobody's here. The whole house is empty, so let's go away. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean the dog-- what kind of dog? 

SUBJECT: A German shepherd. 

INTERVIEWER: Came up a ladder, saw you, and didn't indicate-- 

SUBJECT: Didn't bark. Didn't bark for some reason. I immediately stretched out my hand. And I don't know why. He just didn't do anything. And he went down, and the German said, nobody here. What else? Then his wife had a dream that if she saves a human being, she would go directly to heaven because said Maria appeared to her, and so on. 

It was-- she was a very religious woman. I was there for 14 months. Then I heard that the Russian army is coming nearby, and the Germans are getting defeated. The Russian peasant who kept me went one year to school only, but he was a very, very intelligent man. And he said, it's impossible that the Germans will win against the Russians because the Russians have a special will to fight, and they know what they are fighting, and it's their territory, and they will fight till the last man. He kept me-- as I said, I would have committed suicide 100 times. 

INTERVIEWER: You were about 35 years old at this point? 

SUBJECT: I was born 1906, and that was '39. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So-- and you were for 14 months hiding under the hay. 

SUBJECT: . Yes 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing to do. 

SUBJECT: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing for you to do. 

SUBJECT: Nothing to do. Nothing to do. There were a few mice that would come. He gave me once a wooden toothbrush. And one of the mice liked the toothbrush, so she would know. And I wouldn't mind, and because it was something-- I didn't speak for 14 months. 

When he came to give me the food, he would steal it, in the beginning, from his wife, and he would bring it under his arm, a piece of bread, or some potato, and some milk. I had milk enough, as much as I wanted. Sometimes, a chicken would come. It would come up, and she would see had a little roast, and she would lay an egg. So I could have egg. Raw, of course. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you-- what sanitary facilities did you have? 

SUBJECT: That was horrible. I-- he gave me a pot, and at night, when nobody was there, I would go down the ladder, and I would put it under the feces of the cow, and I had to mix it so it wouldn't be visible that it was the human excretion. 

After we heard that the Russians are coming, they came to the village. 

INTERVIEWER: Let me just ask about-- 

SUBJECT: Menstruation? 

INTERVIEWER: No, I hadn't thought of that. But yes, well, that and getting clean, just generally. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I didn't wash myself. I had one cup of water I could use as for brushing my teeth, or drinking it, or-- washing was not necessary. 

INTERVIEWER: And in the menstruation? 

SUBJECT: It stopped, more or less. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you did have some nourishment, so-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I had enough milk. I had milk enough. And there was no problem. 

INTERVIEWER: What was a day like? I mean, do you remember a day? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. Yeah. I was waiting for the cow to make the first sound. I was waiting for him to ope-- to open the door. He once left a little knife, and I would cut out a little hole in the thatch roof, so I can see the sun, a few rays. And then I would hear what people are speaking around, especially in spring. 

And I would hear the bells of the church, and I would hear what also people are speaking. And I would repeat to myself songs that I knew in different languages. I would recite poems. Once he gave me a piece of paper and a pencil, and I started to write down, but then he took it away because he was afraid if they found it, he would be punished. And I was supposed to say if they found me, that I just that day came up. That I came up just that one day. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you stand up? 

SUBJECT: Yes. When I went down to the cow. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you were up there-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. Oh, no. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't stand? You were lying there? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Lying or sitting in that position. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, do you remember any of the songs you sang or the poems that you-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. Oh, yea. I would sing lullabies in Ukrainian, Polish. 

INTERVIEWER: How would you sing them so that you wouldn't be heard? 

SUBJECT: To myself. 

INTERVIEWER: No, so that you wouldn't be heard? 

SUBJECT: No, no, to myself only. I mean, in my mind. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, not out loud. 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, no, I couldn't. I would move my lips probably. Once, it was Easter and everybody was in church. And once, I was singing a very soft lullaby, and I forgot it-- I said nobody's there. And somebody went by, ran to the church, and told the man, somebody must be in your house because I heard some human voices. 

He came back from the church and he took away the ladder immediately. Said nobody's here. You are hallucinating, or maybe it was some bird. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER: A day. You were describing a day. You woke up with the-- when the cow moved and the-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and then I heard the-- then I waited for the milk. And then he gave me some milk. Sometimes, he would tell me a few words. The Russians are already here. The Russian are there. The Russians are defeated. And a few more weeks until we'll be all right. And just don't give up any hope. And he was just extraordinary. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you didn't speak for 14 months. He spoke to you? 

SUBJECT: He spoke to me, but in a whisper, and very slow, and just very, very few words, so I wouldn't be suspicious of the neighbors if he stays up in the-- in that-- 

INTERVIEWER: You never answered him? You didn't ask any questions? Nothing? 

SUBJECT: Once he brought me soap. And on the soap was R-J-F. And that stood for Rein Judisches Fett. I was told that it was made from Jewish people fat. I don't know whether it's true or not. But I told him I won't use the soap. I don't want any soap. I don't have to wash. 

So after 14 months, when the Russians came nearby, I decided I will leave, and I will go to the Russians, and they will do something. He gave me one bottle of oil that I could buy myself something else, because it's all that he had. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in the same clothing, in the same not washing-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I had only one skirt-- on shirt, and his winter-- 

INTERVIEWER: For 14 months. 

SUBJECT: For 14 months. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, you're a physician. Uh, weren't you concerned about disease? 

SUBJECT: No, no. I was all myself. I couldn't get any disease. I was completely isolated. 

INTERVIEWER: From him? 

SUBJECT: He was a healthy man. Why should I get a disease? 

INTERVIEWER: From dirt? 

SUBJECT: No, from dirt, you don't get a disease. 

INTERVIEWER: Or skin problems? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing. Nothing happened. I was very pale white and had a very long black hair at that time. And the hair grew and grew and grew. And after I left-- I had to leave at night because I had to leave, so I hid my clothes that I came in-- in his house, buried somewhere. 

He took it out, and I left his peasant clothes, and he gave me a basket and bun, bottle of oil, and I left at night so none of the neighbors would know that I left his house. And I was walking, walking until I came to another village. And they told me the Russians are there, and it's a big Russian hospital, a field hospital. 

So that was during the day time. I came to the-- I asked for the director of the hospital, who was-- it was a military hospital. And I told him I am a physician. I would like to work in the hospital. 

He said, fine. Our hospital is not very well-equipped, but if you want to work, that's fine. Come tomorrow. So I was waiting for a few minutes, and another physician, a Russian came out and asked me who I am, and so on. Then I told him. 

He said, look, you are a Jew, you survived. The Russians will you say you probably collaborated with the Germans because no Jew survived in this vicinity. So you will be sent in the first line to the front, and you will be killed, either tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. Doesn't make any sense to be a survivor and not to live longer. 

The Czech is coming through Romania, and after a while, they will come. If you really want to do something, you go to Romania, Czernowitz was the name. I listened to him. I knew he was sincere. And I started walking. But because I didn't walk for 14 months, my legs swelled, and I really couldn't go too far. But anyway-- 

INTERVIEWER: How far was Czernowitz from where you were? 

SUBJECT: Maybe 100 miles. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you slept a lot in the 14 months? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I slept all that time. What else could I do? I slept most of the time. I got some rides with some peasants and some Russian military things. And it was quite very, very unpleasant. Some of the Russians so hungry for women, when they gave me a ride, they gave me plenty of alcohol to drink, and they wanted different things. 

I told them always that I'm going to visit my daughter who has syphilis, and she got the syphilis from me, and so they shouldn't touch me because they might get infected. So that was easy. I came to Czernowitz. 

I stood on the street. I didn't see any Jews. Czernowitz was known for being a Jewish intellectual city. Then, I was really desperate. I thought, I'm the only surviving Jew. And I had guilt feelings. Why did I survive and nobody else? And it doesn't make sense to live. I stood there for a long time, not knowing what to do. 

Suddenly, I saw a middle-aged gentleman with a black doctor's bag. So I went to him and asked him-- I speak very great German. And asked him in German whether he's a physician. He said yes, but what do you want? I said, I'm a physician too. 

I looked like a nun, you know, white face and long hair. And he said, I am very busy now. I have to go to see a patient, but my house is here. Go up, and my wife will let you in. I went up. His name is Babish. I went up and told her that her husband told me to wait there. 

INTERVIEWER: What condition were you in? Were you clean? Were you dirty? Were you? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I was dirty, but the face was clean. The hair was shiny, fat, and long. I think I had it in braid. My feet and legs were very swollen, and they almost-- I had some shoes. I don't remember what kind of shoes I had. Maybe the peasant gave me some shoes, and I had that 1 liter of oil. 

And I told her that her husband asked me to wait. She wouldn't let me in. She was afraid. And I told her, look, I don't have typhus. I don't have lice. I am not clean, of course, but I don't have any disease. 

What do you want? Said I would like a handkerchief and whether I could take a bath. After a few minutes, she agreed. I took a bath, and then I couldn't get in the shoes at all. And I was waiting. 

Then the physician came and asked me who-- he wasn't sure that the story is true. He asked me, who do you know in Czernowitz. I had about 10 or 12 classmates in the medical school from Czernowitz, and I knew all the names. So I gave him three or four names. 

He called up the first. And when the first heard that I am here, he said, wait a minute. I am coming immediately to take her to my house. Then he called another one, and the response was the same. So he decided I will stay with him. And I told him my reason to stay is to wait until the Czech army comes a little bit nearer, and I would like to enlist, because I couldn't bear to do nothing, and to start having a normal life. 

INTERVIEWER: Was Czernowitz under Russian-- 

SUBJECT: That was under Russian occupation already, and it was a big-- Czernowitz guarded zone. And the Czech army was already coming quite near. It took about two weeks until the Czech army came. 

That physician and his wife really didn't want me to go to the army. He said, what for? You are going again to the front lines, and they had very heavy casualties, the Czechs that time, because the Russians put the Czechs in the first line, and they were in the second line. 

I went to the Czech army, and I asked to be enlisted. And they took me. And then with the Czech army, I was going back to Czechoslovakia. I was that time an assistant to the surgeon until we came to Prague. 

What it was in the ghettos are things you probably heard a thousand times, and it's no-- no use-- no reason to tell the same story again and again. So if you want some details, I could tell you, but I don't think it's necessary. That is-- 

INTERVIEWER: What I would like to know about the ghetto was what they did with the children? Children cry. Why didn't young teenagers break out of the ghetto? That's what I find very perplexing. 

SUBJECT: In our ghetto, we were only maybe 200. I don't remember too many children. I remember only one boy, 10 years old, who came to me and asked me, does death hurt? Does it hurt to die? And I told him, no, it doesn't hurt at all. You just sleep. 

And as the pharmacist who was being taken away asked-- told me, he said, he said he just took strychnine, and he would like me to close his eyes and to wait until he dies. With strychnine, the death doesn't take too long, about half an hour, because it's a paralysis of all, but the brain works for just the last moment. So I was sitting with him, holding his hand, and when he died, I closed his eyes, and put. 

In the hospital where I was, we had little opening to the basement, and then we knew that the Germans are collecting 20 people. So nurses and the few physicians who went there, went down, and we were hiding. So they would take whoever was there. And one day, somebody told us that we are hiding there. 

So Germans came, opened the openings, the door, and we all came out. He looked at the watch and said, oh, it's 8 o'clock. I have orders to shoot only till 8:00, so you can go. We will do it next time. 

INTERVIEWER: You said about the one 10-year-old boy, but were there teenage boys in the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Not too many. Not too many. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you witness any behavior of young teenagers? Here in this country when we have so much, you know, we're concerned about our teenagers. They're rambunctious. They're-- to constrain them like that-- 

SUBJECT: There was nothing to constrain. Everybody was depressed. Everybody was afraid. Everybody knew that tomorrow, it's their turn. And it was horrible, because the men had to go to the day before to dig the grave to put in lye, so the bodies will disintegrate immediately. 

And there was no-- no exit. Nothing that could be done. I went out. I was one the privileged. I went out to the pharmacy, and I could exchange sometimes. Something I would take out-- I don't remember, but maybe-- once I took out my panties, and I got 10-- 10 coffee beans. 

I knew that I was infected by typhus, and I knew that they will get typhus in 21 days. So I told my father I still had a few ampoules of medicine. Not against typhus, because against typhus, you didn't have at that time anything. So I told my father-- [INAUDIBLE] was the name of that medication-- to give me an injection if he thinks that I am collapsing completely. 

And also, I got these 10-- 10 beans of coffee, so we ground it and asked him, if I am completely out, to make a cup of coffee. Maybe that coffee will help. But I survived. I weighed only between 75 or 80 pounds when the ghetto was dismantled, and I was taken out with the Polish and Ukrainian population. 

I got a small room where I had my-- my office, so-called, and I had to treat the German-- the Ukrainians. They would pay with two potatoes, three potatoes. Before that, my parents, before they went to the ghetto, I was still a physician in one of the villages, and my parents were hiding in another house. 

I would at night bring them some food that I got for- I had to register as a physician, and they came to register to a Ukrainian doctor. I had to walk. Jews were not allowed to use any public transportation, so I walked about 18 kilometers, about 10 miles. 

Then I came to register to that Ukrainian doctor. I was used in Europe to shake hands. And I stretched my hands. We don't shake hands with Jews. That physician, his son is in Boston now, also as a physician. And of course, I have no-- we went one place where-- he's a dentist in Boston. 

When I studied in Tufts, he came. Also studied in Tufts and started speaking to me in German. And I told him, please, don't speak to me in German because they think that you are Jewish just like I. So that stopped him, and he never spoke to me again in German. But that's beside the point. That's not important. 

INTERVIEWER: Ghetto life. How did people, before they were taken away, how did they-- I mean, you were-- you were-- 

SUBJECT: It was such a desperation and such apathy, that it didn't matter anymore. Before they took them away, there was one day he put about 100 people in the one room, standing one after the other. 

I asked for the man who was in charge of the German whether would let me just bring a few pots that the people could urinate, and he wouldn't let that. There was a physician with me, and she was taken away immediately for some reason. I don't know what. 

When I was let out, I asked that my parents could come with me. Said otherwise, I don't think I would like to go. I will go with them. He said, you have no right to ask anything. You can-- we decided you stay here, and that's it. You have no rights. And he put me then in that little village. 

INTERVIEWER: There was no difference in respect for someone who was a professional helping? 

SUBJECT: It was seem important, and I had a few German degrees. I had the degrees, traumatology degree and in medical. And so he would speak with me from time to time and ask me to sign death certificates. I couldn't sign the death certificate that said died of natural causes, because some get shot in my presence. So he said, OK. So I will shoot your parents first, and then you will sign it. 

I think most-- it's a peasant who kept me. I am in contact with him since I sent him packages. He started writing to me after Stalin died. I left my address. I have somebody in Chattanooga. I left the address there. After Stalin died in '56, or I don't remember the day, he wrote me a letter. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get him your address? 

SUBJECT: I left-- before I left him, I gave him the address of my aunt in Chattanooga, Tennessee, just in case. And since that time, I sent him every year, spring and winter, packages, materials, and sweaters, and things. He writes what he wants. 

He send me presents. Embroidery, sayings, , little things. That last package, I'm sending Monday, I got for Easter, Easter eggs made out of wood. He died but his daughter, who knew later on everything, she's in contact with me. 

But still, I write under my married name, not under my maiden name, because if the Ukrainians would know that he kept me, they would still today be very unfriendly to them. Unfriendly's not enough. 

INTERVIEWER: As a physician, perhaps you can explain how people survive the kind of deprivation that they did survive in the camps, drinking, having no water, drinking their own urine for-- for, uh, for lack of water. A lot of people would like to understand. 

SUBJECT: It is a will to live. And you do anything, because you still don't give up hope. You think tomorrow may be better. Tomorrow may be better. One day, when I was let out from the ghetto, I brought back something. I don't remember what. I had a very good Polish friend, and she would give me some food that I would keep in my cheeks, like a pat of butter, or maybe a cookie, or something. 

And then I brought in something for my father. I don't remember what it was, and my father was very disappointed, and said, what I would really like that you bring me is a tallis. My father was religious, but he didn't put on a tallis every day. 

But in the ghetto, he started getting very religious. He would pray every day. And one day, when we knew it is the end, and I had enough strychnine for the whole family, I begged my father and mother that we take it all together and have it over with. 

Then, my father says, that's a sin. I don't want it, and I can't take it, and I don't want you to take it. All my persuasion was not enough. They just didn't take it. I wish they would have, too. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that you hid food in your mouth. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and mostly coffee beans or peas. Sometimes, a piece of butter. Sometimes, , when the German guard saw it, he would ask me to swallow it, just in spite, so I shouldn't give it to anybody. 

INTERVIEWER: But that seems like such a minimal amount of sustenance. 

SUBJECT: It was not more than 600 or 700 calories. It was impossible to outlive. It was-- it would mean the ghetto, just six or eight weeks more, everybody would had been dead of starvation. 

INTERVIEWER: People talk of-- there's a great deal of discussion about lack of resistance. And I thought perhaps you could explain as no other-- perhaps could-- about the effect of hunger on your ability to function. 

SUBJECT: I think the hunger was-- I don't remember that that was such a big thing. The big thing was my father was a so-called Judenrat. Judenrat was an elite of Jews who had to say who is going to die tomorrow, and who is going to be segregated, and so on. 

And when my father didn't-- couldn't do it, they took a few other people from the Judenrat, hanged them, and we had to go and to look at it. I didn't go, but my father had to see what to do. When we were headed up to go to that Nadworna, there were about 200 people, and some people said, well, I can't go. I have to take my tools. And the Germans would say, wherever you go, you don't need any tools anymore. 

I had a few First-Aid things, and he said, well, you may take this. You may need it. And then he asked me, take your parents and tell them to bring a horse and a wagon for people who can't walk. 

And then he told me, tell your parents to make it very slowly. Then the 200 people went to Nadworna. Now my parents didn't come back in time, because it was a hint that they shouldn't come back. He just wanted to save my parents and me. There was a time where I hid them in the forester's home, who was very, very nice to us, and he also endangered his own life. 

There was few really good people that did things that not even close relatives wouldn't have the courage to do it. But there were people who believed that Germany must be defeated, will be defeated, and the Russians will come. 

INTERVIEWER: And you said the hunger was not the greatest factor, yet I hear over and over again that people did very severe things for an extra slice of bread. 

SUBJECT: That was in a camp. I don't know-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, no in the ghetto. In large ghetto, for example. 

SUBJECT: Maybe they were in big ghettos. In our ghetto, it wasn't so bad. Food was left over from the hospital with people who couldn't eat anymore. Some other people would come and would lick the plates. But I don't-- that didn't leave any impression on me, the hunger, but left is a taking out of people randomly and knowing where they are going, and where they're being shot. 

I had an aunt and three nieces and nephews in Stanislavov. When I first-- when the Germans first came, I was still in Stanislavov. The Germans said, would the physicians should come to one place. All the intellectuals-- lawyers, engineers. 

I was one of them that didn't want to go. They took all the people, and they never came back. Then in Stanislavov, they made a very large grave, and they shot everybody. My aunt and her children were shot, but she was not dead. At night, she came out from under all the dead, and she was a little bit dizzy and dazed. 

And she walked for about two or three days around-- of course, there was no Jew around, and no Pole or no Ukrainian would take her in. So after three days, she was again taken, and that was the end. That I heard from a Pole who knew her. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know of many people who crawled out of these mass graves? 

SUBJECT: Only my aunt that I know. 

INTERVIEWER: When they took the people out, did you see them take the people out? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you choose not to go where they had asked all the doctors and professionals to report? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. Probably some instinct of self-preservation. I knew already in Czechoslovakia when the Nazis came. I had some German friends, and they knew what they were doing in Germany with Jews. So I was a little bit more cautious, and I didn't think that anything good would come if they want to have all the intellectuals. 

One day, when I was out already, working as a physician, they called up and said they need a few physicians to go to Elbrus Mountains. This far, far in Russia. That was in the beginning, when they had already the war won. 

Then my parents were still alive, and we were not in the ghetto. That was in the beginning. And I said maybe I'll be volunteer to go to the Elbrus. And speaking to my parents, we decided, it doesn't make sense. I had a friend, a man physician. I asked him whether he like to change with me. I would stay here, and he would go to Elbrus. 

He went, and he was shot the next day. It was also-- they wanted to ferret out all physicians just to be sure. 

INTERVIEWER: We hear a great deal about the abuse by, uh, physicians, German Nazi physicians, of camp inmates. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Of um-- do you know about this? Do you understand it? Do you know how this-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. It's one woman, a Polish woman, who was used by Mengele to make when Heydrich was killed in Czechoslovakia, and he died. The German physicians thought that they didn't do enough for him, and they wanted to see what was really the cause, whether is the dirt-- whether the dirt from the street made the infection. 

And they took a few hundred people, cut their legs in pieces, and put in dirt, and whatever was on the street, and waited what will happen. One of the women was treated this way, and she's a Polish woman, a Christian woman. She the a cousin of the Polish dentist who lives in Boston. 

Her name is Jimbinska. Through some Jewish organization, she was brought to Beth Israel, and they tried to treat her, and she's back now in France. That is the only woman that I know who was used by Mengele. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't-- I'd like to understand, just clarify this a little bit. Heydrich died how? 

SUBJECT: I think it was a bomb. He was in a car, and it was a bomb in the Czech resistance. Heydrich was a German-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, I know who he was. But his leg was opened up? 

SUBJECT: Yes, his whole body was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: So what was the purpose of the dirt? I don't-- 

SUBJECT: To see what kind of infection will be. At that time, we didn't have antibiotics. We had sulfur. So they treated them sulfur and these other things to see what it could have been, because the physicians in Germany were also afraid that Hitler may say you didn't treat him right. And Mengele wanted to see, as a physician, what can be done. 

INTERVIEWER: So he used human beings to-- 

SUBJECT: He used human beings, cut in pieces, and did all the same injuries that that were done to see whether they will survive. 

INTERVIEWER: What infirmity did this Polish woman who was helped here in Boston-- what infirmity did she develop from this experiment? She couldn't walk, what? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I know she-- she walked, but she had open wounds and so on. Now maybe, she's better. But there was a time when she came here that was in the middle '50s. I don't know-- I know she's still alive in France. 

And then there's this Irene Jimbinska. She's here in Boston. She has an office. She would know details. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, what other attitudes did you discover about the Nazi's medicine, treatment of people, attitude toward-- 

SUBJECT: When I was in the Russian army, when I enlisted, we had prisoners-- German prisoners of war. I was in charge of one part, and there was a young German physician who was badly injured, and I had to treat him. 

I went, and I told him, I'm Jewish, and I'm going to treat you. He said you can't. I will come back, and we will still kill you. We will still be in the war. Then I asked my superiors that I can't treat him. He should take somebody else, because I-- just beyond my endurance to treat German prisoners of war. 

I couldn't treat any German prisoners of war. Some non-Jews took it over, and they treated him. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were on this truck, or car, or however you were traveling to Czernowitz-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --and you told these soldiers or people that you had syphilis-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think they believed you? 

SUBJECT: I described so vividly all the symptoms of syphilis and how horrible my daughter suffers in the hospital. So they believed me. And I spoke-- I spoke Russian. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. When you were lying under the hay in, uh, the Ukrainian town-- it was Ukrainian? What were your concerns? As a physician, what were your concerns about your own deterioration? 

SUBJECT: I didn't think of myself. I was thinking, who will be alive, who will come out, and whether it's worthwhile, the whole thing, to live, because I really terrified that no Jews will be alive. 

INTERVIEWER: But the man obviously thought that you were going to kill yourself. How would he get that notion, that he kept making you promise you would not? The Ukrainian man who was feeding you was worried you would kill yourself? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How would he know that you felt that you might? 

SUBJECT: Oh, he knew that that I was horribly afraid of torture, and I knew if they find me, and they will torture me and ask me who kept me for so long. 

INTERVIEWER: How did he know this about you? 

SUBJECT: No, no, if-- if they were to have found. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. But how did he know you were afraid of torture? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I told him. I told him. I'm very-- I told him, I'm very much afraid of torture. 

INTERVIEWER: This was in the beginning. 

SUBJECT: That was in the beginning, and I had a little strychnine bag. I sewed a little pouch, and I had it on my-- 

INTERVIEWER: You showed it to him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, and he took it away from me. He took it away from me and he told me, if it's in extreme, he will give it to me, but not in winter, where he can't dig a grave. One day in spring, we saw that-- that is the last day, and he started digging a grave under the cow's trough, where she got her water, but in case I have to take the strychnine. He has to bury me. He can't let that me-- 

INTERVIEWER: He gave you back the strychnine? 

SUBJECT: He gave me back the strychnine. Said, this is the day if something happens, because strychnine acts quite fast. 

INTERVIEWER: What was this day? What was this day that he-- 

SUBJECT: I know it was spring that he-- I don't remember. Days and nights came without any change. I didn't know. I knew only when the snow was falling. And then, he was also a little bit afraid, because when I was breathing, it was a little bit warmer, and that part of the roof was not as thickly covered with snow as the other part. So that was one of the signs that might have given him away. 

INTERVIEWER: I have heard about people living in hiding situations for many months, but I've never been able to perhaps have it explained how one exists under circumstances as severe as this for an extended period, like 14 months? 

SUBJECT: I was counting in any language I knew. I was counting to a million, counting backwards, count in Hebrew, in Jewish, in German, in Polish, in Ukrainian-- whatever I knew. And I would repeat it, and I would tell myself stories, and especially lullabies. I liked lullabies, and I would think of lullabies, and think of things what will happen after. 

And I thought I might write the experiences. But then I gave up, because I said, there's-- for whom and for what? And after I came out, my most unpleasant thing is I tried to suppress all-- all the best things, and I remember only the positive , things like-- like the peasant who kept me, like the Russian doctor who told me not to go to that hospital, like to go to the Czech-- to the Czech military corps, and also horrible guilt feelings of why I should be alive and people who were much more deserving to live, why they didn't live, and I why I was chosen from the whole-- not only family, because I lost everyone. 

My brother who was in France, he enlisted in the army, and he survived because he was an ordinance and came to England. Only we two are alive. From our whole family, nobody else is alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you suppressing it now? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It's the first time that I speak today, and I feel like I am naked, that I am telling things that I should not-- that should be buried in me. I know it's my own-- maybe I should have a duty to tell it. But it's very difficult to speak about it. 

Is there are some details that I never told anybody-- not my brother, not my husband. They don't these experiences, because they were not in, uh-- they were not in such circumstances. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember the lullabies that you sang? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you sing one? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, I wouldn't. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you speak a poem that you thought of at the time? 

SUBJECT: No. It's sentimental, and I don't want to. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, I'm asking because I wondered what it was that you said to yourself that kept you alive. 

SUBJECT: I said different things to myself. I was thinking of books that read and I had in my imagination, like a theatre. How the person's act, how they interact, and especially books that I read fiction, science fiction. 

I would imagine new discoveries after I come out. New discoveries of radio, some-- some race that could penetrate darkness. Some race that could go deep into the Earth. I just went with my fantasy. 

INTERVIEWER: If you're still suppressing, can I ask you a-- an impertinent question? Please, forgive me. Why did you agree to come here today? 

SUBJECT: I really didn't want to come. I spoke to Heda Kovaly and Heda Kovaly told me if I don't go, she wouldn't go. And I think Heda Kovaly should speak her story and should say it. And just in order for Heda Kovaly I did it, more or less. 

I was asked several times to tell some things, and I just-- I just refused all the time, because it's very painful. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you speak at all of this to your brother now Is he still alive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my brother is younger than I. He's alive. He has three children. We don't speak about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT: No. No, I married quite late. I married after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you come to the United States right away? 

SUBJECT: No. In '45, we came with the Czech army with my husband to Prague. At that time, my husband was in the government. He had a very high position. I was a physician in the Ministry of Defense, and we lived very happily till '48, when the communists took over. 

The day the communists took over, my husband was dismissed. He was also a very well-known politician in the Social Democratic Party. So then, we decided to leave Czechoslovakia. My husband was the Chief of the UNRRA I don't know whether you what UNRRA is. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, 

SUBJECT: And American people who were with the UNRRA they brought us their passports, and we escaped in '48, came to Germany, waited for about nine or 10 months, until we got a visa to come to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to Prague right after the war? 

SUBJECT: Yes. With the army. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Can you explain why all the Jewish ritual objects, the vast collection of Jewish ritual objects, are in the section of Prague? 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. That, I can explain beautifully. A curator of the museum, a Czech, had a Jewish wife. When the German started looting all the synagogues and taking all the things away, he went-- I don't remember the name of the German Gauleiter in Prague. My husband knows all the names. 

He told him, look, we are going to get rid of all the Jews, but at least we have to show the world what kind of culture, what kind of religious rituals they had, and I would propose you bring all the things to one place. I will catalog it, and then you will have a thing forever. And you can show the world what it was. 

The Germans agreed. He started collecting it. And we have there in that synagogue over 600 Torahs, and beautiful silver things, and the Torahs are given away now. Not one is left anymore. The Torahs are in London. 

Sent a London man, came to Prague, I think about eight or nine years ago and said, you have so many Torahs. You don't use them. I will buy some from you. The Czech government needed the money, wanted the money, sold them, all the Torahs. 

He brought the Torahs to the English synagogue, and the man who knows how to restore the Torahs was immediately hired, and he does it. 

INTERVIEWER: That's helpful. I wondered about the Jewish woman married to the Czech curator. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Before the war. 

INTERVIEWER: He was the curator of the Czech-- of a-- 

SUBJECT: Of one of the museums, yes. He was a art historian and-- 

INTERVIEWER: And, uh, did she survive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. She survived. I think she lives in London now. 

INTERVIEWER: This was an idea of the curator, not of the German government. 

SUBJECT: No, no, of the curator. Of the Czech curator. 

INTERVIEWER: So he deceived the German-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: He sold them the idea that they would prove that they destroyed the Jews. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And then what was left. My husband's coming to pick me up, and he is also a historian. So he will tell you details and names that I don't know because I just didn't pay heed much. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever hear that that Hitler had planned to build a monument in the form of a sarcophagus or some over the altar in a synagogue? 

SUBJECT: No. It's sort of a very funny story. At my synagogue is a legend that the golem is buried, and when the Germans came, they wanted immediately to destroy the synagogue. They took rags, put them in kerosene, threw it in, and put a match to it, and waited until it burns. 

It didn't burn for some reason, so the Czechs said, you see? The golem saves the Jews again. And the synagogue stays as it. Nothing was changed. The synagogue is now very-- have you been in Prague? Yeah. 

Then, the Germans in Prague in one of the places as the monuments of the composers. One of the composers was-- not Offenbach-- he had two of the same-- I forgot the name. One is Jewish, and the other one-- never mind. I forgot the name. And they told the Germans to destroy-- to destroy the bust. 

He had a very long nose, so they destroyed it, and it was Richard Wagner, instead of the Jew-- the Jewish composer. I can't remember-- there are two families. One is completely Jewish, and one is non-Jewish, and one of the ministers of the Unitarian Church has the same name about five or six years ago. If you tell me the name who was the minister of the Unitarian-- oh, you probably would know it. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Kerner, what are you left with from this whole experience you went through? 

SUBJECT: That, unfortunately, I don't believe it can't happen again. I am not sure that it can't happen again, whether here, or in Israel, or in Cambodia. I just don't believe that people learn their lesson. I believe that people are cruel. I mean, governments are cruel. 

And I just-- 

INTERVIEWER: You have no hope when you are saved by the goodness of-- 

SUBJECT: It is such a-- it is just a microscopic-- from 6 million, what does it mean? It means nothing. It's a drop in the ocean. It doesn't mean anything. And when they see all the atrocities and they read the newspapers, and killed here and and killed there, and I just don't think-- 

INTERVIEWER: Are you more religious? 

SUBJECT: No. I was never religious and not religious. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents, though, became more religious? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they became much more religious. Yes. We had a kosher home. But we children could do whatever we wanted. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt, though, that that religion gave them the hope? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Not hope, that at least when they died, they died for a-- for a cause. They died because they are Jews and maybe they will have a reward in heaven. Maybe. I don't know. But I was never religious. 

INTERVIEWER: You think it's important to be Jewish? 

SUBJECT: For me, yes. For me, it's very important to be Jewish. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because we live already for so many thousands of years, and I think it contributed so much, and just, it's my family, and I want the family to survive. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. That's it, I guess. We just ran out of tape. 

SUBJECT: Good. 

