INTERVIEWER 1: It's-- it's open-- like opening an album. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Flipping-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where is his album, incidentally? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where is your album, incidentally? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: It's here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But the other album is more important. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICS: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICS: Take them out of the album here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. OK-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wait. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Paul, can you just begin, and you can flip through the album as you-- 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Your name, and-- 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I'm Paul Davidowicz. I was born in Moldova, which is in Czechoslovakia, 1935, November 1. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Any relationship to Lucy Davidowicz? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: No, I don't think so. In Moldova, where I was born, there were a lot of-- there was a big family. I-- I tried to find out where the family came from. I think they came from Yugoslavia through Turkey, then to Czechoslovakia. But yes. 

My father died when I was three years old. That was before the war, 1938. But the war was already preparing itself, and Czechoslovakia was broken up. Part of it was-- was taken over by Hungary, and where I was living, where my mother and I and my grandparents, my father's parents, were living became Hungary. And where-- and my mother then decided to go back to where her parents lived in Hummené, which was in Slovakia now, another country. 

Nobody told me that my father died. That much I know. My mother came back from the hospital, and it was a subject that was never brought up. 

I look at this picture. This is a picture of my mother and me. This is a passport picture. I'd like you to-- like you to see this. You have it? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hold it still for a little longer. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Oh, OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you talk while you hold it? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Yes, I look at-- I looked at this picture just a few weeks ago, and both my mother and I really look happy here. But I remember when this picture was taken, and I was just-- I was very, very sad. I started urinating in my pants again here, and I wasn't feeling very good at all. Have it? OK? 

Then we went back to Slovakia, and then the war began. The first thing that we had to do-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have-- what is Moldova? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Moldova like? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: What was Moldova like? You want me to talk about Moldova? I'll talk about Moldova again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Because I-- I went back there, and that's-- I remember the Moldova that I went back to. I don't remember the Moldova that-- that I came from. The first thing I remember about the war is that we all had to put on yellow stars, and I remember that everybody in my family was very upset. 

My mother remarried, and I had another father now. I have a picture of him as well. This was my second father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were how old when you had another father? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I was five. It's two years after my father died. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1940. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: 1940. You have that? OK. 

And he was-- he was just a beautiful man. He loved me, and he really made a home for both my mother and me. For a while there, life for us was just really beautiful. 

I had a bicycle. That's me on a bicycle. And I had a dog and a car, and I was surrounded by dozens of cousins. There was my mother's family, and then there was my second father's family with aunts and uncles, and that really was a joyous life. It lasted about a year. 

Just thinking back on it. Used to go out-- this-- this picture, this was my mother and my father, and his-- my father-- my mother's sister, my aunt. This was on a picnic. I remember this picnic. 

My grandfather had a farm in Hummené, and he had cows. I remember taking the cows to pasture, and it was my job to-- we kept a kosher home. It was my job to take some part of the goose. 

Once a month, we had a goose for supper-- for yontif. It was my job to take this part of the goose. It was like-- I think the bladder, to be examined by the rabbi, and he'd blow it up. Look at it through a light. It was a nice life. 

And so-- and then the war began, and we wore Jewish stars. And I remember my mother telling me that this is something that should make me very proud because-- because Jews were very special. It's sort of my first awareness of being a Jew. 

And then they began to take-- they-- deportations began from Slovakia. Now, what happened then, I remember very clearly, there was a priest in Hummené, a Greek Orthodox priest. And the law-- a law was passed that anybody who had converted to Christianity before 1938 would be exempt from being deported. He agreed to put on the list of people who had been converted any Jew who wanted to be there, to fake the list. But he insisted that the children be fully baptized, legally converted to Greek orthodoxy. 

And so my parents chose to do that, and I was converted to be a Christian. I was-- I remember the holy water being poured over my head, and from that time, I have a vision. It was either a dream or a vision. I'm not sure which, but the whole image is very clear in my mind. This is the image. 

I'm on a meadow, and there are Jewish kids playing around me. And at one point, they move away from me, and I'm alone on this meadow. And God appears before me, and he's a mountain. And God holds in his hand an ax, and he just goes-- takes the ax over his head, and with a full swing, splits me in half. And I just break into two. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jew-- Jew and Christian? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I think it's more like killing me, like punishment. It doesn't feel like Jew and Christian. It feels like annihilation. That's what it feels like. 

I tried to be Christian, but it didn't work. The whole-- this whole scheme that was cooked up only lasted a few weeks, and then they contin-- continued to deport Jews without any distinction at all. My first memory of the horror of deportation was this. We were warned that there would be a deportation. 

These things-- these deportations came in waves. If you somehow-- I'm not clear on how it was legally, but if you survived it, then you were safe for a while again. There were some quotas that were to be met, and we went into hiding. And I remember we were in an attic of a Gentile, a friend of the family, and I saw, through a little crack in the window, Jews being herded towards the railroad station. And when this was over, we went out. 

We came down again, and all the other Jews somehow came back, that were not deported, and we were-- there were some children of us, and we went looking to the houses that people were deported from. And we went to the house of the shochet, the shochet from Hummené. He lived in a very small house. 

The window was so low to the ground that, even as a small child, I was able to look through it, and inside there was nothing but rubble. Everything was broken up, and all over the floor, there were his little books that he used to tear off tickets from to give you as a receipt for the chickens that you took to him to kill. Some were blue. Some were green. 

And I remember all I wanted to do was just get one of these books for myself. They looked very desirable, and then I crawled in through the window. I took some of the books, and somehow, then I realized that this man was taken away. 

Sometime around this point, my aunt, uncle, and their son, my cousin, were taken to concen-- were deported also and were taken to a concentration camp. And my father brought them back-- had them brought back. Spent a lot of money. 

He himself went to the Polish border. They were in a Polish concentration camp. Lublin, I thought it was. That's the-- that's the name that's in my mind about that. And he bribed guards, and my aunt and cousin were smuggled back out. And my uncle-- he was shot. 

And at that point, I knew that all these deportations ended up in the killing of Jews. I just-- I knew that. That-- the realization that people were being killed comes from that period, and that was very early in the war. It was probably 1942. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you know why-- after people were taken off, you were hiding in the attic, and then you went and looked in the houses of the people who were deported. Why did you do that? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: The only house that I remember looking at was the shochet's house, and it may be that I wanted those-- that somebody told me that the place was filled with those neat tickets that I wanted. I'm not sure. But people-- a lot of people were doing that. People were just sort of going to see the houses, the empty houses, from which the Jews were taken, sort of walking around, looking at the houses that were empty. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jews were looking-- 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Jews, yes. There wasn't looting. There wasn't looting. Nothing like that. 

In Slovakia, there were-- this is what they were doing to Jews by quotas. They were gradually deporting and emptying the country of Jews. In Hungary, where my-- my grandfather lived, in Moldova, the condition for Jews was safe. They weren't bothered. 

There were some restrictions. Jews couldn't practice certain kinds of law, or they couldn't be wholesalers. They could be retailers and things of that sort. But on the whole, it was all right for the Jews there still. 

And so my mother asked me whether I'd like to go to Hungary. A lot of the kids, a lot of the children from Slovakia who had the opportunity were, at this point, being smuggled to Hungary, to safety. And so my mother asked me if I wanted to go. And this, I remember very clearly. 

I convinced her that it was a good idea for me to go. She was very ambivalent about that, and I guess, I remember telling her, trying to convince her, that this definitely would be a safe place for me. But all along, I really-- what I wanted to do is have the adventure of the train ride because I knew I'd be going on a train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were ready to leave her? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Hm? I was ready to leave her, yeah. I wanted the adventure. Of 

Some-- I didn't think that this would last for a very long time. I just-- it just sort of felt like a-- like a fun thing to do. That, I know, and so when the train left, I was sitting on the train with the smuggler, a woman. I was being smuggled across as her son. I remember I was really filled with excitement. 

I saw the train leave and her staying behind on the platform, waving to me. We crossed the border, and we-- the train arrived in a city called Kosice which is the largest city around. I think it had around 70,000 people then. And when we arrived there, the woman, the smuggler, just took me by the hand and said, now, you just get off the platform. Look for a policeman, and whatever they ask you, you just tell them that your parents are dead, and that you don't know where they are, and you don't know where you're coming from, and everything will be fine. 

This was-- I remember being very scared. I expected to be with my grandfather, and here I was on-- in the-- in this platform on the train station. A lot of people. I remember there was a clock inside, and there was a policeman there. And I went there, and I told him I was an orphan, and they took me to the police station. 

And I remember starting to create a story as I was-- as they were asking questions of how my parents were killed, and the images that I still have over that time is a bombed building with big thick beams of wood crushing my parents and flames. I think that's what I told them. And I was there for a whole day, and at the end of the day, somebody came from the Jewish orphanage and took me into the orphanage. 

And in retrospect, I now know what the plan was. My grandfather wanted to adopt me legally, and in Hungary, things were still very legal. And so he wanted me to be officially in the orphanage, and then he began proceedings to adopt me legally. 

I remember being driven into the-- to the orphanage, and I remember arriving at the orphanage. I remember the-- the whole train ride to Kosice. We arrived at the orphanage. I was very hungry, and they had-- the kitchen was now closed. 

It was late. Somehow, I know it was 9 o'clock in the evening, but I-- I'm not sure where I know that from. And all they had was-- it was garlic and boiled potatoes, and I just ate the whole pile of garlic and boiled potatoes, and I got very, very sick from that, nauseous. This is still my symbol for nausea is the smell of garlic and boi-- boiled potatoes. 

And I remember the head of the orphanage took me into this long room which had beds on either side with many young-- with many boys there, and they all looked at me. And that's the last memory I have of the orphanage. I was in it for several months, and I don't remember anything about my being there, except I have one memory. I have one memory, which is not in the orphanage, but it's from that time. And that's a memory-- that must have been take an orpha-- orphan home day, or something like that, because I remember being in a-- in an apartment, in a fancy apartment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: John, stop tape. 

INTERVIEWER 2: John, stop tape. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Can I refer to you in this interview at all? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, yeah, that's right. Which one? You mean this one? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because it ought to be able to use a full name-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: All right. All right, we're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A friend, or-- 

MALE SPEAKER: Hi. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, hi. We're filming now. Could you be-- OK. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Let's see, where was I? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Roll. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I think I'll-- I think I'll start with this again. The one memory I have from the orphanage was actually took place outside-- outside the orphanage. I remember being in an apartment, a very fancy apartment with big, tall ceilings and long windows and a velvet sofa. I think it must have been some event where people took orphans to their house. 

So I'm sitting in this velvet sofa, and I'm very small. It's a huge sofa. And there is a very aloof lady pacing, and she's looking-- she looks magnificent. Long hair with a-- with waves in it and a long robe, but she's-- she pays no attention to me. 

And there is an old lady there also who is blind, and she's reading Braille. And I remember my being led off to her, and she feels my face. And the whole thing is very scary. That's the only memory I have from the orphanage time. 

Then I remember when my grandfather came to get me, and it was like, suddenly, there was a-- suddenly, everything blossomed, as if life opened up. I was suddenly, again, brought into this warm family. This is a picture of me right after I came out of the orphanage. I was-- they took me to a store where they bought me new clothing. And this is a picture of my cousin Evi, Evike, and me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old are you here? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I am not quite eight. Seven. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So this is 1942? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: This is '43. '43 in the spring. And then we went to Moldova with my grandfather and grandmother. My cousin Evi was killed during the war. She was-- she was killed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: She was taken into concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old was she? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: She was-- she was the same age as I-- as I was. She was seven. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did they take her and not you? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I-- I'll tell you. I'll come to that. This is my grandfather and grandmother. 

My grandmother was just a beautiful, warm woman. She-- when I came to their house, I started urinating in bed. I'd-- I'd wake up and all wet with urine, and this went on for a long time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do-- do you remember dread? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Dread? No. No. I just remember waking up all wet with urine and feeling very, very ashamed of it. 

And nobody mentioned anything, and everybody sort of ignored it. I wasn't yelled at. But nobody-- nobody mentioned the fact that I urinated in bed. 

There must have been fear. There must have been dread because I remember waking-- I remember waking up at night, and my grandmother coming out and hugging me and just holding me and sleeping with me. I remember that. That was after-- that was-- that was that, yes. 

So now, I lived in Moldova, and it was just-- it was very nice there. It was-- I-- my grandfather-- I remember him. I remember his teaching me the multiplication table, which I still remember, in Hungarian. The multiplication table I have in Hungarian. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you give us an example? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: [? [SPEAKING HUNGARIAN] ?] He'd test me. And I lived there for a year. And then you asked me what memories I have from Moldova. Very warm memories. 

Nearly all my Jewish memories come from that period of one year. We did everything-- everything there was done in a very Jewish way. Every Friday night, I'd wheel the wagon with the cholent to the baker. It was covered with a wax paper tied with the string, and our name was on-- it was written on the wax paper. 

And tremendous anticipation-- I knew exactly how it would look and smell next morning when we'd pick it up on the way from the shore. Take it home and eat [NON-ENGLISH] and cholent. Everything-- that happened every single week. Went to synagogue every Friday, every Saturday. 

Moldova was a very small town, and everybody knew everybody-- a very warm place. I went to soccer games every Sunday. I went to school there. 

And then the Germans invaded-- Germans invaded Hungary. They-- well, they just walked in, and-- and it became immediately evident that things were going to be bad for the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was 19-- 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: 1944. I was in grade-- I was in second grade, and I had a teacher. His name was Bollog. He was my teacher in second grade. 

He was a very tall man. His hair was completely plastered smooth on his head with a park in the middle, and he made a speech. I was just sitting there, and he started to make a speech. And his speech began something like this. 

He said, black crows invaded our country many years ago, and they were eating away at the flesh and blood of our country. And these crows were the Jews. And he pointed right at me. It was horrifying, and I was very scared, and I was also very, very angry. I remember my anger. 

And that day, his son was in the playground, and my cousin was there. I love my cousin. She was a year younger than me, and Bollog's son started to beat my cousin. She-- pushed her off to the swing, and I got furious. And I just jumped on him and pushed his face in the mud, and I really beat him up. 

And the next day, I was in class, again with Bollog, his father. And his father said-- started to make another speech. He said-- point at me-- at me. Davidowics, it said, beat up my son, who's weaker than he is. But I am glad that he did that because that will even-- that will reinforce his hatred for the Jews. 

I don't know what got into me, but I got up, and I said, Bollog I said, Mr. Bollog, if you're so glad, I'm going to beat him up again. And he lunged at me, and he picked me up from the seat, and he tossed me across the room. It was very scary. 

I remember, around that time, two Hasidim, two very religious Jews with pious and fur hats, came back from Kosice, which was the big city 20 kilometers away. And they reported that they saw German soldiers. Nobody in our village had seen German soldiers. Had been Kosice the German soldiers had arrived. 

And I remember the sort of the relief and the joy with which they said this because they saw them and nothing happened to them. They were not killed, which proved to them that everything was really going to be all right. But it wasn't. 

This was Pesach. It was the second day of Pesach, and during the day, I remember one of the policemen came to warn my grandfather that we were going to be gathered and deported that night. And so I remember my grandfather took the jewelry, and they buried it someplace. 

This is a very clear scene in my mind. They sort of kept it secret. They didn't want to-- me to see where it was being burdened. And that night, we were all herded together and herded into the synagogue. 

The scene I remember from the synagogue is that there was a lot of crying there, and there was a family sitting next to us. People gathered in sort of family circles, and we didn't-- there wasn't-- there wasn't any bread. Nobody had any bread to bring, only matzo. 

And this family had brought in-- brought with them a whole pot of eggs, which I knew that they thought were hard boiled eggs. Why else would you bring eggs with you? And they started to eat supper, and all the eggs were soft boiled, and there was just a mess. Eggs were just pouring over everybody, and there was tremendous crying there. 

At this point, the rabbi and the hazzan got up on the bimah, and they started to sing El Malei Rachamim. And it was wailing, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you sing it? Do you remember how it sounded? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I only remember the first phrase. It goes something like, El malei rachamim. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: That's enough. Tori Lauth, my good friend, asked me what that night in the synagogue meant for me. It's a very, very-- it's a powerful image for me. It stayed-- stays with me, and it came to me again two-- two years ago. 

I injured my back, and I was in bed for three months. And I was getting increasingly despairing. After a while, it really-- just staying in bed was-- was the end in itself, and I pretty well used up everybody around me. I just about used them all up. 

And Judy, my wife, asked me-- this was just before Yom Kippur. She asked me whether I'm going to come to-- to the kol nidra service. And my first response was, no. You know, I have to stay-- lie flat on my back in bed. 

And I had a vision. This was very, very clear, and what happened-- I saw myself, on Yom Kippur eve, kol nidra, lying in my bed upstairs in my room with just one small bulb burning. Everybody-- the house is empty. I'm the only one there. Everybody else is at synagogue. 

And in this vision, the door opens to my room, and all the people who were in the synagogue, and all the people whom I knew from Hummené, all the people who died, all dressed in black and tallis, come very slowly into the room. They surround my bed, and they start singing kol nidra. And I get up very slowly, and we all start walking out the door. So I went to the kol nidra service. I got out of bed because it was clear that that's the way I would go if I had stayed. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were going to tell us why they took your cousin to the concentration camp, and they did not tell you. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: I'm-- I'm coming to that. The following morning, from the synagogue, we're almost-- we're almost at that point. The following morning at the synago-- from-- they took us from the synagogue to the railroad station, and we were-- we all had just small bags, suitcases. And all the people from the village were standing around watching us leave. The Jews that were living-- that lived there probably for 600, 700 years in Moldova were all now leaving. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you wearing any identification as Jews? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: No. There were-- we wore no stars. We just marched sort of in between them to the railroad station, and at the railroad station, they put us into cattle cars, freight trains. Closed the doors, and they took us to Kosice, the big city where my cousin lived. 

And they prepared a ghetto there. They herd all the Jews together, and we lived there for three weeks. This was happening all over Hungary. They were bringing all the Jews from the smaller villages, smaller towns, into the big center-- centers, ready for deportation to Auschwitz. And this Kosice lived a large part of my family. 

One person who lived there was my uncle, who's still alive. Lives in Toronto, and I just spoke to him two weeks ago. I was in Toronto. 

Gradually, they were gathering everybody from Kosice-- from the-- people who lived in Kosice. They were gathering them up to also center them and get them ready for deportation. Everybody there knew that this-- this meant Auschwitz, and there's no question about that. 

My uncle tells me his father-in-law lived on the same street that he lived then. Streets were already being emptied, and his father-in-law, who was a very sm-- he was a very intelligent, smart man, worked up this scheme in his head, in which he believed that all the Jews would be gathered up except the Jews on that street because it was clear from the pattern that they were going to leave them alone. And my uncle said to me, you know-- and he had me believing that also. What was seemed to have happened is that everybody believed that death was coming, but not-- not to them. 

But all through this period, in Slovakia, things were still going more or less as before. They were deporting Jews in quotas, and my father, my second father, just did incredible things to try to get me out of the ghetto. Every few days, he sent smugglers to get me out. It was possible to move in and out of that ghetto. It wasn't that tightly sealed. 

The smugglers would come in, and my grandfather-- my grandfather was afraid to let me go because I was on his list. He was responsible for me. Three times, smugglers came. My father later told me that, at this point, he was ready to go for me, and he had a-- he had borrowed-- he had rented or bought a priest suit, and he was going to dress as a priest and come across the border and come and get me, and I know he would have. He just-- he was-- he loved me. 

The fourth time the smuggler came was just at the time when they were already gathering us for the trip to the railroad station to Auschwitz. There was a flatcar a flatbed truck, and the belongings were being piled on it. And the smuggler came, and I remember this. We were in the apartment, and there was all the rushing back and forth and getting packed to leave. 

And my grandfather came to me, and he looked at me, and he said, you will now go back to your mother. And he said, we will probably not come back, and I'm going to tell you where we buried our jewel-- jewels. And you make sure that you tell your mother where that was-- where that is. And he kissed me goodbye, and I left. I 

Played with the ball past the German guards, and the smuggler was waiting for me outside the ghetto. And it's a long adventure, how we find-- how he smuggled me across the border. You want to hear? 

We-- he took me with a streetcar to the end of town, and then there was a horse and wagon. And that waited for us, and it took us to the woods. And then we walked through the woods. This was now early afternoon, and we walked and we walked and we walked. There were two men and me. 

And I developed enormous blisters on my feet, and my feet hurt really badly. This is the first time I saw this remedy, and I've never seen this remedy again for blisters. He took off my shoes and he went [SHARP EXHALE THROUGH NOSE] and a glob of snot landed right on my blister. 

And he put my socks back on, and it worked. You know? It lubricated the blister. So he was quite a man, that smuggler. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can I interrupt just to ask why they let you out of the ghetto when they were rounding up for deportation-- a boy with a ball is allowed to leave? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: They weren't paying any attention to me. Just bounce the ball past the German guards and the Hungarian guards, and then that's it. That was that. 

And my-- my cousin who was with her parents, she had no-- nobody was there to take her away, and her parents probably wouldn't have let her go. Families wanted to stay together, and she was taken into concentration camp. And she was separated from my aunt. My aunt and uncle survived the war, and she was killed. 

All my cousins were killed. My grandparents were killed. I have this feeling that I am the only person who survived from Moldova, but that-- that's not the case. There were about-- from a community of-- of about 500 Jews, about 20 people remained. 

After the war, we went back to-- to Moldova, my mother and I, and there were no Jews left there except for a woman with one daughter. And they lived in the house that they had lived in before the war. This was right after the war, pretty soon after, and she was crazy. She was demented, and she just kept asking where is everybody? 

She just couldn't understand that people had been killed. She was waiting for her husband. She was waiting for the village to fill up again. 

I want to show you. After the war, we went back, and we took out the jewelry from-- from under the woodpile where it was. The only thing that I have left is this. I don't know what happened to the rest of it. It somehow dribbled all over the place, but I have this watch. 

This was my grandfather's watch. This is his monogram, ML Davidowicz, and this was given to my grandfather by my grand-- grandmother as an engagement present. And it-- I forgot to wind it. I should have wound it. It keeps perfect time, and I wear this watch on high holidays and on very special occasions. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did your father, or your stepfather, not go back with you? You said you went back just with your mother. You said you went back to Moldova with your mother. 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: Oh, why did they not go back? It-- it was illegal. I mean, you could smuggle-- is that what-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was your stepfather back then? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: They left-- they-- they stayed in Slovakia. I'm now-- I have not yet gotten back to Slovakia. I'm now being smuggled across the border. 

The smuggler got us-- got me to the border, and it was now dark. And the river-- a river was the border, and he left me-- he went to reconnoiter to see which way we could cross, and he came back. He said-- and he said, I have to leave you here for a while because the place where I usually cross is not safe. I'll be back for you. 

And so he left me, and there was a meadow and-- facing me, and there were woods behind me, and I was hiding behind a bush. And it got dark, and I waited, and I was there most of the night alone. And I remember being there, hidden behind that bush. There were dogs barking near the border. I was about 200 meters from the border. 

I don't remember any fear, but-- but it must've been very scary. He came for me, and then we crossed the border. And he met my father on the other side of the border, was waiting for me there. Took me home. 

And-- and the scene that I remember is that he was so moved, my father, that he just cried and cried and hugged me for a long time. Then he put me on his bicycle, and we bicycled to the train station. And we got on the train, and he took me back to Humenné. 

And I remember getting off the train, and there was a long street on the other end-- at the other end of the street was my mother and my dog, the one whose picture I showed you. And the dog just started galloping towards me, and he just jumped on me for such a-- so great to be with them. And the first thing I told my mother-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had been away for how long? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: A year. A little over a year. The first thing I had to tell my mother was where the gold was buried. It was such a weight on me to-- to carry this message, and so I told her. I felt a great relief to have given that message. 

About a month afterwards, the final order to-- to deport all the Jews came. There were-- there were not-- to be no more exemptions, no more quotas. This was it, and at that point, we ran. We had false papers. My-- my-- both my mother and my father had false papers, and we ran towards the center of the-- of Slovakia, which seemed safer. 

And for a while, somehow-- I'm not clear on this, but we lived there for about a month. Things were beginning to fall apart in Slovakia. That's my sense, and all the orders were given. Some places didn't obey them. So there were places where it was safe for the Jews. 

We were in a place called Nitra. But then the Germans were on their way to Nitra, and at that point, we had to-- we went on false papers. There was an uprising in the center of Slovakia. This was now middle of 1944, summer of 1944, and we headed towards the center of Slovakia, which was under the control of the partisans who rebelled against the Germans. 

And we got there, and my father joined the Partisans, and that was a terrific sight. He had-- he had a uniform, and he had a gun, and it really looked great. And we lived there for two months, and then the uprising was betrayed by the Russians. This-- this is what they did, and I remember this is not something that I know from afterwards. I know it from them. 

But the Russians were coming, and then they stopped. And I remember the panic when everybody suddenly realized that the Russians stopped coming. Stop and waited for the uprising to be defeated, to be wiped out, because they didn't want an independent-- any independent leaders to con-- to contend with. And the Germans came again, and I remember my mother and I got up-- got on a train, which was sort of the last train out of this place. And my father was still in uniform, had a truck available to him, and he drove with the truck. 

And I remember getting on the train, which is absolutely crowded, and there was a young man on the train, about 25. And when he saw my mother and me, he started shouting, get those Jews off this fucking train. And he started kicking my mother and just pushing her off the train, and somebody stopped him, pulled him away, so he stayed on the train, but that that's-- that is still such a powerful thing, anger, just tremendous anger. I hope he some-- somebody bashed his head in. 

We got to where the train was going, which was sort of the beginning of the Tatra mountain ranges. And then we got off the train, and we met my father, and we started hiking into the woods, into the mountains. Along the way, we were attacked by some German planes, started shooting at us. We finally got to a sort of a clearing where there were a few houses. 

The one picture which stands out clearly in my mind is a troop of German soldiers, about 100 which were prisoners, which the-- the partisans had taken prisoners during the uprising, and they were taking them to be shot. And I remember the fear, the panic on the faces of the German soldiers. And I didn't see them getting shot, but they were taking them to the woods, and we heard the machine guns, and they were killed. 

And then-- then we went into the mountains. This was fall now, fall of 1944, and it was cold, and it was raining when we start the walk into the woods. And there were my mother, my father, my aunt, and my uncle, and we just started to walk into the mountains, into the woods. 

The mood that I can recapture from that, walking and climbing into the hills, is the stuff all over the place. The whole army of the uprising was running into these mountains, and they were throwing away their guns, and their ammu-- and their ammunition. And the place was just filled with machine guns and-- and bullets and grenades. 

It was very exciting. I really wanted one of those things. I remember picking up a gun and carrying it for a little bit, and then my uncle coming and grabbing it away from me because had we been sort of caught by the Germans, he figured this would be the end if-- if any of us had a gun. 

So we hiked through the woods, through these mountains, with the rain coming down, the cold, and at night, we stopped, and my father made a fire. He-- I remember how he did that. He split sticks, and he took out the dry part from in between and built a small, very, very smoky fire. And we sat around it, and somebody else joined us, a man and his wife, a young man, and he was very, very despairing, and he cried. 

And what he wanted to do-- he had a grenade with him, and all he wanted to do was throw the grenade in the fire and kill us, kill us all. I remember my father telling him, listen, it's not time yet. If you want to do that, I'll build you another fight over there. So he didn't kill himself. 

When morning came-- this one memory I have was that my mother gave me all her clothing. She was-- she was practically in her summer clothing, and I wore all her clothing. It's all sopping wet. 

When morning came, my aunt sort of sat up in a panic and said she couldn't see. She was completely blind, and so I was leading her by the hand as we went further into the woods. And then my uncle's feet began to hurt. He had-- he had a bad heart, and I pulled him. 

I don't know whether this was-- whether I really pulled them, or whether they just made it appear as if I was pulling them, but I think I was really helping them. I was really helping them. That's the way it feels. There was no make believe there. I was really pulling them, and we wandered through the woods for a few days. 

We met-- we met a group of partisans at one point. They looked terrific. They were dressed all in leather, boots, and they weren't wet at all. They all had waterproof clothing. They had guns. 

And my mother and father wanted to join them. So they were going to take them, but they wouldn't take me. They said if I-- if they leave me with my uncle and aunt, they'll-- they'll take them, but they wouldn't go do that. So we stayed together, and we wandered some more. 

And finally, we came out on some road, and the road was filled with refugees. People were just wandering through the countryside, and we joined them. At this point, we had false papers. We were-- we were on our false papers, and my aunt and uncle did not have false papers. Their false paper-- they had some very weak documents. 

They separated from us. Later on, I found out what happened to them. They survived. They just walked into a person who was-- whom they had met briefly in passing through-- through a small town. They went back, and they-- to that person, and they said, look, you know, here we are, and we're going to be killed unless you help us. And they did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A gentile? 

PAUL DAVIDOWICZ: A gentile. These people took my aunt and my uncle, and they hid them in the attic, and in this-- in their house was the field kitchen for the Germans. I know that the field kitchen was there because we ended up in that small town ourselves by accident, my mother and-- and me. And I know that-- I knew-- know this house, and I know that that's where the German field kitchens were. Used to hang around there. 

And they were hidden there for about half a year, maybe more, seven months. Weren't able to move, and the people came and fed them every day and took away their feces and garbage. And they saved them like that, and they did this for no money. They did this purely out of-- out of humanity. 

We-- my mother, my father, and I-- we ended up in the same town. And my father had different false papers from me-- from us, from my mother and I. My mother-- my mother's false name was Anna Hitsakova, and I was Pavel Hitsakova, her cousin-- her nephew. She was unmarried in this, and my father had some other false papers. And we used to meet, my mother and I and my father, every day in a park. 

And after about two or three weeks in the city, my father didn't show up, and it was just complete panic. And my mother rushed over to the place that he had lived, and she heard that he was-- they had been arrested. And the following day, we were waiting in front of the police station, and he was marched out with about 30 other men. I saw him. He was marched out with soldiers around, and my mother started running after him-- running after them. 

And he sent a message back, and the whole troop started to yell get away, get away. They all just started to shout at my mother. So my mother stopped, and we quickly moved away. 

It was-- and we never saw my father again. He was taken to outside of the town, and he was shot in a-- I don't know how I know this, but I know that he was shot in a lime quarry. That was that. But I kept looking for him. When the war ended, I kept looking for-- I looked for him for, oh, a year. In fact, I was the only one who kept looking for him. 

So-- so now, it was just my mother and me. I think back at my mother as she was then. She was then 28, and the woman who had never really-- you know, it was-- well, you know, from a sheltered middle class Jewish family. And she rose to this tremendous event, and we essentially saved each other, my mother and I. We lived together, and she relied a lot on me, on my advice, but she was brilliant in just the way she maneuvered and manipulated our survival. 

At this-- that point, we had very little money. She had to get a job. Some of the things that happened to her-- time came to get you new false-- new papers because every year, you had to get a new identity card. So you had to-- she had to exchange her old ones. 

So she came-- she went to the police station, and she came out just pale, shaking. And I said, what happened to her, and so she told me. She had gone in there, and she gave the policeman her-- her identity card. And the policeman looked at her and said, Anna Hitsakova, please come with me. 

And so she went to the office, to the inner office with him, and he looked at her, and he says, you know, I know you're not Anna Hitsakova because I know Anna Hitsakova. She had been a-- a maid in my parents family. She comes from this village, and she and I were lovers, and you are not she. But you're a beautiful woman, and we can work out something. And, you know, I'll give you your-- your papers-- 

[KNOCKING AT THE DOOR] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, I'm sorry. 