INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Go ahead. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Well, this was, uh, the point where the division, or the breakdown of our species and of this universe that I was aware of happened, really. It had only been empty ideas. When I was a kid, it happened. But then my uncle helped me to repair my universe and that Italian woman, above all. And the rabbi finished the job. 

But then it broke down in Mannheim. That's a simple way of putting it. But there's a lot of truth into it-- in it. And it, uh-- and then when we came to a town called Grossrinderfeld after Mannheim, it's even worse, what happened there, because Roosevelt died the day we were stationed in Grossrinderfeld. 

And my own buddies in our field artillery-- oh, god, I didn't remember this until now-- started running down the main street of this German town that we'd taken a few weeks before, saying, hey! Roosevelt the Jew-lover is dead! Yeah! And they were drunk as skunks, running up and down. 

And Alvin, the same guy, and Smitty, who was not Jewish-- but we tried to turn him-- crowned him Jewish. [CHUCKLES] We sort of made him into a Jew Maghrebi despite himself-- we were all looking at these guys running down the street saying, hey, isn't it great? Roosevelt the Jew-lover is dead. Then we almost picked up our guns and picked them off. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your own American-- 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Our own American soldiers. That's right. That's right. Uh, that wasn't the first time, I-- uh, when we came to the Tyrolean Alps it occupied when the war was in effect over-- except for these rumors of, um-- of, uh-- of, uh-- of, uh, Hitler's rising again from Bavaria and all that-- when we came down there, I saw some terrible things in our outfit. 

I saw one big guy. I'm not going to use his name, uh, but I remember his name. If I remember my own, I'll always remember his. I saw him knock on the door of a German-- a little German house that we were right near, right near where our-- where we were billeted, and, uh, way up in those beautiful Tyrolean Alps. And a lovely blonde, uh, Austrian woman, um, opens the door with a little baby in her arms. She's a beautiful young woman. 

And Ferraro-- ugh! Boy, I wish you could cut that out of the tape. I didn't want to use his name. [SIGHS] Anyway, uh, he, um-- I really-- is it possible to edit that out of the tape-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But we heard it. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Oh, OK. He took the baby and threw it to the floor and, um, and proceeded to try to rape her right there. And, uh, I jumped him. And, um, somebody nearby helped me and-- didn't need to, though. 

Um, and, uh, oh, the things our soldiers did. A lot of them were great kids. Those usually were the ones who were killed, the ones who were really sweet and good. And there were lots of them. But there were some real bastards in our outfit, raped little kids for a cigarette. [CLEARS THROAT] That didn't help, in the sense of just a total breakdown of everything. 

And, uh, well, when the war was over, and then the bomb was dropped-- the bomb was dropped. I was fully aware of what the bomb meant. Um, you know, it meant wiping out people, children, everything to end the war and, I know, end it soon. I was all for the dropping of the bomb. And that made my implication much more deep in the whole thing. I'm all for it. 

Uh, when all-- when you had to just do that in order to just-- to heal the world [CHUCKLES] and break it apart, finally, in order to heal it, that was-- that was it. And, um, but-- but for before-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know, in your imagery, I don't hear anything, so far, about Jewish victims or even French victims. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: I didn't think in terms of, uh, of, uh, of those divisions anymore. I just felt that, as people, we were fragmented. We were lost, like a desert, with separate little grains of sand under a blazing, brutal sun, alien-- alien sun, no water. I felt like a piece of sand with a bunch of other pieces of sand. They all look alike-- Jews, rich men, German. 

I'd seen these bodies chopped up. They looked-- I mean, they were anatomy. They were human anatomy. So there was no strong sense of that division. It was just we were all divided. 

It was really at that time, paradoxically enough, that I started thinking only of the species and not of the groups in the species. This is the background of my thinking. I really find it very, very difficult to talk about groups within our species with any seriousness, except when they're doing something terrible or wonderful for each other. 

Otherwise, I just think it's a silly makeshift distinction, except the people make it meaningful. And, uh-- so no, I really didn't think too much that the French were distinct from anybody else or the Jews is distinct from-- I just talked about it. It's distinct from everybody else. 

And, um, went into philosophy. I came back, got trained rigorously to use clear language and hated every minute of this clear language, empty, just like the language of physics. And I finally decided that I was not going to do that kind of philosophy, that I was going to do what I promised Smitty I'd do, namely understand history, people's deaths, really, and lives, and everything. 

So I went into ethics and started working in ethics as it is in life, not as an empty words. But it was evil that I started on. And it was that that I was conscious of, cruelty. So I wrote, amongst other books preparing the way for this, a book called The Paradox of Cruelty, the idea of which is, uh, that cruelty, which is the main evil there is in the world, instead of this empty word "evil," fiddling around with that and all of its theological guck. 

"Cruelty," the word people can use with each other, did not mean pain. That was like saying "cancer" means pain, um, because the deep source, the origin, the nature of cancer. Cancer is a certain proliferation of cells. Their nature cruel-- and the pain in the belly is only a symptom. And so this-- the pain of cruelty, the victim feels only a symptom of real cruelty. 

Real cruelty, I became more and more convinced while I was researching and writing that book-- and I'm still convinced-- is a matter of power, an exertion of power, of superior power, economic, aesthetic, physical, um, economic, basically, perhaps. But whatever it is, um, power-- great-- great power, uh, eh, exerted on the weak, who have less power and exerted-- exerted primarily in humiliation, um, as a mental phenomena, not a physical. 

And when that power is exerted on another being, whether an animal or a human being, so as to humiliate, um, this is the essence of cruelty to me and all I understand of evil. And, uh, I was involved with the Black Power movement quite a bit. I was directing the Center for Advanced Studies. So I had a big budget for it in the late '60s-- '68, '69. Uh, '68-- well, '67 '68, really, but also '69 and '70. 

I-- I was, uh, Wesleyan was in this whole thing and, uh, with the Black Power movement. And I was financing Black Power leaders from all over the country to come and talk to us. And they [INAUDIBLE]-- they spoiled-- this is when I wrote my Paradox of Cruelty, in the context of the Black Power movement. And, um, I was, I think, the only white man who was, uh, trusted by the blacks at that time. 

And so I was kind of a foot-- a leg man between the whites at Wesleyan and the blacks. And, um, their view and so was mine that, uh-- was that, uh, the only way to eliminate the cruelty that the whites had exerted on the blacks for hundreds of years in this country was to get the blacks to have power [CHUCKLES] so that they wouldn't be the weak member of that little power pair, with the uneven power balance, the imbalance. 

And, um, that was what I developed in my understanding. And this is what I talked over and learned and also criticized various people in the Black Power movement for walking-- working only apparent power, you know, socking somebody, burning something. That's bullshit. That's not-- that's-- it's an illusion of power. 

But real power, long-term power, economic power, intellectual power, spiritual power, real stuff, solid stuff, then they're going to avoid being the victim, the weaker member of the power-- power pair. And so this is when I developed my ideas for The Paradox of Cruelty. 

And I dedicated my book to my beloved Ed Sanders, who is a-- was the black leader of the, uh-- he's a very militant Black Power leader in Middletown and, uh, scared the hell out of those whiteys. They got paler just seeing that guy, deep, booming voice, minister, glorious man. He's now at Fisk in Nashville. 

And, um, it was all about the struggle for power and the diminution of cruelty by balancing the power. And, uh, it was still a fragmented universe. It was still a universe of struggle, of unending struggle. I had no dream of an end, just to balance unstable. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How do you conceptualize giving power to the weak, which wouldn't change the situation? It would just, you know, switch the roles. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Well, that's exactly the point. I never understood how we could avoid that. I mean, I knew that if you gave him enough weak-- I mean, one of the things you find out the more you study the history of humiliation or cruelty, whatever you want to call it, in history is that when the weak get enough-- get enough and get strong enough, they continue the cycle of cruelty, for various reasons. They enjoy their upsurge of power, and they use it. When you have it, you use it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're an example that contradicts this, that, uh, eh, when you had the big bombs, eh, to kill those you were-- you knew were going out to kill you, you maybe used them once but couldn't use them again. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Oh, no, that's right. But I was weak enough to go along and not walk off the field, and take my chances to get shot for desertion. You know, I was against it. But I was, uh-- I went-- I stayed in the Army, and I stayed alive. I stayed-- I got my battle stars, an honorable discharge. 

And we did a lot more after Mannheim. I didn't want to, but I did it. Although, you're right, in my heart, but gee, the heart's sometimes hard to fight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, not in the heart. You, uh, eh, almost you be, eh, saved that, uh, German woman from being raped more, eh, knowing quite well how many Jewish girls had been raped and-- and killed. And, you know, you had the power. But I don't hear you, uh, enjoying using it. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Uh, no, no, I don't think I'm kidding myself now. And I don't think I'm kidding you when I say I-- yeah, and I agree with you. Um, I didn't enjoy using it. It's the loneliest, the bitterest thing in the world to me to use it. [CLEARS THROAT] Uh, it's full of pain and horror, because perhaps the Rabbi Singer, God knows. 

And, um, yeah. The, um, fact is, however, that's a very interesting point, because, uh, uh, when I came to write my last book, the one that came out last year, uh, I was to find it in-- in, uh, in the village that I wrote about the people who had the power and, uh, would not use it to hurt. On the contrary, they would use all of their power, which was considerable, because they were French. 

And they were-- they-- they-- then they-- had the whole Vichy government backing them up if they wished to collaborate with the Vichy government. And they could've done all of these wonderful things, like keeping themselves perfectly, uh, safe and secure and, uh, and all that. Uh, but they didn't. They opened up their lives to, um, to these Jews. And I wrote a book about-- about the-- about the-- the fact that they refused to use their power, which was considerable, their isolation and their-- and all that, their farms, and give them food, and all that sort of thing. 

They refused to use their power to hurt. But on the contrary, they used their power when they could have been just the perfect ally of a cruelty in the world, they-- they helped the Jews and the-- and the Aryans who were running away from Hitler and pulled them up, uh, to-- to-- to-- they gave him homes. They gave them food. They gave them love. And-- and-- it redressed the balance of power just because they were good. 

But I hadn't thought about that. I thought that eternal battle. I never thought that the strong could reach over and pull up the weak and then live with them. But that's where-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The story is of-- the story-- the name of your book and the [INAUDIBLE]. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: The name of my book is Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed. And it's from, uh-- that's a quote from, uh, Deuteronomy, uh, where God tells Moses, um, make cities of refuge, uh, for persecuted innocents, "lest innocent blood be shed in your land" and their guilt-- the guilt of their blood be upon you. 

And this is a village, Le Chambon in southeastern France, under the beak that Switzerland makes there in southeastern France, just right under-- practically under Geneva, that, uh, saved thousands. We think now 5,000, 6,000, first, Jewish children and then whole families of Jews and Aryans. And they were a village of refuge. 

But, uh, uh, there are these-- now that you are leading me with these questions, I can see there were these nodes, sort of nervous nodes where things came to a focus. And signals went out, and everything, in my life. Um, I've-- I'd written the book on The-- The Paradox of Cruelty. 

I was not happy with a world where everybody was struggling for equal power. And the struggle was going to go on. Or the ones who had it equal got a little bit more. And what you were saying tonight they-- and they went unused, you know. 

But water tends to go downhill. They-- cruelty went down and got the next, uh, weakest, um, thing. That wasn't, uh-- that wasn't the world that I-- that I had in my heart, or wherever. Um, just still a world of discrete entities fighting in and hurting, and-- and-- and so on. 

[SIGHS] 

But I knew I was beginning to understand cruelty in some subtlety. And nobody I knew of had ever really worked on it, except with sadism and these empty little cliches people used and all that. So I started studying evil but cruelty, concrete evil, uh, in the concentration camps. I was studying the, um-- the, um, dismemberment and the, um, crushing and the freezing, and so on of Jewish children, um, by the so-called doctors. And many of them were doctors, uh, uh, of the, you know, the camps. 

And, uh, as I mentioned in my book, I was sitting up in my, um-- this was, uh, three years-- three and a half years ago. Where are we now? Um, this is '80. So it was something like '76, '77. Yeah, I think it was academic year '76/'77. 

Um, I was sitting up in my office there in Middletown, Connecticut. And, um, uh, I just felt that I couldn't go on to read about these things anymore. They were familiar patterns, and yet they were always horror-- horrific to me, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long did you-- 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Oh, I had been studying this sort of thing before I wrote Paradox of Cruelty, even. I don't remember the year that Paradox of Cruelty came out. But it was considerably before this, uh, almost eight, nine-- eight years. And I had, um, uh, long been studying the concentration camps with one hand and the blacks'-- their slavery with the other, so to speak. 

And, uh, the, um-- I was having a nervous breakdown, because everything was confirmed. The world was not one. Everybody was-- you're trying to get people to rise from their weakness. But you had a feeling that if they did-- in fact, I believed that if they did rise high enough, they'd perpetuate the cruelty. Um, and, uh, this was the vision that I had that wasn't my vision. 

It didn't-- but I was having a nervous breakdown. I was not a good father. Oh, I love my kids. I'm very physical. And then they know I mean well, whatever that means. But, um, I was not a good husband. I was a very bad friend to myself. I've long known with the ancients that, uh, people can be-- ambush themselves, that you should watch yourself. You can jump out from behind a bush and kill yourself. Uh, it's that funny business of your own ambusher. 

Uh, I was killing myself with all this stuff, as I try to explain, uh, either I was coldly classifying these things and hated myself for being cold. Uh, or I was going to kill the doctors. I wanted to rush in-- into-- back into history and-- and-- and kill them, dismember them, piece by piece, all the old anger from my-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The doctors that had dismembered the children? 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The doctors who had dismembered the children? 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Yeah, that's right, or their assistants or-- there were various people who would be at hand in this. Some SS would ask to do it. It was very interesting. 

Um, a book is-- a book, I think, has just come out. It's coming out very soon, by [INAUDIBLE], a very important book it will be. Yeah, I think it's out. I haven't caught ahold of it yet. 

But anyway, I was either cold and a monster, namely classifying familiar forms of humiliation and cruelty, especially on children, who are the weakest of them all in the power balance. They just can't do anything. They're physically inept. And they're not experienced enough. And they just can't-- they-- they're the ones who are low on that power thing that cruelty thrives on. And it was driving me up the wall. Oh, it was bad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You are either cold or vengeant. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: That's right. And between those two extremes, I drove myself crazy. When I was cold, I hated myself as a monster. When I was vengeful, I hated myself as a vengeful person, because I was still-- i was still haunted by this business of maybe we're in one species. Could be, we look that way. And doctors will tell us and take us apart and put it back together that, give or take a few differences, we're in the same outfit. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you searching for? You kept on reading these things over and over and over again. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: I was trying to understand evil or cruelty and hoping to come out the other side by this understanding with something like maybe a cure or a-- at least understanding that could in the hands of other people lead to cure, because very few people have faced particular instances of cruelty and written about them, except in sort of clinical ways that don't have the classificatory-- not by classifying them with ethics. They'd been just classifying them as facts. And that can't have been very revealing. 

Yeah, there are very few laws, like physics, you can find from just studying instances of cruelty. But in ethics, if I studied and I felt it, maybe I could help to understand evil and possibly understand why or how or something good people can help prepend it or ameliorate it or do something. 

And, uh, so I kept on doing it really for the cau-- yeah, but then that's a deep question too. I was doing it ostensibly to understand cruelty in hopes of curing it but also because there was the kind of anger in me that it was happening. And I had to understand what was angering me. 

And this was reality. I hated it. But goddammit, I was going to do it, like, you know. Out of anger, resentment, I was going to still deeper and deeper into the filth of-- of cruelty. Something combative in me made me do it. It's a very deep, uh, thing. 

And, um, as I say, that, either way, joining the victimizers, cold and indifferent to both of them, um, and so on. Well, one afternoon, I was in my office on the second floor, in the back, uh, porch of, uh, Russell House in Middletown. And I said, oh, I can't, um, do this anymore today. 

Uh, there was this little book, uh, The Anthology of the Holocaust. And I looked in the index for anything that had a French name, anything that had "France" in it and possibly something-- a resistance to evil. And so I thought, well, maybe this is just not the same old story of kids who couldn't resist, the low person on the power dyad, uh, you know, not because it wasn't going to be-- it would be something else, the people rising and being able-- you know, the old thing that I'd written in The Paradox of Cruelty, and hope that they'll rise, but not too high as to start hurting, and outstay the resistance, especially the French resistance which, of course, had been, you know, trained to understand, more or less. 

So, uh, I looked it up and there was in the title-- on the table of contents, Le Chambon sur Lignon, the little village of Le  Chambon on the river Lignon du Velay I said, oh, OK, resistance. May it'll be a breather for me. So I opened up the page. Ah, just leaf through it, three pages, four pages, a man named Donald A. Lowry never have found him. 

Anyway, I'm reading, uh, very, very much interested in what's happening on the page. And all of a sudden, as I mention in the book, I felt some dust on my cheeks, all over, and, uh, some fuzz or dust. And, um-- and I was concentrating. I was absorbing the story. And I said, oh, yeah, that's what they were doing. That's the way it is. And that's the way the power balanced and all that. 

I reached my hand up and I couldn't believe my sense of touch. My hand was soaked with tears. I felt that-- that, um-- you know, that-- that my hand had been steep-- put in a pool of water, so many-- so many tears. And, uh, you know, they're just still coming down. I reached up on the other cheek, and there was the same thing happening, tears. Well, then I was really frightened, 'cause I really thought I was going around with a twist. 

And, uh, I didn't know what was happening to me, except that maybe I really was on the verge of that nervous breakdown that I had sort of maybe even yearning for to get away from this, whatever-- the nervous breakdown, I'm sure. [CLEARS THROAT] Anyway, I got up, went home. And, uh, I got a wife, which you know. When she walks down the stairs, it's an opera. Walks up and down the stairs, walks across a level floor, still an Italian opera. 

And I got two kids, who are their mother's, uh, children. But also, their mine. They love to talk. Uh, so it was pretty wild, customary, ordinary, helly meal. [CLEARS THROAT] And I was part of it. Nobody noticed it, 'cause I've always been crazy. And, uh, went up to-- at least, I've been crazy the last year or so-- went up to bed, and, uh, said goodnight to Doris, uh, lights out. 

I closed my eyes, and the image that I had read in the story came before my eyes as clearly as you are before me now. Um, the image was two great big, clumsy, ill-proportioned khaki-colored buses coming into a big square in a mountain village surrounded by extinct volcanoes, but way up high in the mountains of southeastern France. And they come into the Square. 

And the-- a black car is behind it. The man in the black car steps out. He walks up to a great big blond guy, six foot-- more than six feet tall, very tall for a Frenchman, a blond guy who was a pastor, the Huguenots minister, French Protestant minister of this village. This happened in '43. 

And he walks up-- he's a little guy, and he walks up this great big blue-- blue-- blue-eyed blond and very volatile guy, André Trocmé, the uh, pastor of this Huguenots village. And he says, Monsieur Trocmé, we know you keep Jews in the Chambon. Everybody says that, um-- that, uh, you are a nest of Jews in Huguenots country. That was the saying in there in the neighborhood-- they're a nest of Jews in Huguenots country. 

We know this. And you have been doing this for a long time. And we tell you now, give me the names and places of each Jew. And-- and Trocmé said, I don't know Jews. I just know human beings. And the, uh, the official from Vichy, the collaborating government of-- of France said, uh, listen to me, Monsieur Trocmé, if you don't give us the names of these Jews, then you will be deported yourself. And it is quite possible that a Vergeltungsaktion is going to be happening-- [INAUDIBLE] a reprisal action on the village, wiping out the village, was going to, uh, happen. 

He didn't-- wasn't specific about the vergeltungsaktion, but he was very specific about-- I mean, he didn't go into detail about that. But he was very definite and firm about that Trocmé and his wife were going to be taken to-- deported. By this time, people knew-- the people who wanted to know knew about the killing camps. 

And, um, uh, Trocmé said no. And, uh, the Vichy representative-- all this was right on the screen in front of my eyelids. And, um, the Vichy guy got back in his, uh, car and sat and waited. A few minutes later, maybe an hour or so later, they caught a Jew, the only Jew they caught, a man named Steckler who was, um, by accident was going to the grocery store. And he hadn't heard. See, whenever the Jew-- whenever the police came in the village, they'd have what they called une disparation des Juifs, a disappearance of Jews operation, DJ, [CHUCKLES], Disparation des Juifs. 

And the-- the-- everything worked-- they had it all worked out very smoothly. But he hadn't-- this was one guy they hadn't heard-- he hadn't heard about the DJ operation. So he came out to, you know, do a little shopping. And he was nailed, put him in one of these great big buses, the only resident in the bus. 

So he's sitting around. Little by little, the people of the village gather around. This is all what I saw, I swear it, just as clearly as I see it now after I researched it and talked it over with many, many people. I saw it then just as clearly as I do now. 

Um, and they gathered all the people in the village, all these poor people clomping around in their poverty, in their wooden shoes, worn wooden shoes, couldn't afford the leather to keep the wooden shoes. It was just a-- you know, you save your wooden shoes. But they had like leather at the bottom of it so you don't have to re-carve the whole shoe. They couldn't even afford that and so on. 

So they, uh, gathered around. And they started putting gifts inside the, uh, the bus. And, the-- [SIGHS] uh, soon Steckler was surrounded by, um, by these gifts, pieces of sausage, [BLOWS NOSE] candles, toilet paper-- that's very valuable-- and, uh, food-- a various assort-- these people were poor people, you know. Their clothes were all worn thin. In those days, the Germans were taking everything out of France to Germany. It was worth taking and so on. Uh, they piled up all around him. 

They waited and waited, but nobody else came. So the buses left the Square. And the next day, in comes Steckler pulling a wagon with all the gifts. Turns out he's demi-juif. He's half Jewish. Um, he's a-- that time was just before they changed the regulations to trap half-Jews too. Uh, so he was lucky and came back. And he tried to give back all his gifts. [CHUCKLES] And they, of course, wouldn't take it. A Chambonier never takes a gift back. And that's another story about gifts and the the Chambonier. That was the story. 

And, uh, I got up out of bed, and I went to-- back to my office. I remember, no stars, terrible night, dreadful night. And, uh, went back and I read the story again, same thing happened. But I decided, well, I was going to research it. I was going to find out. But where am I going to find it? Who's Donald A. Lowry And I still, as I say, never have found him. 

My closest buddy-- I don't want to go into much detail on this-- but my closest buddy in the world is the son of Arthur Holly Compton, who was the leader in the atom bomb project and who was in charge under grove of the-- with Ferme, in developing the atom bomb. He was the son of this man. And he and I are old, old buddies. And we taught together for many years. 

And he happened to be visiting us that year-- bashert, as the Jews say-- so it was destined, or at least a wonderful coincidence, or whatever-- whatever you prefer. He had been visiting us that year as a guest professor of philosophy. He walks into my office, uh, one day, shortly after this had happened. And he said, uh, what's new? 

And I said, Dave, didn't you once tell me about a little village, Le Chambon, that you went to one summer? I was at a dead end, because they had no real names except the name of the village in this article. Everyone had Xs and Ys and dashes and all. 

He said, oh, yeah, Le Chambon. Yeah, Le Chambon, I used to go there every summer, and my daddy-- my father and mother would send me, uh, to, uh, to the Chambon. I helped to help them build their schoolhouses and everything there. 

Johnny-- I showed him the story. He looked. He says, oh, that's a nice story, 'cause that's the way he believes anyway, It was no shock to him. He's an absolute pure-hearted guy. So what else is new? People help each other. That's-- he's like a member of the village. And, um, I'm standing there, and he says, yeah, very nice. What else is new? 

I said, Johnny, you got to help me, uh, to find these people. He said, oh, it'll be easy. They have a group in America called The Friends-- [INAUDIBLE]. No that's a pacifist-- a nonviolent village, a pacifist, uh, town that this Pastor Trocmé had started where they hid-- uh, where they hid the Jews in here, like made them members of the faculty or students, depending on their age. And that was a very important instrument of saving the Jews during the-- I didn't write much about that in the book, a very important [INAUDIBLE]. 

So he said, but before we have the meeting, which is coming up in a couple of months, of the people-- the refugees from all over the world will meet in New York once a year to show their love for the village, and so on, let me drive you around in my new Volvo. And, uh, let me just introduce-- so that's the way I got into it. 

And without Johnny, I don't see how I could have done it, 'cause I never-- as I say, I never found Lowry I kept looking for him. Maybe he doesn't exist. Maybe he's God speaking through the pages or something weird like that. 

But that was the turning point. And, um, and one of the reviewers of Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed, uh, Neil Ascherson, who's a-- about as good an historian as-- as we've got now in modern French history, said that Hallie went through a, uh, a conversion experience rather similar to the conversions that Huguenots, Protestants, talk about. And he should know. He knows more about these things than I do. 

And I think there's something true about what he said, that I was converted. Uh, the language I use in the book is, I was redeemed. I was purchased out of slavery to my own anguish. And, um, uh, I was converted. But I was converted not in a-- to a Huguenots belief, but to the shammah. I was converted to my belief in the unity of the universe. It, uh, the wound was healed. So I wrote the book. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So Rabbi Singer is back. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: He's back in power, God bless him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mannheim disappeared, and Auschwitz disappeared. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: No, oh, no, no. How can-- how can these things disappear? It makes life-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But maybe Singer is stronger. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Oh, he's much stronger. At least I have the hope that he is. I hope that he is in my mind. I never know what my mind is going to do next. But so far, it seems to me that he-- and that's a very cagey remark, but I-- I choose to make it that way-- he's won the battle. Rabbi Singer has won the battle with the help of a-- of a-- of a man named Trocmé. It, uh, had to be a non-Jew, really had to. And, um, 'cause I'm always afraid of illusions and, uh, self-serving vested interest, private narrowness, watch it like a hawk. 

And, uh, especially a-- a guy, Trocmé, whom I admired and love as I do very, very few human beings, but a very tough character, very puritanic, was, uh-- he's a very rough, tough guy. So I really feel as if there is a-- there is a unity in the world when I can love him and feel-- 'cause he was-- he had many traits that both his wife and myself probably found [CHUCKLES] hard to live with. But, um, he was, um-- he was the successor to, um, Rabbi Singer and his wife. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You felt an instance of unity. Did you learn something about how unity can be achieved or how goodness that happens, as you say in the title of your book? 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Well, you know you learn so much about that-- that-- that when you take a particular example. I tried to explain. Really, the book is an attempt to understand all of the last titles. The last chapter is called "How Goodness Happened Here." Uh, and the subtitle of the book is, um, you know, The Village of Chambon-- How Goodness Happened There. 

At the end of the book, after I told the story, I tried to-- the answer is how it happened there is just a story. It happened there. To me, the clearest instance of how or why it happened was every element of the story-- every element of Trocmé's belief, of Magda Trocmé's incredible power and courage and practicality and love, uh, the-- the business of being isolated from the rest of the world in a mountain village, all these things, um, that's the story of how it happened there. 

To generalize it, to understand it in, you know, broader terms, to make it portable so you can walk away and maybe use it, open it up and use it-- tougher. But it can be done. Um, I don't think I want to go into too much detail about that here. But, uh, helping others, um, a good-- a good way to do it is to raise your kids that way. Um, it's got to be part of what Aristotle called your "character." It's where the word "ethics" comes from, the word for character. It's got to be a part of your ethic, got to be part of your character, "ethikos." 

And, um, yeah, that's one way. That's a tough way, 'cause how are you going to raise your kids? [CLEARS THROAT] It's like a vicious circle. But people have done it. And possibly the story of Trocmé can be a role model or something for how to raise your kid. 

Um, another element is have a lot of luck, which is another thing you can't too easily control, because Trocmé was very lucky that they weren't wiped out a dozen times, [CHUCKLES] just a dozen times. Or it was bashert, or whatever, whatever. Have a-- you got to have a lot of luck, 'cause it could have been a complete loss. A couple of other places tried it, and they were wiped out, and not too far away-- Oradour-sur-Glane uh, right nearby. There's others, Claviers and so on. 

Hard question to answer, but when I teach this business of good and evil to my kids, I tell them these stories and let them try by understanding the story is a textured account of human intentions and deeds under immense danger, poverty, and so on. Um, I let them, by the story-- this is something [INAUDIBLE] and I are in almost total agreement over. 

There's a story-- a story is so important. It's better than abstract principles, uh, because, um, if you really know the story, and if the story is the right kind of story, I mean, you know, wow, you can really learn a lot, because it brings out you. You can come to the story. Somebody else will come to it from a different angle. And they'll find something else that's portable. 

That's fine. But the story is going to have implicit in it a kind of chaos of interpretations. And one person is going to choose one and say, aha, that's what it means to make a good mensch, to make a mensch, a person who really is good. Oh, that's what-- for instance, a minister, uh, met me in the street the other day. It's really weird when a person can pick out of a story and find portable and useful and walk off and say, that's the goodness, oh, ho. 

Uh, the minister back at Middletown, a wonderful man, um, read my book. And, uh, I was walking down the street and he was walking the other way, you know, he was on his bicycle. He walked [INAUDIBLE], I-- I-- I understand now what made Trocmé a-- a-- a-- a good-- a good minister and a good man and a leader of the village and all sort of things. 

And I what is it? And he said, he visited-- visite- he visited, uh, each home. And I said to myself, what the heck is that for an explanation of the man's decency? What else-- but that's what a minister would see as the part essential to his organizing the village and showing them what it means to help in your own actions, 'cause Trocmé had a terrible back. And he died from it. And they knew it. They knew it-- in constant pain. 

And he would go across those mountainous snows and everything to visit each house-- each house, no matter what the terrible weather. So he picked up this thing, visit, visite Uh, god knows what you're going to pick up in the way of how it happened, why it happened. But tell the whole story, and different people might do it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can the whole-- can the story be whole, or can the shammah might have substance, or even this village or Trocmé without the Kiddush HaShem, without remembering in the same time, uh, whether Mannheim or Auschwitz, when-- would you have gotten there without going through the-- 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Never. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --children of-- who were broke-- who were broken to pieces? 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Um, I always think of it like birth, [INAUDIBLE]. In order to breathe air, you have to have been away from it. You have to be in your mother's womb. And you have to be in a liquid with-- and so on. And, um, in order to do one thing, you have to have done its opposite, uh, before you know what you're doing. We live by difference, by change, by conflict. But we're conscious only of conflict, contrasts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think we're talking with goodness, you know, and it's-- that it not be trivialized. I think we have to know-- 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Got to know evil. Trocmé said this a million times. He said, if you want to be a Christian, you've got to be angry. You have got to be hard. You have got to be unsentimental. You have got to do. And if you are patient and you are passive and you are sentimental, you will never set foot in the stream of Christianity. 

And, uh, this-- it-- it-- he knew exactly-- he knew what evil was. That's another story I try to tell a little bit in my book. But that's because-- that's why he could be good. He just had-- you have to know them both. They're like black and white. You can't understand dark and light-- you can't understand them except in contrast. If-- cruelty doesn't make any sense to you unless you have some idea of what its opposite is, absolutely. And I knew the opposite. Now I found out at least a lot about, uh, goodness. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: Very abstract. Well-- [CHUCKLES] is it too abstract? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no. 

PHILIP PAUL HALLIE: No? 

