INTERVIEWER 1: Roll tape. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rolling. 

SUBJECT: OK, uh, we were at the point where I got to this first camp of mine, and sent there, and worked on the other bond. Normally, the work over there, if I had to stay a little longer, I was just about the last leg of mine, physically. 

Mid-summer, you know, it was, uh, sum-- beginning of summer. And the work-- describing the work of what I know now, I had no comparison, as far as what take place at a, uh, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which means a place that you work. 

The way-- work alone, basically work alone, that people can survive, and they can work hard and hard and harder. But it's not the work that kill people, which were dying by day and time. It was the abuse. 

You have the-- that man over there, the foreman, or that, uh-- that soldier, he's standing over there. And his job is only to holler and scream and hit. No matter what you do. You-- you don't have to do good, no good, in order to get punished. 

And the work is so that the-- the way it's laid out, you're on a-- on a railroad track. You load it, and you push it uphill, downhill. Accidents happen, because of the-- the tracks, you know, laid in sand, fresh-laid sand, mud, whatever it is, in the rail-- rail track. Things step over, you know? Things step over, and things happened. That's not my work, especially when you're under duress. 

So you are under the constant beating, beating, and you haven't got time to breathe. And as I said, under those conditions, the survival is very, very limited to the strongest. 

on top of all When you go to camp, you-- all of a sudden, you find yourself in a dilemma from there on, that a constant hunger, food, is on your mind. That's-- that's almost-- that almost obscures anything else. That almost obscures, because from the day you get up, you know you get this little water, something looks like. And about the-- to begin with, the times changed at camps. 

So anything what I'm going to tell you, it does-- it doesn't stay put as a fact from one camp, from one day to another. But at that particular time, you get a ration in the morning, a slice of bread that's enough to feed a bird, you know? Until you get in the noon time something that's called soup, which doesn't resemble anything I could ever have imagined. And in the evening, another type of soup, supposedly a little thicker. 

And on that ration, all of a sudden, your stomach starts to bother you and shrink. And all what's on your mind is-- you know you lose-- you lose your physical strength. You just lose it. And all what you think of, you haven't got enough food, and you want food. And you won't make it anyway. 

Then-- and then, you're-- I'm telling you about the working outside of camp, marching, particular miles and miles, the abuse over there, which I said, I wouldn't have made it if I stayed any longer, because I was on my last leg. 

And when you get on talking about camp, and what is not mentioned or not known is the life in camp is almost as bad as on the job. The camp, where you live, supposedly, in a barrack with 100 people at a time, double bend, double, uh, type of a wooden structure. 

INTERVIEWER: Bunks? 

SUBJECT: Bunks. It is not as you consider. You finally come home from work. You made a day's work. You can stretch out, or you can be left alone. 

The horror starts over there. You're just under commands every hour. There you get up. And there you shine your shoes, or whatever it is. There you straighten out the bed that day. There you come out for exercise. And there you come off of Appell, you know, Appell to-- Appell, which means roll call-- at anybody's whim. You're just not let to rest. 

The process of doing all things-- or doing those things-- come over here, come over there-- there isn't anything as you would imagine. You were told to do. You go over there. You go over there. You do this. You do this. This takes care under atmosphere of constant shouting and beating. 

The only thing is whoever-- and if you ask to get out of the-- of the room, you know, or barrack, outside, and roll call, you got took to couples, they called them. Uh, soldiers standing both sides of the door. 

And no matter how-- they tell you to go fast, fast, fast. But no matter how fast you go, you get hit, you know? You get hit. If you're lucky, you went in between, you know? You went in between. 

You go out and you stand in line. All of a sudden, you get hit from either side, all the time. Understand? There isn't moment that you partake a rest. The only time that you-- something is rest you think is because the guard, he needs his rest. That's about when they leave you alone. 

So the-- the torture goes from work and to camp with you. At times, you just want to get away from here and want to go over, just for change. 

But speaking about camp life, as I said, I was transferred from that camp a short while later to a camp that I spent three years, which they came and called for people in the woodworking business, sort of carpenters, builders, cabinet makers. At times, transferring was a lucky thing, and sometimes you went from-- to a worst place. There was never anything that you could predict where you're going. 

And sometimes, this part-- this particular stroke was luck for me, because they did need people in the woodworking business in this particular camp. A name-- the name of this camp was Bunzlau, also Bunzlau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bunzlau. 

SUBJECT: It's [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. It wasn't 100 miles away or so. It's not far from Berlin, actually. 

There was an industry that produced a box. Box, you know, the portable houses, and all kinds of paraphen-- paraphernalia out of-- made of wood for the army. I think a big, a big item was over there, wooden boxes for munition, or whatever it is, or transfer things for the army. Cabinets, like clothes-- clothes cabinets, wood, it was mostly box, which means we had an area about 5 miles in diameter of wood, you know? Lumber yards. And a big-- big halls of machine-- sew-- sewing machines, which is-- what you call it here? 

Anyway, and I was sent-- and I-- I was sent there to work in the hall on one of the machines, operating, first as a helper. In this particular camp, a saw mill-- saw mill, as you call it. All kinds of-- at that time, the saw mill was ready to the standard that I worked at. They weren't new to me, because I worked at it back home, but they were modern machines here. You know, German style. 

And also, this camp had something, uh, particular different. We had all kinds of nationalities over there working at the job, like, uh, French POWs. Later on, we had the Russian POWs. Worked side by side. 

And we had a-- we had a Polish, uh, people, uh, civil workers. We had German people from the city, elderly women, everybody employed at that particular, uh, saw mill, transportation, handling, so forth and so on. 

And I-- my first month, I became a helper for a particular machine. And, uh, I was working to get in-- getting into the detail. The one that I was-- the boss there, the Frenchman, a French POW, he got sick. And I took over running the machine with a couple of helpers. 

Later transferred to another machine. The stories related to it are many. The stories related to Czechs and priests working with us, you know? And, uh-- and it-- as helpers. 

We had no communication, except we always under the watchful eye from master or soldier, because we don't supposed to intermingle, except at the work. I could run the machine. He could help me with the wood, you know? And so forth and so on. And so the whole camp got mixed up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you talk to each other? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. We had language problems to begin with, especially with the French. But I came-- as time goes on, they learned a little German. I learned a little French. And we could communicate, especially what we needed-- what we needed. There was an advantage to it, which I'm going to come to it. 

Working with the other people, at times-- at times, very few times, although it was very strained, you could get some help. Very, very few times, but at least, you hoped for it. You exchange a word. You exchange some indications of what's going on, you know? 

As far as food, you know, sometimes, that's smuggled for you. They left you some-- something in the sawdust. They'll never give you directly, you know? You actually ask for it. You begged for it. But everybody was afraid. Uh, it was punishable, you know? Having anything to do or helping out anybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who-- who could leave food for you? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I'm-- I'm just speaking. That is part of an overall assessment, which I'm going to come in later that in times during the years, you come across lucky spots now and then that give you a lift. Uh, at my particular point, the fact, just working a day at my trade, or close to it, or at a mechanical thing, you can only exert yourself so much. Yourself is a machine. A machine got to-- you can only go at the speed of the machine. That doesn't mean there was many abuses, but it's different than wor-- working with shovel and pick. 

It was one of the lucky parts. I was good at it. And I-- in summer, there was many of them good. And took all the-- almost all the-- uh, all the machines were taken over eventually by inmates from my camp, from the trade, or they learned it, and the-- once they were there, Germans, all Germans usually run it, or invalids. Either they got sick, or they called off and they took over thing. 

Working at a trade was, in a way, at least, you got to have a chance. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Were the abuses more towards the Jews in that circumstance, or were they equal at the Polish and the French? 

SUBJECT: No. The-- there was no equal. Nobody had an equal to the abuse of the Jews. 

Now, with the Poles, I mentioned, and the others, that's quite something else. They were civilian workers. Civilian workers, sort of. 

The, uh, POWs, the French, they were treated like POWs. And nobody beat them, anything like that. They have communication with their home. And they had packages from the Red Cross. And they had food enough, so much so they would like to give away, and very few did. And if they didn't, at times, they sympathized, as you know. But they were afraid. They could-- they could get punished for the same reason, because always strong watchful eye, you know? Either a German, or an overseer, or the guard at the doors, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: But on the job-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you treated differently as the two? 

SUBJECT: At the job, at the professional job, you were treated-- you got to do your job. You got to do your job. And when you do your job, you're doing it, because it's not the-- you pick a shovel. He hits you when you drop something. But you work with a machine. You've got to work the machine. 

That does not exclude the coming and going from work and to work. They're not excluded [INAUDIBLE], but that time, you pass by like a-- through the jungle. Any-- you're anybody's prey. Anybody's prey. 

I had-- I'd mentioned, just in passing that-- I said something that helps you, like, uh-- you lived-- you worked with the people outside of camp, which they have access to things. Understand? While contrary to other times, other places that you work only with inmates. Everybody's starving. You certainly cannot expect anything from them, because everybody's starving there. 

But if you work with civilians or other types of people, they had more. So as slick as it was, and now and then, you expect and you got-- you found something in the sawdust. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me of your moments of light, you said the word-- 

SUBJECT: Of luck? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Light or luck. 

SUBJECT: Is it-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your own, personal. 

SUBJECT: This-- this is a-- this is a-- this is a, a big subject, which I would like-- that needs so much clarification. You see? This story about life in camp, which basically I know all through the years is enough complicated. And you hear people say, I lived so many camps, and I lived through so many years. And then you're going-- going to hear the horror stories about it. 

And then the question always comes up, how did you survive? Right? It always comes up. And the obvious answer would be-- what you mostly hear, luck, right? And then, if you-- if you're somebody that's outside, you would think in your head, luck, all right. I'd survive luck for five years through that kind of condition. They have a question. Did it enter your mind, you know? It must. How-- how you get lucky for so many years, for anybody who survived, you know? Anybody survived. 

Now, this word luck, it took place in many forms, many different forms. And I-- I wonder if I could just give you a few examples, a few examples of luck. The biggest, uh-- the-- the biggest thing was a mental-- mental worry about what emanated from hunger. You forgot at the moment you lived in camp. You only-- of course, it was only, uh, strive for survival. 

You have not-- you could not af-- afford the luxury of thinking back what happened at home. You could not afford. Later on, you'll find out, if I have to tell you, you could not afford what happened to your cousin or your brother in the next camp, or even at the same that you're with. 

You actually worried about your survival. Your survival depended mostly on being healthy and strong in order to go out and do the day's work. 

Once you go out, you can't do your day's work. Today, no, not the US, not the normal way of, um, doing it. Then the normal abuse that usually you get, you can withstand while you're healthy. And if you're not, you do less work, because you just can't. The more abuse you get. The more abuse you get, you are all the way down hill, and you're down and out. 

You wind up either underworked, crippled, or you're brought home crippled and incapacitated. And you wind up in-- in a-- what you call a sanitorium, or the, uh, hospital, sort of like the last. And over there, you get picked up for disposing of you once you're not productive anymore. And that's it. If you're not-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want your examples. 

SUBJECT: You know, [INAUDIBLE]. 

I know what to say. So the-- the most diving was to be healthy-- and healthy. Or something to do mostly mentally, how you think you're healthy, and what worries you. 

And a day-- a day that you were lucky somebody threw some food at you maybe, or hide something for you. A potato could be two, three days old, you know? In the summer, very sour. 

That little extra gave you so much confidence. Oh, now, I ate. I got something extra. You felt stronger, the more than-- that's what gave-- what really added to you. Your mind overtook you. 

You-- you're in the morning. You get your-- your fashion of bread, you know? Or you call it a fashion, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Ration. 

SUBJECT: Ration. 

And you're mentally so psyched up. You look what you're going to get. Now, should you that day get a slice that looks small to you, you go on, oh, they stick in your mind. You were cheated. You can't make it. You're not all right, because you haven't got at least what you've got. 

On the contrary, should you find it-- should you find it, oh, today, I got a good piece. That gave you so much confidence. It took you for days. You relished it. It gave you the spirit to survive. It eased your mind. You-- you watched. 

It's just minor examples, but it did so much spiritually to keep you alive. At times, you see that person-- it's so insignificant to many, you might think of at the moment, what is he talking about? You get your ration of soup, you know? 

And you saw the man that dishes out the soup. You saw he gave you just from the top, you know, with the ladle. And you know you've got water. Your stomach just curled up, fighting worry. There's a day for you. You waited for that. That's supposed to give you the strength, and there you got cheated. 

You just barely made it the day. Emotionally, you go around all day, because the only thing, food, was on your mind. And on the contrary, you saw a potato falling in, or you went down. Now that-- that must be very foolish, what you heard. That's enough to give you confidence for a week. That little bit of something. 

Now, you-- there's other things. You-- you-- you were on-- on-- at work. And at work, I said-- told you, you're always-- if you didn't get hit for what you've done wrong, or supposedly, there was just always somebody crazy going around hitting people, either German or a soldier of the guard, it felt like. Or a-- some master, you know, that thought he-- everything, all Germany, is on his head. He's responsible. He's going around hitting Jews. 

And he always swung. He always had, uh, at that particular place, or another place somebody else, a stick or like a 2 by 3 in the sand, and go around swinging at you. 

Now, you were lucky when he hit you, but he didn't break any bones on you. He just missed and hit you in a soft spot. You were able to go on. You're the man. You were lucky. 

And if I tell you something else, I didn't think if it will make anybody's mind, they would conceive at that part lucky. You were punished for things as, uh, a bad is not made straight. Now, yes, you'd think, what the hell with the-- where does he got a bed? Talk a bunk, or something like that wasn't straight, or your shoes or something wasn't right. You were punished sometimes that you got hit over the ba-- over the back. You have to kneel over, you know. You get whipped, you know, over the bare bottom. And you ask yourself, well, how can you get lucky there? Lucky could mean to somebody or didn't mean to somebody-- at a particular time, when the guard said or the commander said, OK, give him 25, you know, hit him 25 times. 

And you-- the guy, whoever it is, don't want to come too-- too personal-- bend over, take his pants down, and you had a bloody mess. And if the person at that particular time, that particular guard, which you could be verified, y-- you would s-- you would say a sadist, [INAUDIBLE] sadist. If you lay down, you get hit and you scream. Hear that? 

You scream. Because it hurts. You get all bloody. He says to the guy, not 25, just hit him. [SPEAKING GERMAN] means "not counting." Until he turns around and talks and, hit him. Do-- we don't count anymore. But if you're quiet, if that guy passed out after the fourth or fifth whip, he was lucky. 

He didn't-- he had-- he didn't feel any more at the moment. And the guard was satisfied he didn't scream. They picked him up. OK, he figured he had it. He was lucky he passed out and couldn't take it. And he did-- he didn't got, uh, unnum-- unnumerous hits. He just stopped at 10, 15 whatever it is. And, of course, the guys took him in and put him on his belly, recovered. But the guy that screamed, he wasn't lucky because he got hit and he never recovered. 

DORI LAUB: Were you ever hit? 

LEO: Uh, you're not going to ask me and I'm not going to tell you. Simple that. So luck in many forms. I give you another way-- way we're lucky. What was lucky for one is unlucky for the other. In camp, there were times when family were in the same camp, brothers and brothers or brothers and fathers. 

At times, through a lucky, lucky stroke that-- that, uh, they could help each other in a way. You know? Somebody needed more, they help each other and with food or some chores. There were chores to do, they could do. There were assigned chores. And, uh, they help each other and they survive that, uh, tense moment times. 

At times, was a tragedy. It was a tragedy that, uh, if one gets punished and the other has to stay watch. And when one is hungry and the other can't-- couldn't help him. When one is sick and the other can do nothing for him. 

And seeing it and being witnessing it, I don't know if I-- if you can, eh-- if you can ever, eh, describe-- if anybody can describe or can visualize what tragedy and agony it is between father and kid and son or brothers seeing each other beaten to a pulp and stay there and couldn't open his mouth. And if they did try to help, they both went. You understand? 

Or in a-- in a form of helping with food. And it was not beyond-- It was not beyond for one ask the other knowing that the other is just as hungry as them, you know? But the mind, at that time, was not rational, eh, one person. And you-- and then you got to figure, there were some big people and small people, as far physically. 

And one eats more than the other. And the rations were the same. And, uh-- and-- and, uh, at times, as I said, brothers or father and son, they demanded of each other, and others refuse it and watch somebody just go into pieces. 

That brings me to the point is-- that in the-- in the whole story of the Holocaust, we always talk about, so many died, thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions. The bigger tragedy, if anybody can-- c-- can visualize this, is dehumanization, degradation, and agonization. What went through for the ones that lived and the ones that didn't live. 

Or how they died, how some died. Dying, dying and suffering, in separate was not as horrible or not-- e-- not even 10% as horrible as when the-- all this took place with kinfolk near each other. Can you ever visualize? Mothers and-- eh, eh, mothers and children, of course, it's been documented. 

But from what I saw and where I was that the suffering that what people turned to, what people act and-- and, uh, what manifests in a human being when they see their own kind suffering. This, I don't know how to bring it out or how anybody can en-- visualize, you know? You take a person-- it-- it-- it's-- 

I would like to get to a specific. I would like it to tell you a name, a place. I can't. I don't want to for other reasons. And then again, speaking of, eh, what, eh-- with all this hunger and fear and the-- the-- the will to survive or-- or the-- everybody want to survive. There isn't anybody that wanted to die. 

If any-- If anybody wanted to die, its because he-- he's-- he's got too close involved or touched with the-- his own kin at the moment to forget he saw it. He could take a-- indiv-- eh, anybody individually, individually could-- could maybe make his decision on life and death. And-- and, eh, and can act without harming anybody else. 

But if it come in front of a relative and a close one, kin, the-- the-- the-- the-- the spiritual part of a human being disintegrates to a point beyond describing to act, that never could be described to anybody. And getting into that kind of details, place, point, it's-- it's just impossible to make you believe or impossible for me to tell you that. And, uh, what transpired u-- u-- u-- under-- under those circumstances between so many people is will probably never be told. 

For-- and don't think-- think I'm talking personally. I'm not. And but, eh, it transpired so much, the dehumanization, degradation, that probably people will take to the grave with them without coming out and tell you. Eh, you almost, eh, sometimes think, eh, animal like. 

No animal could never act as degrading as a human being get driven to in-- at-- at some stages. And this is most of it that I-- that needs to be get into if you want to-- if you want to, eh, record the Holocaust, not just numbers that are in the thousands and the hundreds and the millions. You can focus almost o-- on one family, on one person, on one particular day. 

And if you go through in the details, it's just enough for a lifetime for people to dwell on it, what happened over there. And uh, I-- I-- you have seen-- seen a picture of the Holocaust, right? And, of course, to me, uh, to anybody it's a-- it's a play. 

And if-- and it-- and not a-- any so much-- if you saw any humanity over there, anything human, that was fictitious, anything human that, uh-- that you could see from the part of the Germans, even for the price of-- if they act human, eh, for a price that you, eh-- that, uh-- if you want to, eh, go back to the act of the girl, you know, of the woman to the German. 

Or some way, if they ever act human and you saw it, then it's a fraud. It didn't happen. It didn't happen at no point. At no point it didn't happen. Eh, they-- they couldn't act human because it's just was beyond them. You saw them all the time. A-- and, of course, you're going to ask me or I ask myself, where-- where does it take a people to act like this, to be like this? 

They are always being psyched up. The-- eh, we knew at the camp, I know I'm skipping around, they had, uh, intervals. The guards which they were sent to refresher course, sort of, eh, indoctrination. And the guard that was halfway human before he left-- of course, we-- we-- we started off on the point of luck, what is luck? Luck, eh, eh, again, I said-- 

DORI LAUB: What about the guard that was half-- 

LEO: What? 

DORI LAUB: The guard that was half way human when he left. 

LEO: When he was halfway human, I say, he-- he finally got, eh, immune to the problem and act, eh, instead. He got to the point that he screamed like a dog and-- and-- and mad. But he didn't use his hand. He was that way halfway human, you understand? If you had that kind of guard, that, uh, you hear him, uh, on the top of his lungs with all kinds of insults, you know? 

And he didn't use his hand or a stick or his things. That was a lucky part if you get that kind of guard. But then you've got the guard, from nowhere, you don't hear a word. And he-- you get beaten up, eh, from left and right and turns away with a smile. And-- but if you got the guard that I said screams a lot, it's a lucky part. 

DORI LAUB: That's a sign of his humanity. 

LEO: Eh, that, I said, when he becomes a halfway human, 

DORI LAUB: Screamed. 

LEO: He ju-- he just-- he just scream, we-- at least, to us. Because-- 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LEO: --this was his weapon. But I'm trying to say that that guard that-- that was half way human-- 

DORI LAUB: Was there such a guard that you remember? 

LEO: There-- there were far-- too-- too few, too far in between. But there must have been some you come across. But, eh, I'm just trying to say with all you're telling me, how could anybody ever live with or live by and who are the people that done this? So what I'm trying to tell you is that, even the guard that got immune to situation, every now and then, we knew they were ca-- they were called into indoctrination. 

INTERVIEWER: How often-- 

LEO: And when they came back, they came back, the-- there you just saw a beast in front of you. 

INTERVIEWER: How often would they go for indoctrination, as far as you could tell? 

LEO: We-- we always knew it. Again, you ask yourself, how do you know it? Intervals, six months or so. And the fact is, at times, you get a commander, uh, command-- commanders and camps change. And if he gets to be halfway human or to their point of view, lazy, to take us through the mill too often, you know, too often, or let us in peace too often on Sunday when roll call twice, make us all kinds of exercise or demanding. 

Somehow, I don't know where-- from where that guard, that commander gets replaced with somebody else. And all of a sudden, you get a beast again. Who squeal on him and how this happened? It's almost-- we know it's happening, you know? 

Because all of a sudden, we thought we got it all made, that we got a commander that, uh, he remain as-- as tough as nails, but he won't abuse you if you don't, eh, break a rule according to their standards. They-- living in the camp, is as-- is as interchangeable from day to day, from morning that you leave to night. 

And again, I said, from camp to camp. Because there were no-- there was no constitution or rule or any prescribed way of doing things. The commander was as usually given the authority over your life. Do as you please. Do as he pleases. And his task was to eliminate, to harass, and to bother. His record-- his record will only be rewarded if he needs always more people. 

DORI LAUB: You were in the same camp for all three years? 

LEO: Uh, oh, three years in one particular camp, that particular camp. Later on, I went to another one at the end. 

DORI LAUB: As you were in that camp, what-- how did you get information about the war? 

LEO: Yeah, right, OK. Uh, there was a grapevine in camp. We heard it. Eh, not always accurate. Not always accurate. As I said, we were with civilians, civilians and POWs, which they-- they went back to France once. And they had a [SPEAKING GERMAN] what you call it. 

DORI LAUB: [INAUDIBLE] 

LEO: Vacation, whatever. And they had access to the outside, at least to the press or whatever. And at points, you were out without-- a moment without guard or anything like that. And you also could ha-- could hear sometimes, uh, a German will tell you-- or speak to one another, . speak to one another at the-- at the break. And you were close by. 

DORI LAUB: You remember once an incident overhearing? 

LEO: Yes, that it-- personally, the-- see, you come-- you come to a period of, say, start at '42. '43 the w-- the war-- the war started going downhill. At times, the, uh, was it a conscience or try to-- try to make their way back and, uh, impress us somehow. While they won't speak to us directly, as I said, they speak to the maid. 

And-- and, uh-- and we're talking about older people, now. Now, we didn't work in a camp of the German civilians where nobody are young. Now, I'm talking old as 60 and over. They were the bosses and so forth and so on. And they can hear, uh, sort of complaining to one another what's going on and what's going to happen and crazy regime, so forth and so on, not by name, so forth and so on, you know? 

And what happened over there, supposedly, we don't supposed to hear or believing we don't understand or whatever it is. We picked up here and there. And we picked up from the French, uh, from the French, uh, POWs. And word gets around and we heard. U-- un-- uh, unfortunately, we heard more things believing it than we should have. 

Because you always counted, it's going to take, eh-- oh yeah, a bombing's going on and a defeat. We thought the war is over, you know? Tomorrow we're going to be-- you're going to be, uh, liberated. But it never happened. That's, uh-- the worst part was yet to come as far as for me is concerned. 

Or others that, uh, when-- when they knew that the war is going to-- is going to come-- as far from the military point of view, not from the civilians. Civilians, they sort of start thinking back, you know, what might happen. And, uh, but, uh, the-- as far as the army is concerned, they were determined. And we knew it. 

And we always knew it, that, uh, it has been told by them directly that, uh, you know, 12 o'clock, which is the end, if it's the end of the regime, a minute before 12, it'd be the end of us. And we always expected that. And consequently, I-- I-- I-- to dwell on camp life is enough one day's-- one day's history to take you away for long and long and long hours, uh, just what happened in one day. 

I wonder if-- why your questions don't come in, what did you do? What did you do for yourself as far-- as far as, uh, why did you cooperate? Or why didn't you organize or something like that? If ever that kind of question comes to your mind, asking me about it. 

DORI LAUB: The question that comes to my mind is of what happened half a minute to 12? 

LEO: Uh, yeah, a minute to 12. Well, we waited for that minute to 12 and worried. Now, I'm skipping from that point 'til a day that, uh, the Russians were 20 miles away from us. And, uh-- in the winter of '45, the Russians were 20 miles. And at that time, we heard the big guns and everything else. 

And the order came in the middle of the night that we're evacuating-- evacuating, uh, the camp on foot. And that was the beginning of February '45, and be the second or the third or so forth and so on. And, uh, we had a choice. Some had a choice and said, uh, they remain in camp. And they didn't force us, some of us, to go. 

If you claim you can't go, well, the guard says, OK, stay there. Good luck for you, you know? You want to stay. But we also know, at least, in our mind, that if we stay, we going to get either dynamited or whatever it is. They're going to do away with us. That's what we believe all along. 

Uh, what actually happened is, particular, that-- that camp that we started off to march away, the ones that remained, uh, some hundred odd people, they got-- they got, eh, liberated 24 hours later. They got liberated, a lucky stroke for them. That never took place over there, at least. 

We were sent out in the winter for march through [SPEAKING GERMAN], which is hill country, for six weeks, six weeks on the road, uh, a group of a couple of thousand of us. And on the way, falling away by wayside. You know, if you can't march, you just get pushed off the road and gunned down. 

DORI LAUB: By the old German guard? 

LEO: Guard. 

DORI LAUB: The old man was-- 

LEO: They are old men and some young ones. The were-- a fact-- matter of fact, we got some old ones and we had some young ones that were slightly wounded back from-- bitter, sadistic, and particular few ones that, uh, they just-- they just wait for the occasion that, uh, you're not in line. 

DORI LAUB: And those were not SS men, or were they? 

LEO: Uh, some of them, some of them, mostly not, some of them. The injured young ones were SS men. The others were old guard, ASA or whatever you call it. 

DORI LAUB: The old, regular soldiers also shot people-- 

LEO: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: --who couldn't walk? 

LEO: Yeah, yeah. There was not-- uh, I'm surprised you're asking. There's almost a-- eh, you couldn't walk or you just fall down and march. And the question wasn't walking. You mo-- for most of the time, you had to pull wagons, wagons, you know, on wheels, with the supplies, supplies for the guards, and so forth and so on. 

There were about a dozen wagons which you had to push. 20 people in front and as many as you can in the side, uphill and downhill. And any time somebody steps on each other and falls down, that's it. Uh, the-- the march took place and we come from-- uh, uh, uh, I said that camp that, uh, we talk about a minute before 12. 

And that they'll take care of us, we always knew it, or, at least, believe it to be or the orders should have been. That's been all through the years whenever we talked. Eh, I want to go back to, for a moment, to the grapevine that we always heard. We heard the alarms, the sirens and bombings. 

We were-- we weren't too far from Berlin. And we always thought, uh, any day, parachutes are going to come down and liberate us. And, uh, and the more we thought so, the more we were fooled. But, uh, you might think we're spiritually up for one minute. But the next day, we're just as-- 10 miles lower after every news that came to us. 

Eh, I don't know how you people read over here, but we were wait-- we couldn't perceive that the whole world, an A-- an American army and a French army, English, couldn't overtake the Germans. And then, we knew the Russian-- Russians are coming. We heard 'em. 

And, uh, we didn't believe that-- that they could be that awesome, you know? That they cou-- they couldn't be-- they couldn't be taken over. That march, which took place, we gotta get back-- back into. At every night, we stopped at a barn, you know, in barns, uh, to rest for the night either inside or outside, in the snow and everything. Just, that's the way that we rest. 

And the guards themself, they had their shifts rotated. They're standing at their three shifts, uh, that, uh, rode in-- in some of the cars, whenever they took off to sleep in the farmhouse, they were fresh and every day. And, uh, the beginning of the-- of the march, at every station, some people hid back in-- in the straw or whatever, and didn't continue. 

Some saved themself. Until a particular point, everybody got smart. We-- we knew, as far that we go inland, now, the farther we're going away from the Russians. We never gonna be liberated. And our bad luck, uh, the Russians just, uh, came across that camp and, as we know later, we found out, they were stopped for another couple of weeks. 

And the people that hid in, subsequently, every night someplace were just caught and done away with. We didn't know that either 'til later on. And in one particular place, everybody got smart or a big group of it and said, OK, we're not going. And when the morning came up, they got all the people from the-- from the barns. 

You could see there wasn't 10, 15 missing, it was half of the camp missing. And what happened then is, uh, the guard, as before, they might have known what happened, but, uh, the counting wasn't that accurate. They didn't care, a dozen or two. But now, a great many, they were obliged to do something, at least, and, uh, they thought. 

And they went in with machine guns right in the straw and sprayed the guns, you know? Whoever run out, run out, they got caught, whatever it is, and that was the result of, uh, trying to escape in that fashion. And another story is related to it. Many of them, to them, hiding places, and shootings, and injuries and deaths personal and then unpersonal and some were here and were having and f-- what, uh, made through that march and with experiences, uh, which need not be going into right now. 

But we marched for just about six weeks. We went through the width of Germany. And at the camp, uh, near Buchenwald, and, uh, we saw all this on the road, you know? Because everywhere from the east, whatever they could, they got it more inland. It's beyond me what anybody-- what they are trying to prevent, they-- why they didn't away with them or what they took them for. 

There was no more such thing as organized camps and labor. At that, it was total chaos. But yet, uh-- yet, I think, it was sort of a bureaucracy for the guards themselves and the commanders. They got a job, their job to do, you know? Once they get rid of the Jews or the inmates, they would have to be, you know, go back, join the army. 

It was a point, then, that you saw everywhere through Germany, any-- anybody-- anybody that could walk, as far as the older people, had to have-- have the gun. Not to go in the front, but, uh, sort of a, defending the city, like, in a-- in a most crazy way thinking, you know, for the Russians. 

So the guards themself, it was their safe passage away from the army. That's why they kept us. There were no-- there were no more any, uh, orders to follow from any place because total ch-- chaos. But the commander and his guards, that-- that was their ticket. We were their ticket. 

So they herded us across the country. And, uh-- and other guards had the same problem. And we saw all kinds of groups there on the road marching back and forth. And the-- and the-- what transpired through our marches, sometimes we marched through cities, most of the time, main roads and outside the city. 

And a particular place, uh, I think it was Gorlitz one time, we marched through during the day, during the city. And there you see-- and as if you see people, sometimes, lined up watching a parade, and they were lining up watching hundreds and hundreds of people walking in 50 width in ragged style, fashion, you know, people that, uh, looked skeletons, just barely dragging their legs. 

You could see, if you want to believe it, some of the older people, women, just crying, plain crying. What's going on? So forth and so on. And you-- and asking the guard, you know? An old woman, I imagine, old people they are sort of less fearless. At least, that was the impression. 

And the guard will tell them, oh, this is criminals. This is, uh, hardened criminals that did murder, so forth and so on, you know, to take away the sympathy of that person. That person ain't going to ask further questions or investigate is that true or not true. But that, uh, that what transpired at times when we were facing the German public for the first time in-- in a long time. 

Of course, in camp-- in camp, we go back to camp, but the civilians that we worked, they were indoctrinated before they got there. Who they're facing and what-- and what's what. So to them, it was no news. Anybody, almost had to have clearance to work in camp near an inmate. 

But there, we walked through a big German city. And the population just out there instinctive-- instinctively see what's going on. They see a breed of people like, uh, undescribable what we were look like, you know? Two-- already two weeks then, on the road and the type of clothes we wear. 

Now, if I should describe clothes. As you know, uh, camps varied. As we first enter the same camp, first one or the second one, to a regular work camp, [SPEAKING GERMAN], which, in time, changed to a full-fledged concentration camp. That necessa-- uh, necessitate changing our clothes to the pajamas type, striped-- striped stuff. 

And, uh, another thing is, as you know, uh, the n-- the camps that we know of, Auschwitz, Buchenwald, so forth and so on, had tattoos over their arms. We had not. Our-- we came our parent camp. See, every camp was a division of a big camp. Our parent camp by the name Gross-Rosen. 

You-- you maybe be come across to it sometimes. We did not go. Their camp had instituted a different type of identification. We had our heads shaven two inches, it's all two inches from front to the back, every week, once a week. We didn't have long hair. Short hair, but clean shaven, two inches over here to the back, a way of identification. 

If we escaped, and, of course, we had a number-- a number with a triangle in the front and a number in a triangle in the back. Plus, on the side of the pajamas, left and right, the numbers was usually used against us. And any-- any fashion goes back to camp, you know? 

At times, that, uh, you can't think of anything, so somebody thought they saw you-- uh, somebody wants to report you, he just took your number off. You understand? And turn it into the guard. And if he turn it into the guard for any violation, either a master thought that you didn't work hard enough or a master thought you were lazy or a master thought you didn't obey him right away or for whim, he just report your number. 

And, uh, that was, ah, when we transferred to-- to that part-- type of, uh, garb with the identification. Now, eh, I come back to the march. As we were supposed to look like marching through the city, to civilian eyes, eh, aside our clothes, wooden shoes for most of it. Or could get into points of two different shoes and so forth and so on. 

To look at that, at, uh, a group of people, uh, first week was no food, in the first place. And march, because until somebo-- something organized. We had, uh, talking about luck before. We did have a commander at that point of the march that the commander himself was halfway human, you know? 

Which manifests itself, well, you ask yourself, what the-- what the commander do? He, uh, rode motorcycle forward, you know, always, and secured quarters and secured some type of food from the farmers, while, uh, the rest of the guard didn't give a hoot one way or another, you understand? And he went out and how he got it, I don't know. But he-- he secured a minimum amount and quarters. 

And, at times, he could not get, eh, the farmers even to let us in the barn for overnight in the winter. Here, we just camped on the road, camped on the road in the snow. Only problem was, with him, he was very little around. He was always ahead of us a day or two, secure the road and the permission sort of legal things. 

And if when he was around, eh, sort of the beatings and the abuse was to a minimum. And when he came in, we always hold our hand up to God like a savior. And a particular time-- and a particular time, that particular commander, which was an older man and from the old guard and, uh, a particular time, he saved a lot of lives. 

So outright, I couldn't get into it. You say, eh-- It was a-- a scene that, uh, I will have to get back to-- I will have to get back to the incident where I told you in the barns where everybody hid so many. And the-- and the guard went in and machine gunned, whatever that were there. 

And at that time, whatever they didn't hid in the-- in the straw, everybody run out and join, sort of, hiding between the, uh, people that were already up for the count, for the roll call, which was about three, four columns, you know, in order to get mingled in with the rest of us, with the rest of the them. 

And, uh, whatever they kill there, they were-- they weren't done. They were going to, as the normal way of-- Now, everybody run out, come over here. Otherwise, you know, you get every fifth, every tenth in the-- in the row. And that's about just started, you know, that, uh, after all the dead and so forth and so on. 

At that point, that particular commander, he must have heard the shooting on the road. And, uh, one moment he came in and crossed the yard, opened up, and he came in, hold the shooting. Hold the shooting, he just gave the order. And-- and, uh, many people were saved. Just the-- no ifs or buts. 

That-- as a matter of fact, that commander, he survived, the-- they come-- they say he survived after the camp, I understand. He was a Berliner. He went back to Berlin. And his record, uh, with that act. And he was a commander of our camp, uh, a total of only six months. It's the last six months in camp. Plus on the-- on that big, uh, fateful trip, march we had, the six week march. 

And he was, uh, commander of another camp some other time. I understand, in Berlin they rewarded him after the war. He survived in some-- I don't know which one of the countries. He was recognized for his deed helping. And that was a lucky part for many of us. 

Uh, getting back to that, uh, march. In the march, we went through cities and mostly farms. And we finally came into, uh, a camp, which was very, uh, harsh camp, by any means, one of the harshest, and also large numbers, uh, of 100,000, uh, inmates of all nationalities, you know? 

Even, that camp, to begin with that, uh, I started off with originally were mainly Jews from that particular area where I came from. Later on, transfer to the other camp and the other camp start already coming in all kinds of nationalities. It wasn't very strictly Jews anymore. It was already Germans. 

DORI LAUB: So you got to a camp with many nationalities? 

LEO: Eventually, the camp-- 

DORI LAUB: [INAUDIBLE] 

LEO: --ming-- mingled in all kinds of nationalities. And, uh, or even-- even some Germans. But uh, of particular breed, which I wouldn't want to get into it now. Of course, we had to, you know-- 

DORI LAUB: I'm talking about on the march. You got to the-- 

LEO: On the march, whatever-- whoever was in camp marched. 

DORI LAUB: You got into a camp-- 

LEO: We got into a camp, to that big camp at-- it's actually so famous. The camp is-- name was Nordhausen. And one part of it was named Dora. 

DORI LAUB: Dora. 

LEO: Dora, I don't know if you've heard of it. It was a big mountain top and the bottom of it was the industry under the camp, which the develop the V2, V1 missile. Under the-- under the mountain, there was a factory that produced the missile. And on top of a mountain was the camp, which was 100,000 and [INAUDIBLE] of inmates. 

There was a full-fledged camp with the nationalities from all over the world. And, uh, if you heard of camps, the, uh-- at that time, was so everything unorganized. There was no more bunks. You sleep on the floor like sardines, one to another. 

Food was no more regularly. You just not, uh-- whenever it come, be just a few-- the-- the, uh, whoever rule the camp, the authority that took care of the food part, distribute-- distribu-- distribution. As in a normal matter, you would line up and get your portion and one after another, one after another. At least you were secured for something, you know, however little it was. 

At that time, they just went through the motion. They came in with the food. They gave out to 10, 15 minutes and three quarter, then they took it away and-- for themselves, you know? So you were no more living or you just existed over there and waited the day that, uh, you can't go anymore. 

That was after six weeks of, uh, of traveling on the road with the-- a way that, uh, you came in already to camp skeletons. The wonder now is, how did you make it in the first place, you know, or anybody? It's unexplainable, but you-- you just go on, uh, bones and with our flesh, for the majority of the people, you know? You say-- 

DORI LAUB: What happened in that camp? Can you-- 

LEO: That camp, I was a short time. That camp had its own, uh-- had its own, uh, disposal of bodies, a crematorio. That camp had, uh-- had, uh-- It was not big, as far as the crematorio. You had already in the yard the side stacked up logs where you see, uh, used for the burning the bodies outside of the crematorio you know? 

And, uh, the days that we're there, again, the lucky part that I was chosen to go on a kommando work away from camp. And that was already, as I said, abuse in camp and sometimes worse than outside. And the marching in camp, the activity in camp, overall, you couldn't determine, because so spread out, so vast, so many barracks between the woods, and so forth and so on. 

However, you had one-- one central, uh, place where you gather and-- for accounting, you know? Appellplatz, you call it. And going to it, you knew, you knew, you saw over there is this and over there is the crematorio, over here is the bodies. You saw it all along the road. And either you saw them carting them, you know, on some type of wheelbarrow. 

And you saw them stacked up, saw the wood, you saw the fire, you don't-- didn't participate in anything, but you were aware everything is there. And you just, uh, gather them bodies like you gather a apple from a tree that fall down, you know, in the fall. You just, uh, when they come down, you pick them up, you dispose of them. 

That was the criteria over there. And they falling now plenty because there was no food there. And all the-- the, uh-- whoever were in charge of, uh, rationing, to them, they had a-- they had an amount, whatever was prescribed for them. And the less people they had to feed, more was left, so for them. That was the criteria. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there women and men intermingled at all? 

LEO: Uh, now, you can go back about women and men to previous camps that I was. We had a woman camp. We had a woman camp. And, uh, to go in about their lives, we didn't live together, that's for sure. 

INTERVIEWER: Right, and the last camp? 

LEO: That's for sure. And that, uh, particular camp was not the last camp, was not the last one, a transitory camp, sort of. There were a lot of women and, uh, for different purposes, women. As it's been, back in history, women to entertain the men, at least the elite of the men, the elite of the men, the Germans, or the elite of the men that rule the camp, inmates. Because in that particular camp, had a large majority of political prisoners. As you know, uh, as I described before, at the concentration camp, inmates wore a number plus a triangle. 

DORI LAUB: The women, it was a brothel? 

LEO: Yeah. One of-- we know-- we knew that for a fact. There it is, and we saw women going in and out. They saw them from afar. To us, they were news. Uh, we didn't have this in our camp. At least, uh, the women that were in our camp, they were supposed to be working women, at least they were. We didn't have such a thing in our because it was a relatively small camp. 

DORI LAUB: So we are now in, uh-- 

LEO: In Dora. 

DORI LAUB: In Dora in April almost? 

LEO: No, we-- we are in the beginning of April, I think. 

DORI LAUB: April 194-- 

LEO: End of March, April 1944. 

DORI LAUB: '45. No, '45. 

LEO: '45. '45. 

DORI LAUB: And, uh, they-- there st-- eh, there still was a brothel used by Germans and camp officials in April '45? 

LEO: We knew. I don't know how long they been there, when they been used. But we know, there are the women. And they were there for that purpose. We had no access. 

DORI LAUB: A month before the end of the war. 

LEO: Sort of. But that's not the end yet. Uh, I will relay a particular incident that never escapes me. We went out on a-- on a kommando digging some ditches through the city or on the side. And, uh, we just lay cables, I think, and some cable communications underground for a week-- for a weeks time. 

And a particular time, we came back on our way of the evening, marching back our outfit, which was about 50 or 60 people with a dozen guards. And, uh, just about a half a mile from the camp, uh, airplanes overhead, American airplanes. We saw them before. We heard them before. We saw through the march, through the six weeks, we saw many devastations and burned out places. 

And we're only happy to see it and glad to see it. And come sooner the better, I don't care if you throw it over here. And the reason, uh, uh, something about that incident that is there we saw they-- they right overhead. And we were at a point, marching back on the road where, to every side, so the-- a short distance was the camp where they produce the V-- V2 missiles. Uh. 

DORI LAUB: Just a second, we have to change. 