INTERVIEWER: You pick up from where you were at the wall. Anything. 

SUBJECT: To describe the ghetto. First of all, a certain allotment of uh, cubic uh, meters-- three cubic meters. A meter is approximately 1 and 1/2 yards, cubic, allowed per person, which meant at least three families living in one apartment with one bathroom, one stove, no heating. Central heating was all out in the middle. A wood-burning stove with the um, flue stuck out of the window or through the balcony. 

That was the ghetto. People crowded into tiny, tiny compartments. And it depended-- if you knew someone who lived in the area where the ghetto was constructed. That was our fortunate story. Another teacher's wife, a widow, had an apartment. And she invited us in because my father was a teacher. 

And so it was a little more pleasant. But crowded. People crowded into an area that may have been meant to house but 1/5th of the population. 

And totally isolated from the outside, from the hostile, forbidden outside. Don't forget-- you had to have an identity card on the outside. And you were questioned about it any moment. 

And so even if you did, and many did venture to the out, you had to be prepared. You have to have a background of an underground that forged papers for you. And you had to look-- look the Gentile. Whatever role you were playing. And you had to know where to go. Where would you go? Who would take you in? 

I am not passing disparaging remarks against the Polish people. Not for that. How many people, let's say, in the United States, down south, Whites-- how many would hide a Black, had this situation existed, if they knew that for that one Black, their children would be shot? 

I could not have demanded it from them. There were many who did. There were many who were brutal. But being in the position of just a little bit better than the Jews-- polnische schweine Polish pigs-- the Polish people really are asked for too much if you're thinking in terms of saving. 

They did save. They were more anti-Semitic than, perhaps, Western nations, because of the history. They were educated in the anti-Semitism. They were just anti-Semi-- anti-Semitic, as perhaps, southern Whites were with the Negro, because that was their particular history. That isn't in the Polish genes, anti-Semitism. It was bred into them. 

So there was no way of escaping. There was no place to go unless you had contacts or money. There was a thriving industry of making out-- making so-called Aryan papers. You know the story of the Aryan nun? Aryan philosophy. 

There were these papers were being made. And people paid heavy money and children were saved. Some were gotten out of the ghetto. In fact, many of my friends who are today in the United States or in Argentina sa-- were saved that way. 

My sister was saved that way. My aunt purchased a birth certificate over this-- uh, uh, uh, Polish girl for approximately the same age for her. And being children, were easy to save. Because you didn't need to have an ident-- identification or passport. Would have had to have a Soviet, for example-- I didn't have to have a Soviet passport, because I was on my father's passport. So they wouldn't have asked, where is your passport? So I could just have a birth certificate. 

But my parents didn't have the money, nor was I going to do it. I wasn't going to leave my parents. Because they were totally helpless. 

INTERVIEWER: The ghetto walls, the-- that enclosed you. Why was it so restrictive? What were they made of? How were they guarded? 

SUBJECT: That wasn't restrictive. It was just ordinary wood. It was what was on the other side. Guardians of semi-human population, which means uh-- there was a law, the German law. A Jew is to wear yellow Star of David and stay in the ghetto. And any encroachment upon the other side is punishable by death. And that wasn't maybe. 

An encroachment meant perhaps putting your nose next to the wall. That was enough. You were shot with pleasure. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were they positioned, the soldiers? 

SUBJECT: They were walking sentries. Sentries were walking on the outside. They were at each-- there were gates where people were led out of the ghettos. Some people were taken to work. Germans would come in, provisions were brought in. They were on either side of the gates. 

And I'm trying-- no. Not on the inside of the ghetto. On the outside. So you never really saw them. It was really taking a chance if you're jumping. 

I had a boyfriend who did that. But then he was risking his life. He really didn't care whether he was dead or alive. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he do? 

SUBJECT: Oh, he went out. We were both in the underground. And he was totally unafraid. Totally unafraid. And also lucky. And he had some friends on the outside, contacts. So he managed them-- smugglers managed. 

And then there were weak points, weak spots, unguarded spots, that eventually, people discovered about. There were tunnels dug under. Things were going in and out of the ghetto all right. 

INTERVIEWER: From your-- from the houses, couldn't you look over the wall? Couldn't-- could you see over the wall from the apartments, where the homes or-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. In some parts, yes. You could. My particular house was located too far from the ghetto area. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go-- 

SUBJECT: From the wall area. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you go out at all? 

SUBJECT: I went out in the very beginnings of the ghetto. They were looking for people who knew something, who were nurses, I believe. And I-- I always became anything that they asked for. Whatever gave a chance to go and do and perhaps get some food. 

Then I worked in a garden outside. And that was about it at the beginning. And then I just stayed in. 

INTERVIEWER: How big was the ghetto, all in all? How many blocks, or-- 

SUBJECT: I would say-- perhaps 20 square blocks. Something like that. It was a square. Or less. And, uh, it had, uh, its own militia. It had its own president of the Judenrat. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us-- 

SUBJECT: And it was pumped for everything we had to-- every so often, the head rabbi would say, we need so many thousand deutschemark, by yesterday. Which meant you had to give. And people had to give. And they collected. 

And then people were hungry. Medical facilities were poor. But as ghettos go, this ghetto was better off than Warsaw ghetto and others. And that for the following reason. We worked. 

We were put to work. We're making German uniforms, socks and whatnots. The entire ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Inside the ghetto. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And so-- some Wehrmacht officers got themselves out of the Eastern Front. And they were very much interested in maintaining this working ghetto. That made a free pass for them. 

INTERVIEWER: So-- 

SUBJECT: So yes. 

INTERVIEWER: They brought materials and-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they weren't liquidating us the way they were the other ghettos, till the very last moment. This was-- I believe, one of the last, or the last ghettos. We actually worked till the end. 

They liquidated part of it, the non-working part-- I was telling you before that I-- I had the school going for myself. Which meant doing that morning and afternoon, because I didn't have to work. 

My mother I think, worked. Yes. My mother worked in a factory. And my father was a scribe for the militia. And that gave him a nov-- ratio-- cards, to have enough food, so to speak. We were hungry. It was enough for potatoes and such. 

But then in, um-- 1942, in January-- February, excuse me. They liquidated part of the ghetto. They uh-- they let the militia know that they were going to do it. And the militia people took my father, myself and my mother into the militia headquarters. 

Those who had the cards that they were working were safe. Those that didn't have working cards, or working papers, were taken out. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have working papers? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't. But I was with my father. And after that, it became obvious that you best had those working papers. Because there was going to be more of the same. And so I started knitting socks in a factory. I had to discontinue that, uh-- school. 

INTERVIEWER: The Judenrat. Can you describe their function? Who they were, what they did, how they handled things? 

SUBJECT: The Judenrat had to accommodate the Germans, as anywhere else. The Judenrat-- uh, Rat-- was headed by a rabbi. And I forget his name. I'm sure it's in the-- in the, um-- books were written on the Bialystok ghetto. 

But they had to produce. They were denigrated. They were uh-- um, treated in a manner unbecoming a true statesman, which these people were. And they had to produce. 

INTERVIEWER: Did uh-- were you resentful of the Judenrat? Were you suspicious of them? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Of course we were. I don't know how fair it was. What is it that we expected of the Judenrat? Who did we expect it, uh-- what do you expect of people who are supposed to represent you? 

These were not guerrilla fighters who were young, uh, underground. These were functionaries-- uh, if not these particular people, others would have been elected. And they had to produce. 

They weren't traitors in the true sense of the word. They simply mediated, mollified, to some extent, German orders. They were able to negotiate. They were negotiators for us, as best as they could. They didn't sell out. Why would they? 

They weren't-- they knew very well. These were educated people. They knew very well. In the end, they were not going to be saved. In fact they'd probably be the first ones to go. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing with the underground, while you were knitting the socks? 

SUBJECT: We were divided into small little groups. I only knew two people. There were never meetings. We met in little streets. And we were discussing our possibility of escaping the ghetto. 

The underground was a true united front, from the far right to the far left. I don't know anything about the politics of it. That was on a higher level I had nothing to do with. 

I just was aware that I'm part of it. I knew that the ghetto was going to be exterminated. And at that point I knew that we st-- we-- we were going to stage an uprising. 

What has happened before-- there was a, um, dichotomy of feelings. Those with a flair for history and history writing say, let's all die heroically on barricades of a burning ghetto. And the young ones like myself said, no. Let's not die heroically. Let's go and preserve the Jewish nation in the woods. Give us the money. And you go ahead and fight. And we'll go out and save ourselves and we'll tell about you. 

And to the very end, we gear-- at least, the young part, counterpart of the ghetto underground, geared itself to escaping, to surviving on the outside. And so we had our small little cells in the very dense woods of that part of the land. 

And only few knew how to get there. So each time we would send a contingent of mainly men. Because you needed people who could handle weapons. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you get the weapons? 

SUBJECT: I haven't got the slightest idea. They were old. And I would say, from the looks of the grenade that I was supposed to handle, it was a Soviet grenade. So in part they may have been gotten uh, from uh, some leftover arsenals of the Soviets who ran, as I told you, with their pants off. And much was left behind. Some of it may have been, may have been. And I don't know. 

I have read books written by today's Polish government about it. And they claim it was contributed by the Polish underground on the outside. Well. That's left to be told by those who truly know. I am wondering. I think that we were ma-- self-supported and self-sufficient. 

And whatever we had were old weapons. Many couldn't be used. And those that could be used didn't have people who knew how to be used-- to use them. And that was me. 

I was given a grenade and I didn't know which end to open and how to open and what to do with. And that's how-- that's how I was taken to a concentration camp. 

At that final date, I was sent off to where the fight-- fighting was going on. And all the boys were sitting up there. I could hear shooting. And I with a grenade. Only, I don't know what to do with it. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were your parents? 

SUBJECT: My parents-- they were amassing all the Jews in a central plaza, so to speak. And that's where they went. And I bid them a fond goodbye and they didn't know. I was not allowed to tell my parents I was in the underground. Because I was holding on to weapons. I was sleeping on them. 

And I was not allowed to. So my mother didn't know. In fact, when I was sent out to the outpost on the outside, I hurt my mother very, very badly. Because I told her I went with a lover, whom I had never had. How else was I going to explain an absence of a few days? 

I only told her the truth when the two of us, she and I, were in a concentration camp. And I knew it didn't matter anymore. All she could say, how could you do it to me? We could have been shot for you. That was a typical reaction of a Jewish parent. This mentality of, how could you endanger us? 

But anyway, I was one of the many, I would say. How would a high school girl know how to use a hand grenade? I haven't seen one before that one crucial time. And I'm told to look this way. That's where the German tank would be coming. 

I looked this way with a hand grenade, disbelieving in my hand, fumbling with it. And I hear a German voice in back of me, of an old [INAUDIBLE], a Wehrmacht, who says, what are you doing, mein Kind? Just disbelieved that a pipsqueak of a girl with a grenade in her hand was a guerrilla. 

He says, give it to me. And I heard the tank. I was turned this way. He took the grenade. Where are your parents, he said? He thought I was just a lost child who picked up a grenade. 

And half numb, I let him lead me off to my parents. That was my contribution to the underground at that point. And the hard part of it was that, while I was being led off to safety, 100 boys-- our boys were shot right in front of me. What they were really caught using weapons. We were fighting the Germans, I'm told by those who stayed in the ghetto after we were taken out, that it went on for about five days, I believe. 

INTERVIEWER: This old German officer led you back into the ghetto, you told me-- 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. This was in the ghetto, in the part of the ghetto where we staged this defense. 

INTERVIEWER: I see. 

SUBJECT: It was a part which we called the Jewish cemetery. It was a makeshift kind of cemetery. Part, or perhaps, two blocks away from where the central plaza was, where people were being lined up to be marched off to a waiting train to take us to concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: And he took you back-- 

SUBJECT: And he took me to these people. He would not have even thought of wasting a bullet on me. To begin with, he knew where I was going and why waste a bullet. And second of all, he truly didn't believe it. I didn't believe it myself. I-- I probably would have thrown it as was, or, I don't know what I would have done. But I didn't know how to use it. 

INTERVIEWER: You were given no instruction. 

SUBJECT: No. There was no time for anything. We discovered-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yet you had been sleeping on it-- 

SUBJECT: This was just for others. I was sleeping on-- on-- on-- a few, a pistol, I think, and something else, to hide it-- and then that would be given to a contingent of people who went into the woods. My home was chosen as a safe hiding place because my father worked for the militia and they felt, well, that would be the last place where they would be searching for weapons, if ever. 

INTERVIEWER: When they led you back to your parents, they were standing in this plaza? 

SUBJECT: All ready. 

INTERVIEWER: And your parents thought you had been off with a lover? 

SUBJECT: No. At that point they didn't know where I was. Thought I was just lost. 

INTERVIEWER: And so then what did you do? And what happened to you? 

SUBJECT: They took us to the outside of the city. The gates opened. And they started selecting healthy, youngish looking, away and apart from elderly, feeble. And we were right away placed in different cattle wag-- wagons than the rest of the-- the ones that were selected to die immediately. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father? 

SUBJECT: No. My father, my mother. They were at that time-- must have been in their 40s. And don't forget. We only, unlike the rest of the Polish Jews, we only had two years of the ghetto, comparing with the Warsaw, people who had four years of misery. 

INTERVIEWER: How old-- what year was this? 

SUBJECT: That was 40-- 1943, September. I celebrated my birthday on that-- waiting for a train to be taken to a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: And the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising had already occurred? 

SUBJECT: The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising had already occurred. I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: So they knew about uprisings-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, we knew all about it. 

INTERVIEWER: They knew about it. 

SUBJECT: And they knew about it. And strangely enough, the Underground knew about the extermination of the ghetto from a German. Yes. We did have a German contact. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did he tell? 

SUBJECT: For the same reason for which individual Germans helped. 

Germans were a nation that produced many things before it also produced the monster. Why is it not reasonable to think that they would have an outcrop of decent people who would least want to do something, some of them with the sacrifice of their own selves? 

Many people who were in this part weren't SS, or Wehrmacht. Just army people. And we knew that that was the end of the ghetto. That was the very, very end of ghettos, period. 

And so they surrounded the ghetto-- mind you, not by Germans. Using Lithuanians, who they never used. They never employed Germans in these actions, they called them. Ukrainian-- and not the Poles, either. 

I have my heart aches because of Poles, but I didn't ever see Polish police bringing people either to the concentration camps-- they were too proud to collaborate with Germans. Even if they hated Jews, they still hated Germans more. 

But the Lithuanians, the so-called Black Guards, and the Ukrainians, yes. And they were the ones who were standing all around the ghetto. So there was no escape in that final moment. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they collaborators out of fear or collaborators out of desire? 

SUBJECT: These were organized army units. Organized army units, part-- in part made of the um-- infamous Vlasov army. Ukrainians who uh, betrayed-- who just gave themselves up and became a contingent of the German army and went to fight their brethren on the Soviet front. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were put into cattle cars? 

SUBJECT: We were then put into the cattle cars. And I was together with some of my best friends and my father and my mother and my boyfriend, who had the contact with the Underground, who knew where we should go. 

And I cut my skirt open to jump. And we begged people, please give us your money. Soap, anything. It will save ourselves. And they said, no. We're going to buy our lives out, perhaps. We can't give you the money. That was very disheartening. 

But people were jumping and escaping. And they started shooting. And then in total desperation, we just couldn't jump. In fact, I remember clearly, I was being held back by the people in my cattle wagon. 

My father became catatonic. He didn't exist. He just sat there totally unable to-- to uh, grasp the reality. My mother fainted and I started shaking him. Go do something. And he looked at me and he was in a state of stupor. 

But the other Jews kept on saying, if you jump, they will shoot us. Don't you dare, you young so-and-so. And held us back. 

INTERVIEWER: Why would you expect that they would give you what might have saved their lives? Why was that disheartening? 

SUBJECT: Because we knew. And later on, that American dollars were littering the-- the plaza before the crematoria. We knew that they couldn't use the money. We could. We could buy our-- our-- our food with it, in the partisan movement. But they couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they know that? 

SUBJECT: Yes and no, I would say that deep down they knew. There was a way of blocking out the reality and believing in what you want to believe. That's one way of, of-- saving your sanity. 

And now that I am a uh, an aging person, I can see it very well. But at that point, all I could say, don't you have some pride in our nationhood and the young people who want to save themselves? 

Not understanding that these people were bewildered. And if there was some hope, they held on to what they thought might do it. Maybe. Maybe, with some American dollars-- and that was the currency of the ghetto, the American dollar. Maybe with that you will buy your freedom. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was the American dollar the currency of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Because that was the one stable currency that Jews have always saved their money in. And gold rubles. 

INTERVIEWER: But the American dollar, I mean, at that point-- 

SUBJECT: At that point was stable, I guess. It was available, I guess. 

INTERVIEWER: So you arrived at what concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: We-- first of all, the wagon in which I was, we then out of desperation started singing some patriotic songs. 

INTERVIEWER: What? 

SUBJECT: Zionist songs. And they started machine gunning the wagon to quiet us down. 

INTERVIEWER: What did-- 

SUBJECT: The soldiers. Oh, anything. Hebrew songs. Anything that came to our mind. We were just singing ourselves to go to die singing. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember any? 

SUBJECT: Well, I didn't tell you. But I survived the ghetto only by writing music and painting. And one of the songs became a song that my friends knew that I wrote. And we sang this one. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: How does that song sound? Can you sing it now? 

SUBJECT: I have it written down. It's, uh-- oh, I don't know if I could even sing it now. 

INTERVIEWER: Just try. 

SUBJECT: [? [NON-ENGLISH SINGING] ?] 

This is just a verse and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: What does it mean? 

SUBJECT: This is in Russian. That a worldwide storm is embracing this world. And, uh-- people's blood is being shed all over. And yesterday's free children were today's-- were today's war prisoners, prisoners of war, were today's slaves, really. The best translation is we are just-- today we are a bunch of slaves. 

And it goes on. We are broke-- we are kept apart from the rest of the world and uh, locked in this ghetto. And we are beaten with the Nazi stick. But if today, life was bad for us, we are still hoping for a better tomorrow. Well, all of those songs were always like this. 

INTERVIEWER: No. Can you sing that part about the hope that you had? 

SUBJECT: [? [NON-ENGLISH SINGING] ?] 

The reason for it all was written in Russian was, for the boy who wrote the words didn't speak any Yiddish. And so we had a choice of Polish or Russian. So we wrote it in Russian. But that was one of the songs. I have written so many songs. I've written music of all kinds. Folk songs, pop songs, and many words. And then we would sing them. I would sit with my friends and memorize them. 

INTERVIEWER: Were any songs you sang in Hebrew? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we knew all the Hebrew songs. They-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you sing any in that cattle car? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we did sing. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one? 

SUBJECT: --songs because the people who were with me were the Zionist contingent of the Underground movement. But it didn't matter what we sang. To them this was uh, Jews who were singing. And that was enough. 

And I had a bullet right bracing to my thighs. It passed right between my two legs and landed on somebody in back of me who eventually died. Just a freakish luck. 

I had a wound between these-- on my thighs that wouldn't heal for weeks because of starvation, later in the concentration camp. And I had to hide it. Because it was an obvious abrasion by, by-- I guess a German doctor would have been able to tell. 

INTERVIEWER: They shot into the cattle car? 

SUBJECT: They were shooting. 

INTERVIEWER: Through what? Weren't they closed? 

SUBJECT: Right-- of course, right through the walls. 

INTERVIEWER: They shot through the walls of the cattle-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. They were just riddling the uh, walls with bullets. Shut up. Shut up. Quiet. But instead of just saying it, why not shoot a couple of bullets? You'll teach those Jews a lesson that way. And they sure did. Because we were afraid to move after that. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you sing one more song? A Hebrew song. A song that you sang then. A song that somehow kept up your spirits. You have a wonderful voice. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I was a folk singer. I ended up being a professional folk singer. I haven't sang and I haven't touched my guitar for ages now, but. 

What did we sing? 

There was a song written by [? [INAUDIBLE], ?] [? [INAUDIBLE]. ?] [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] If there was still freedom to my soul. 

[? [NON-ENGLISH SINGING] ?] 

And some others. 

INTERVIEWER: And when the singing was ceased because of-- 

SUBJECT: They were shooting. 

INTERVIEWER: Then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Then we approached Treblinka. Then they detached all the wagons that contained people who went to the left. The sick, the aging and such. And they passed. 

INTERVIEWER: They had already separated. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And that's why we stopped. And we saw what we heard about. I saw what very few people lived to tell. I saw a field covered with ashes and human bones. I personally saw it. 

INTERVIEWER: A field? 

SUBJECT: A field. A gigantic field. I retraced that route about three years ago in Poland, where there is now a beautiful, beautiful monument to that Treblinka. 

And I walked for a very, very, very-- I must have walked three or four miles. And all the while that I walked until this stop where the train pulled-- that off, on either side of the field were covered, literally covered with a blanket of ashes. 

Because Treblinka was not a concentration camp. It was an extermination camp. No workforces. No temporary survival. Pure and simple annihilation. Incineration. Period. 

And I knew about it. And all I could say to myself was, so we knew it. So it is all true. Your shower heads with gas and all that must be true. And after that they sent us off further. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents? They saw it too? 

SUBJECT: No we still-- yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say? 

SUBJECT: Well, nothing. I don't even think my mother was aware of it. My father, as I said, became catatonic, and wasn't aware of anything. But we saw it. 

And after we passed it, and this is what the Germans did-- that was one of their favorite techniques. They let you see death of a few to lull you into the belief that you are going to-- you are the chosen one to survive. 

So when our train went on, we started saying, gee whiz. Why-- if we are going, if they didn't exterminate-- exterminate us here, then maybe it is right what they tried to tell us. We are going to be working. And if we-- so long as we work, and so long as we behave, we would be the future museum. The Jewish museum. 

Even I believed that. Or maybe it was-- perhaps that was the lifesaving device then kept me out thereafter. Thereafter I became a spectator. 

Any time that something happened and I was chosen not to be the victim, there was this little imaging popping see. You are chosen. It's not going to happen to me. I'm indestructible. 

But for the time being they took us to Majdanek, Lublin. And once again they went through the routines of selecting 100 young women. Put your kerchiefs on your heads, girls, because it's going to be very windy where we're going. We never saw these girls. My best friends went. 

They led them to believe-- believing that they're picking good-looking girls, Aryan-looking girls. And all along I say, I was saying to myself, oh, don't be a fool. Why would they want an Aryan-looking girl to work? They want somebody to work, I ask you for what you can do. And my friends went, never to be heard of. So little by little they were going through the motions of having gathered people who were assigned to various categories of work. 

And then there came a time. There came a time when the children were asked for. And the mothers did not believe that-- that babies were being taken to nurseries. Because the mothers have to work. And naturally you need a babysitting facility. And we don't have it. 

And the screams started. Men were separated from men. And still they employed this little gimmick. While we were sitting on empty cans of Zyklon B gas, we saw people entering the sauna and getting out of sauna. 

And you were catching onto this bit of hope. Well, they got out. And maybe it's true. We are the ones. And especially since the Bialystok ghetto truly was conserved and preserved and working. We are chosen. We have the-- 

The tale had it, Germans are running low on slave labor. They're now forced to use Jews. Let's try and be healthy and strong and clean. We will yet weather it. Meanwhile, the Russians were coming, the Americans were coming. We'll survive it. 

Until the last moment, in the midst of it all. Zyklon B sitting. All you had to do is say, that's not for me. That's for weaker ones. Well, it's a pity. But that's how it went. 

So we sat there. And then we were sent to, from Lublin, to that Majdanek, which was adjacent to this town of-- wh-- where the train came. And I worked in the fields there. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother and father? 

SUBJECT: We were separated from my father. Later on some inmates told me my father, the wonderful musician that he was, was joined, was made to join the orchestra of the camp. And-- and I'm jumping on myself now. A few months later, this entire camp of Lublin, all the men, in November, were exterminated. And the account of those who witnessed it, Poles, was-- 