INTERVIEWER: OK, we can begin. Dr. Pineas tell us your full name, where you were born, when you were born. 

HERMAN PINEAS: My name is Herman O. Pineas I was born on May, the 6th, 1902. In Dusseldorf on the Rhine in Germany. My father was a bookkeeper in a small factory. My mother was a housewife. At home, we were four children-- three sons and one daughter-- of whom, only my sister is living. 

The oldest son-- Leo was his first name-- and his family were murdered in Minsk, Russia by the Nazis. My youngest brother, Victor, died from illness in Dusseldorf, after he had been living in Bogota, Colombia, South America for a number of years. My sister is living in Bodrum, Israel. That is near Tel Aviv. 

I had a very happy childhood. The economic circumstances of the family were modest. But we always had enough to eat. And all together, when we look back, my sister and I, we agree that we had the most wonderful childhood. My parents never quarrelled with each other. And they were perfect models of people living together with each other and agreeing with each other. 

I went to school in Dusseldorf, first, in grammar school and later on, in high school. I graduated from high school in 1911 and started to study medicine at the advice of my teacher in religious instruction, Dr. Leo Beck. Dr. Leo Beck became my mentor in life. He is still my model, if I may call it that. He was instrumental in persuading me to study medicine instead of becoming a high school teacher. Because he feared there is no future for a Jewish high school teacher in Germany. And I realized he was right. 

I studied medicine at the Universities of Bonne, Wurzburg, Munich, and Berlin. In 1915, I was drafted into the army. And while I was in the army, I got furlough to go back to Berlin to pass my state board medical examination, which I did in 1917. After, I returned to the army in Russia. And starting 1915, my division moved to France. And while in France, I was wounded on October 14, 1918. That was three weeks before the end of the First World War. And it so happened that I became severely ill and spent a whole year in the hospital. 

Thereafter, I started to practice neurology in Berlin. It had gotten-- I had gotten married the first time in July 1917. My wife died in 1927 from tuberculosis of the lungs, my first wife. I remarried here two years later in 1929. There were no children from my first marriage. There is a son from my second marriage. But my second wife had two sons from the first marriage, which had ended in divorce. My second wife died from cancer in December 1977 in New York. 

I continued to practice medicine in Berlin. On April 1, 1933, a guard in brown uniform was posted in front of my office in Berlin to prevent patients to consult me. That didn't last long, and for a number of years, I was able to continue to practice due to the fact that I had been what they was calling a front soldier. And eventually, I got a position as chief of neurology at the Jewish hospital of the Berlin Jewish congregation. And I kept this position until March 1943. 

In 1942, all Jewish institutionalized patients of the state hospitals and private hospitals had to be sent to my department as being Jewish patients. And so all of the non-Jewish hospitals in Germany and Austria sent their Jewish patients to my department, which was overcrowded. Every few weeks, the gestapo entered my department and selected patients for deportation without consulting me. 

In December 1941, I became aware of a letter which a social democratic soldier had sent from Russia, where he was a soldier, to Germany by the mail-- through the mail. This letter that was sent to me. And in this letter, I learned what happened to the Jews in Poland under the Nazis. The difference between the Polish political commissars and the Jewish inhabitants of the Polish villagers or cities was the Polish commissars were shot right away. The Jews had to dig their graves before they were shot. 

This letter was in German of course. I translated it into English and sent it to the American ambassador in Berlin. This happened two days before Pearl Harbor, so I am very doubtful whether the German-- the American ambassador in Berlin did anything about it. 

At any rate, this letter told us about what happened to us. And it was instrumental in prompting us to see to it that we were saved. And we wanted to be saved on our own volition or would die on our own volition. So we decided to turn underground. My wife, after we had been able to send our three sons abroad, one to Israel, two others to England, respectively, to Scotland. We decided to turn underground. 

I first went to Vienna in Austria, where a patient of mine had offered me to shelter me if need be. And there was need, so in March 1943, I traveled to Austria, to Vienna, and stayed with my patient for a number of months, while my wife stayed back in Berlin. 

Meanwhile, my wife was contacted by Officer Zelo, who was a retired judge. He had been in charge of selecting Jews to be saved by Protestant parsons. The way this came about is the following. Professor Karl Barth, a Protestant theologian in Bonn at the Bonn University had left Bonn and went to Switzerland Basel. He was a Swiss citizen. And before he left, he had advised his students, as far as they were parsons, to save as many Jews as they possibly could, which they did. They formed what they called a society in southern Germany in Wurttemberg. That is the country, the name of the country where they lived. 

So my wife was first screened by this judge in Berlin. And as they didn't look pronouncedly Jewish, she was accepted and was sent to southern Germany to a parsonage where she was living in the household as a visitor or visiting guest. Meanwhile, I was in Berlin-- in Vienna, I mean and was twice visited by the gestapo, who had learned about my being in Vienna. But fortunately, when they arrived at the apartment where I had been living with my patient, I was not around. I had gone somewhere else. And my patient advised the gestapo I had gone to Hungary, which wasn't true. But fortunately, they believed it. 

And so-- but I realized now I could not stay at that one spot with my patient. I had to travel inside of Vienna. I had procured false identity papers for money in Berlin, which had my photo in it. And we gave the personnel features in our own writing. With such a certificate, I got admission in hotels in Austria, but couldn't stay any longer in a row for more than three days. So I had to change hotels every three days. 

Eventually, I got an invitation from my wife to come to Germany to Wurttemberg. And I arrived there, so we could live together in the parsonage in Wurttemberg. For about three weeks each. And then, we had to separate again. My wife took positions in the household of parsonages as a housekeeper. And I was just a visiting guest. 

In between, when we were about to transfer to another parson, my wife slipped and broke her arm. It was taken care of in a clinic in a small Wurttembergian town. Eventually, we lived with parsons until I accepted a position as a traveling salesman. Because it was too difficult and dangerous for the parsons to continue to accept us in their parsonages. Because the failed assassination attempt at Hitler's life in July 1944 prevented our stay longer than before. And so we had to fend for ourselves. 

We went to a small town in Bavaria called Memmingen. And there, we got first job as a traveling salesman. But the main reason for applying for a job was to secure housing. And we were being accepted as inmates of the apartment in the court building of this small town, Memmingen. Before that, other applicants for housing in that court building were ejected by the wife of the judge. The judge himself was in Italy in the army. But the wife and her children lived in the court building in the apart-- in their apartment. 

So we secured two houses-- two apart-- rooms in the court building. Two rooms-- usually, when a couple got only one room, but it was assumed that my wife would also apply for work, which she promised, but, of course, never did. So we had two rooms in the court building in Memmingen. In April 19-- Meanwhile, on my job as a traveling salesman, I had to travel through Germany for my small tool factory in order to bring tools and machines which had been sent out for repair back home. And I was rather successful. 

But what happened most-- what's most interesting and unusual was the only son of my chief of the factory, the owner of the factory was officer in the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler. And I was sent to him to bring things from his parents to him, which I did twice. And I traveled, I was so at the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler. That's the leib squadron or leib regiment of Hitler, the private standarte of Adolf Hitler. 

And I had spent time with him twice, bought him laundry and food from his parents. And he complained to me he was not able to tell his men, who were not that youthful people anymore, but were older and mostly married people, about the race theories. They wouldn't accept that so easily. I told him I understood him and I had compassion for him, so to say. And this happened twice. 

By the way, this young boy, who had become an officer in Hitler's army, did this against the advice of his parents. His parents were not that in the world of Nazis, not at all. They were good Catholics. But as I say, they couldn't prevent him from doing what he wanted. Later on in the war, he was severely wounded. He got hit-- shot in the head, and is an invalid now. Whether he still lives, I don't know about it. 

At any rate, we were liberated by the American army on April 26, 1945. An army field hospital moved into court building, which had not been damaged by bombing. And the advanced commander was a major Goldstein of the field hospital. 

We, my wife and I, were the only people in the building who spoke English. So he conversed with us. And he told us verbally, I am an American Jew. And I'm much nicer to you than you have been to my people. Whereupon we took him to the adjacent room and told him who we were. And he was amazed, because nobody of the Americans knew that there were Jews in hiding in Germany. 

So what did he do? He advised us to come the following day to meet his commander. And we did the following day. We had to leave for the night and got some other quarters, but returned to the building the following day. And we met his commander, and he gave me the first cigar and also the first real coffee. And best of all, he took the addressed of our children in Israel and in Scotland. So they knew that we were still alive. They believed we were dead. And so that happened in Memmingen. 

After the Americans had come, I was permitted to reopen nerve practice there, which I did for a whole year. And in the meantime, I regis-- we registered for the United States. Actually, in 1930-- as early as 1938, I had sent my medical credentials to Albany, New York. Because we had believed that we could travel or get a visa in 1938. But when we were invited by the American consul in Berlin for an interview, he told us, unless we get a valid affidavit, he cannot give us a visa. So we got stuck, and that's why we had to stay in Germany. 

But in December 1944, President Truman gave an executive order that collective visas we permitted for people who wanted to come to the United States. And we-- so we registered in the city of Landsberg in Germany. There was an Office of the Joint Distribution Department. And we registered there for the United States. And I had my medical credentials again copied and sent along to Albany. And when they arrived there, they returned them and said, we have your credentials since 1938 already. So they kept them. 

And, uh, I opened a practice in Memmingen for a whole year. And in 

INTERVIEWER: Was it after the war? 

HERMAN PINEAS: In July 1946, we traveled on a liberty shipped though United States and arrive here on July 27, 1946 in New York. We were accepted by the Joint Distribution Committee and were sheltered in a hotel, the Hotel Marseilles on West 133rd Street. 

And then, my wife accepted jobs as housekeepers in households where the woman-- the wife of the husband was ill and needed housekeeping. Where I was preparing for my state board examination. I passed it in several stages, and it took a whole year for me to pass the state board examination, but eventually I passed it. 

Meanwhile, I had accepted a position as a psychiatrist at the Pinewood Sanitarium in Katonah, Westchester County. And I stayed there for three-- four years, from 1947 until 1951. Then we moved to New York. And in '92, I accepted a position with the Veterans Administration Clinic in Brooklyn. And I stayed with the Veterans Administration first part-time and later full-time until 1969. That is more than 17 years. 

And then I started to serve as a consultant for those claimants, survivors of concentration camps, who had filed claims against the German government and whose claims had not been acknowledged. So I worked in their favor and was sometimes successful. And since my wife-- my occupation as a consultant was my assistant, my typist. And she helped me in that respect. In 1977, she died from cancer. And ever since, I am alone, living in the apartment on 72nd Street across the street. 

Now, I am a member of the Congregation Habonim. And while the temple was built in 1967, I became a trustee of the congregation for a year. And ever since, I am a faithful member of the congregation. And every Shabbat, I go to the service and sometimes Friday nights too when there are special occasions. 

INTERVIEWER: Sir, can we go back? You have such a fabulous memory. And you tell the story of your life in such a vivid way. I didn't want to stop or interrupt. But there are certain things that I'd like to have more information about. 

HERMAN PINEAS: Certainly. 

INTERVIEWER: One is, when you were in Germany traveling around under an assumed name, false papers, what were your feelings? Were you terrified? 

HERMAN PINEAS: No, I felt absolutely sure of myself. And I think my profession helped me do that. As a psychiatrist, I wasn't afraid of practically anything. And I was not afraid of being discovered even. Because I used my psychology training. And I was almost sure no one was conceiving the possibility that there would be a Jew audacious enough to travel like everybody else. I did not mention that, for several years, I had to carry the yellow badge, of course, which certainly when I traveled to Vienna, I had taken off, naturally. No, I cannot say I was afraid any moment at all. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know what was happening to other Jews in Germany? 

HERMAN PINEAS: I was aware. I saw it with my own eyes. It so happened we lived in the same street where the candidates for concentration camps were assembled in the synagogue-- a few houses nearby my house where I live. So I saw them being assembled there. And, oh, I hadn't mentioned that on March the 3rd, 1943, two policemen entered our apartment and arrested us to bring us to that synagogue for deportation. 

So as I still, as a physician, had my telephone, which other Jews had not anymore, I called the chief of the health department of the Jewish congregation and told him that I was being arrested. But he called the gestapo. And the gestapo was interested in having the chief of the neurology department at the hospital. And so they ordered me to be released. And that was the signal for us to leave. And two days later, I traveled to Vienna, and my wife left the apartment. 

INTERVIEWER: You said the Jews didn't have telephones. And I wondered if you would tell us some of the other things-- 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, yes. I can tell you quite a bit about that. First of all, they had to deliver their radios very early. And if my memory serves me right, it was on Yom Kippur that they had to surrender their radios. And they had to go to the gestapo office and bring it there on Yom Kippur. And the blind-- it was even true for blind Jews, who, up to then, had been exempted from that. 

And there was something more. Jews were not allowed to go shopping all day long in the shops or stores. They were allowed only one hour during the day. And that was the hour between 4:00 and 5:00. It was the only hour where they were allowed to be served in shops and stores in Berlin. I think all over Germany. I mean, my own knowledge, is from Berlin. 

And as my wife, my late wife, was serving in the Jewish Welfare Department in Brooklyn, she got extra permission to go shopping at other times even. In fact, I have the certificate which allows that with me where the man in charge of the store hours for Jews gave her the permission in writing that we was allowed to be served in extra hours in besides that. 

Then, of course, Jews had no clothing cards anymore. They had to make up with what they had. We could not go into shops and buy clothes. That was not allowed anymore. That was the end of it. And of course, there were so-called favorite vegetables. They were called edles gemuse, noble vegetables, which were not allowed. For instance, cauliflower wasn't allowed, was a preferred-- every vegetable was to be bought only by Aryans, Christians. And of course, the same was true for food of any kind. And of course, in the public parks, there were benches only for Aryans not for Jews. 

The Jews were not allowed to leave their houses after 8 o'clock in the evening, in summer, after 9 o'clock. Jews were not allowed to use public transportation. I, as a physician, had permission to do that. We had to use extra permit cards or certificates for being allowed to enter a subway, or the omnibus, or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you able to keep track of other members of your family during this time? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, my sister, who is now living in Israel, lived, at that time, in Milan, Italy with her husband. And we exchanged small pictures. Her pictures were wrapped in Italian newspapers. I was able to understand Italian and to hear Italian and understand it. And as the German press was under strict control of the Hitlers, of the Nazis, we learned a little bit about what happened in the world in this way. 

INTERVIEWER: What other regulations, dislocations were Jews subjected to? And in what years did this all began? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, I haven't mentioned yet when we had to add the names Israel and Sara to our proper names. I don't remember the date when it was introduced, when we had to do it. But we had to do it. And when we entered, for instance, a police district, police office, we had to give our name and to mention-- when to add "Jude" when we entered to be introduced. 

INTERVIEWER: Did that frighten you? 

HERMAN PINEAS: No, no, no. I mean, the police wasn't too bad. In fact, some of them showed clearly they were not happy about it, not at all. But they couldn't do anything about it. 

INTERVIEWER: You had Christian patients and Christian friends before the war. 

HERMAN PINEAS: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you relate to those Christians during-- from 1938 on or from 1937 on? What was happening? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I mean, we had to carry special shingles at our houses indicating that we were allowed to treat only Jews that was on the shingle. And which indicated that Jews-- non-Jews were not allowed to enter or practice. I have to add something to my tale about that letter from Russia, which I had translated and sent to the Russian ambassador in Berlin. 

In the same month of December 1941, a former colleague of mine, a Christian colleague of mine, who was office in the German Air Force, was on leave in Berlin. And he had the courage to visit me in my apartment. Of course, in civilian clothes not in uniform. I asked him about the content of that letter-- the difference between the political commissars and the Jews. 

And he said, yes, he knew about it. And he had told his commander and asked his commander, what do you think about this? And the commander had said to me, fragen su nicht, don't ask me. So in this way, I know how correct the soldier had been in his letter. 

So as I say, this was a very courageous move of this colleague of mine. After the liberation, I met him again. And I had given him the reprints of those scientific papers I had published in Germany during the wars-- years before Hitler. And he returned them to me. He had them with him. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what problems did you have with money in those days? 

HERMAN PINEAS: First of all, when I had my department at the Jewish hospital, I had plenty of money. Because the Jews were allowed to spend money for medical purposes only. Otherwise, their accounts were inhibited. They couldn't spend more than small sums. But for medical purposes, there was no limit. So I could charge whatever I wanted. And they-- they met it gladly, so to say-- I may say. So I had no problem. But when we were under the shelter of the Protestant parsons, the parsons collected money within their parson that was for refugees from northern Germany. So there was no problem with money at all. 

And of course, the parsons did not charge us anything. In fact, I may mention a German writer who doesn't live anymore, Mr. Grossman, published a book, Die Unbekannten Helden, The Unsung Heroes, in which he collected stories about the Christians who sheltered Jews in Germany. And there's also my story in it-- in this book, which I gave it in German. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Pineas, you mentioned-- you mentioned earlier, when you talked about having to stop dealing with patients, that after April 1933, you weren't allowed to treat non-Jewish patients. As a psychiatrist, having such a personal relationship with a patient, were there-- how did you tell your patients that you could no longer treat them? How did you terminate? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I mean, I didn't have to tell them. They realized that. Of course, I mean, we got visited by people who had turned underground in Berlin and lived underground in Berlin, but not my Christian patients anymore. They were too afraid of being caught. And in fact, you see, the concierge, the supers in the houses were mostly Nazis and kept watch on who came to visit the Jewish inhabitants, inmates of the house. And that was too dangerous. 

INTERVIEWER: As a psychiatrist, as a physician, what would be your observations on the behavior of the German people? Not the special people, but generally, your friends, your neighbors during this time? 

HERMAN PINEAS: They-- most of them were of the opinion that the Jews had to be sent to labor camps and to work there. That there was what we call now, the final solution, did not occur to them. But that was to-- for, let's say, the first years of the war. And since 1944, that wasn't possible anymore. Because there were too many soldiers on leave who wouldn't hesitate to tell at home what happened in the concentration camps in Poland and Germany and Russia and so on. 

So there was quite a bit of knowledge. Though, as you certainly know, nobody here in America, for instance, believed these stories, the so-called atrocity stories of the German camps. But it was pretty much general knowledge, not exactly about the details, but quite a bit about details. 

INTERVIEWER: What did non-Jewish people do or say when Jews were taken away, taken to that courtyard, deported? 

HERMAN PINEAS: They kept their mouths shut. They didn't discuss it. Of course, there was a man who had helped us during the war, during the first years when we were still in Germany. He has accepted our real and genuine identification certificates and so on and returned them after liberation. So he was one of the few. He was a Social Democrat. And of course, the Social Democrats were all against Hitler. 

During my trips for my firm in Memmingen, I had-- I went to Berlin twice. And again, I felt completely safe of being-- never being discovered. And I met a communistic city councilor who said, well, the world is coming to an end. And we have lost, unfortunately. And he provided me with a cap, which I have lost during one of the trips. He had the cap factory after being dismissed from his position as a city councilor, being a communist under Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you sense a difference between the attitude of people in Austria versus Germany? 

HERMAN PINEAS: I may say the people in Austria were maybe even more fanatic than the Germans. But of course, they later claimed they had been forced, which I consider to be very doubtful. They were not actually forced. They were more fanatic than the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you observe that fanaticism? How did that evidence itself to you? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I mean, this patient of mine, who was living in a mixed marriage but separated from her Christian husband, she told me about these things. She has lived in Vienna for 15 years. So she knew actually the details about and-- I said-- maybe I didn't not yet mention it-- while I was in Vienna and living in the apartment of this patient, she was visited by the gestapo twice. And she told the gestapo I had gone to Hungary. 

So she was advised, if I should return, she should report that to the gestapo at the general office. And she promised, which, of course, never did. Either way, later on, I learned she has been taken to Auschwitz and had been gassed in Auschwitz. That's a patient of mine. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find that out? 

HERMAN PINEAS: By another patient of mine who had been surviving Auschwitz. And he she has met the other patient in Auschwitz. They had been talking about me in Auschwitz, strangely enough. 

INTERVIEWER: Did many people consult with you about their concentration camp experiences because you were-- 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, of course. You see, for a number of years after I had left the Veterans Administration, I became a consultant for their claims. They had to discuss all these things with me when I took their histories in detail. In fact, while I was still in Germany, I visited some concentration camps in Germany, what was left of them. Near Memmingen, there was one called Kaufering. That is between Memmingen and Munich. That was the place, the site of a concentration camp. 

In fact, when I was traveling on business from Memmingen to Augsburg or to Munich, I passed this railway station of Kaufering. And I saw the Hungarian Jews in concentration camps dressing, assembled to accept them midday meal, their lunch. And I listened to the conversation of the people in the train that who saw the same thing. And they said, well, every few days, one of them will be shot. They just mentioned that casually. 

INTERVIEWER: This was after the war? 

HERMAN PINEAS: No, it was still during the war. I mean, after the war, I didn't travel on business anymore. I was , yes. But, uh, what else did I mean to say? So, I mean-- and there was another railway station near Munich-- Schwabing-- where we saw concentration inmates working at the rails because-- which had been damaged by the air raids, naturally. And again, the same attitude-- well, that's the way it is, sort of thing. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel when you saw-- 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I was terrified mostly, of course. It was-- I felt-- well, I realized the end is near. So I say, well, wait a little bit and they will think differently. And of course, the Americans, the military government was much too mild with the German people. 

INTERVIEWER: In what way? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, they didn't make them work hard and so on. And I felt they were much too mild and, I would say, almost conciliatory. Of course, you see, the German people, essentially, are clean people, meaning they keep their streets clean and things. And apparently, that impressed the Americans easily. That is at least my impression. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see any of the displaced persons camps after the war? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, yes. In fact, in the backyard of my-- the house in which I reopened my practice, there wasn't a displaced persons camp. Most of them were Ukrainians, most of these people. 

INTERVIEWER: Jews? 

HERMAN PINEAS: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: No Jews? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Aryans. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see any of the Jews who were-- 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, yes. I gathered with the Jews. In fact, I gathered, first of all, with the Jewish American soldiers. And at first, I gathered with the survivors of the camps. And at first, they didn't believe us that we are German-- that we are Jews, because we didn't speak Yiddish. They didn't believe us. We had to speak it. But meanwhile, I've learned to speak and understand Yiddish for my practice here for my patients here. 

At any rate, in fact, I celebrated the Seder with them in 1945. In April, we were liberated. And at the end of April or the following-- or was it the following year? Maybe it was in spring '47, we got matzah and wine from Munich from the Joint Distribution Committee, [INAUDIBLE] and so on. And of course, I ceded to give the Seder to them, to the survivors. Because I was used to conducting Seder at home. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they talk to you about, uh-- 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, well, we talked about everything. And in February 1946, there was a medical convention of surviving physicians of concentration camps. A medical convention in February 1946 in Landsberg on the Lech where Hitler had spent years in the fortress jail and wrote his Mein Kampf. That was the Office of the Joint. 

And there was a [INAUDIBLE] convention under the auspices of a military government. And there, I figured-- I listened for the first time to the band of the Stars and Stripes. And that was really something uplifting for me. And so they registered us for America. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you get a chance to find out what the people who could not get out of Germany after the war felt, those Jews who had to stay in the displaced persons camps? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I didn't find much about it. In fact, most of them, they kept to themselves, especially in Landsberg. In Landsberg, they had opened a [INAUDIBLE], a Jewish court about people whom they felt had betrayed them. And that was the-- that was with the permission of the American military government. And I think I have already told that I got permission by the military government to reopen my practice in Memmingen, which I did for a whole year. 

INTERVIEWER: What is your feeling now about German people, non-Jewish German people? What is your feeling about Germans? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I mean, it depends on how old they are. I mean, the German youth may be quite all right. But of course, the older ages-- in fact, I remember my wife and I traveled some years ago to Italy to attend a medical convention. I think it was in Padua. And there, we met-- my wife got acquainted with a few wives of German physicians. And when she started to talk about what happened under Hitler, these people said, oh, that is so long ago. We won't hear-- to talk about it. 

So they are afraid to be remembered of that and say those older people who had experience what happened. The youth-- I've nothing against the youth. In fact, we spent one week in Germany-- not one week. No, we spent three weeks in Germany. One week in my birthplace. One week in my wife's birthplace. And one week in Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, I say it was nice to visit. But that was it. Nothing else. I mean, I would never think of moving and living in Germany. Though I know a former patient of mine has moved in his old age to Munich. I couldn't understand that. I mean, whenever I meet with German, let's say, at the age of 60 and over, I cannot help thinking, what did he do in Germany under Hitler? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a sense of hate? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you hate? 

HERMAN PINEAS: No, I don't actually hate them. I mean, in a way. I mean, I cannot forget that they actually-- I know they were not bold enough to resist. Though I know, of cause, of people-- there was, for instance, a student couple in Munich by the name of Scholl. They resisted openly among the students of the University of Munich. But they were jailed and executed. There were few people who did. Of course Communists did. But all together, they just let it go at that. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel about the Jews, that they didn't resist? 

HERMAN PINEAS: They couldn't resist. I mean, in which way should they resist? Of course, I mean that we survived is a definite miracle. At that point we were fortunate enough to meet people who were gracious enough to shelter us. I felt it was a great risk for these persons to shelter us, a great risk. They wanted to do it and did it. And they were, of course-- I mean, they all belonged to a different branch of the Protestant Church, the so-called Confession Church. I do not-- I still do not mind to speak German, not at all. I mean, I don't blame the language for the Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER: The music, the culture? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: The music, the culture? 

HERMAN PINEAS: I mean, that's the way I grew up. And as I say, of course I use it for culture. I still read German classics and love German classics-- Schiller, Goethe, Lessing, Heine of course. 

INTERVIEWER: Some people say that Wagner contributed to the Holocaust. 

HERMAN PINEAS: Certainly not directly. But he may have contributed to it, Wagner and his wife too, Cosima Wagner. But I never liked Wagner's musical operas, never. Because I knew how anti-Jewish he was. And again, this paradox-- his main director was a Jew-- Lewy-- L-E-W-Y-- Lewy. 

In fact, I'm sorry that my younger son doesn't speak German anymore. So I have to speak English with him. With, of course, with my sister, I speak German and correspond in German. But with my sisters-in-law in Chicago, Illinois, I correspond in English, naturally. 

INTERVIEWER: You feel this could happen again? Do feel something like this could happen again? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Oh, yes, it could happen again. I mean, I would never have dreamed of it would ever happen before. That's why, for instance, the Americans just couldn't accept as the truth what has happened. But as far as I'm concerned, it might happen again. It could happen again. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't think people learn? 

HERMAN PINEAS: But I wonder whether there wouldn't be more resistance next time. I hope it would. Well, what I really hope is it won't happen again. 

INTERVIEWER: You say they couldn't resist. So how could there be more resistance? 

HERMAN PINEAS: Well, they would be more prepared for these things in the beginning. You see, for instance, here is the Civil Liberties Union, which keeps an eye on things like that. That's just one example, but there are a number of-- besides the Jewish organizations. And I say that the Anti-defamation League is one Jewish organization. The American Jewish Congress, of which I am a member, is an organization 