SUBJECT: Can I return where I left over? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. Just tell me when. 

CREW: Fine, whenever. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, right now. Sure. You start where you left off. 

SUBJECT: Well, there were bags which we had left from picking up the bread And one of the Germans went with a bayonet and start to punch every bag. Threw out the bags. And that barrel just stood there under the platform by itself. We were at the wall and they start to-- they said they will kill us, shoot. 

They went through some Gendarmes It was about 25 feet away. The gendarmes were going by to the barracks and they saw what happened and they start to yell don't shoot. And they came down. And that's what happened. And he told them what happened. So he said-- and he knew that man from the community [INAUDIBLE] that he's connected with that whole situation. So he said, look, let's take that woman and that man to the barrack. We will call the commandant of the city. We will find out what to do. Luckily, the commandant wasn't there. Only the captain who was my boss. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was your child? I mean, how did you know the child wouldn't call out, wouldn't cry? 

SUBJECT: I will come back to that. And he said, look, we have a Mr. Friedenberg here and Mrs. Friedenberg What are we going to do with them? We caught his wife. He says, oh yes, he works for me. Bring them in here and we will see tomorrow when the commandant comes he will make the judgment what to do with them. 

And I was sitting and waiting for him on the platform. It was about two hours. And that poor kid was just in that dead And they came back, we had permission to proceed. Now, when he came to that factory for the door, the other guy said there, look, we didn't see here that woman. So across from the factory, there was a special place where they put in people who were caught beyond the Jewish section who was hidden. And they put my wife there. And we went into the factory. 

Now here I jumped at that barrel, right, took out my kid, and here I am. I don't know what to do with the kid. There are no kids around and nobody wanted to touch it, because that is dead My feeling, numb. You just don't think what's going to happen. You just don't care. After you hear these stories that in each family was maybe one survivor, you just don't care. I put all the kids I had with me at night somewhere in a hole. In daytime I have to go into that office. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean somewhere in a hole? [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Oh no. This was impossible and you couldn't ask anybody to do it. Those were big furnaces in that factory. 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, I want to know about the child. 

SUBJECT: That's what I'm trying to tell you. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you had him in a hole. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the morning, I took that child and opened up one of these furnaces which were not working. We just put them in and close it up. And I went to work. What's going to happen is God's will. 

Now, the same day, the man who was with me with the [INAUDIBLE] action promised me that he will go there. He was on the place where the people were selected. And he will see to it that my wife will come. And he went. And the captain asked him to do it. Now, from a section when there were about 5,000 people, they came about 25 or 30. This was it. And my wife with them. And when she came in, we had the family together. 

I took sick. Very sick. And here, again, I have to take chance to get out. So when they came to pick up a certain amount of people to go to camp, I went with them. Although there in the beginning, they didn't let me. But I just sneaked out and was hidden within the group. That was in the street And we went to the first step of the camp. Here again, this was only one step further. We didn't know, and we didn't try. We didn't want to live anymore. You had no strength. No physical strength, and morally. 

Well, when I was away, they start to build a small ghetto from all these people who were left in the factory. In order to do that, they have picked women. And they marched with them to that small place where Jewish people used to live. And to clean up. And they were going about 10, 12 in a row, the women with pails and everything which is needed to clean up, brushes. My wife took the child and put in one of these pails. And going with 10 or 12 in a row, they went into that little place where the ghetto will be. 

Now, going back, she hid the kids under the bed in that little ghetto. Overnight, the kid was by herself. Until the next day, she came back again and gave her some [INAUDIBLE]. This was for a few days. And in the end, they took all of the rest and put in that ghetto. And all these people who were sent to factories to work had to go back every day into that new ghetto. 

Now here again, we had the whole family together. And we used to go out, men about 20 in a row, hundreds, thousands, every day with big rucksack. And one day somebody tried to kill a German within the ghetto. He had a gun. Unfortunately, it was an old gun. It didn't went off. 

In the entrance to the ghetto was a little office in which there were Gendarmes and also Jewish people who took care of these workers going out and in. And everybody has to go out on that. There was a little place and the market. Everybody alive. Well, here is my wife with the kids again. I wasn't even there, because we were at work. She took the kids and the younger ones after her. 

But fortunately, there was a man, a cripple, and a cripple couldn't stay alive by no chances. So but he knew how to hide, and he hid so far as until that little ghetto. And he saw that cripple. He learned afterwards, after him, and my wife around with the little kids in that office. And she threw that little kid under the little couch. She was so small. You have to understand one thing. The children two years old, overnight they became thousand year old. They knew like rats that they will be killed. 

Outside when that happened, they picked up every third man, put [INAUDIBLE] and just shot them because of that attempt to murder a German. And somebody was looking for an axe. One of the Gendarmes I don't know why. And one told him that the axe is behind that couch in the office. He went in. Of course, he couldn't look [INAUDIBLE] he just put in his arm and looking for it. And that kid got like a little mouse into a corner. He didn't catch her. 

The next day when we came back after the whole thing from work, we learned the whole story. And the next day, they liquidated the small ghetto. In other words, whoever was there had to go into camp. Well here again, what do we do with the kid? Well, my brother-in-law was a big man, and he put her in that [INAUDIBLE] bag. It was winter, about January or February. She was naked in order to put her in there, in the bag. 

And on the way out, they had craftsmen chosen to work for certain branches of the German government for them. Like furriers, tailors, carpenters, and so forth. These had a place while going to? to work. My brother-in-law and his father, my father-in-law, they were painters. Well known painters. And they belonged to that group. 

And in this account, I became a painter too. That's what I said I am. And we were put in that place where all these craftsmen were gathering in order to go to work from there. And then we took the kids. And there were several kids which were hidden. There were furniture. There were storage. Stored furniture where they hid the kids. 

Now, going to work is so fortunate that we were working where the pope was, where the holy Madonna, the Black Madonna is. And we got in touch going back and forth. Painting you just-- people go back and forth. With one the sisters and we told them the story, they want to just save our kids, how to do it. And we gave them an address and a name of our former maid. 

Well, whatever they arranged that the maid will be at a certain time at that place, and the kids will just walk out. And so happened she took the child and walked with the child up to the post office. Over there was another woman. They didn't know each other. Who took over the child. And that woman brought the child into that monastery to a closed door. And she has to leave. There can be no witnesses. Then the door opened and they took in the child. 

The child came in. They have listed as an orphaned of a Polish officer. But she had her ways of showing her Jewishness. And she was always afraid. And for instance, somebody ran away, the gestapo was after them, and he run into that place. Was a big place, of course. And they saw these kids. They said, hey, that's a Jewish kid. But he never came back. So he took that kid and put them together with the pigs. Exactly. That was her living quarters, because they were afraid. 

OK, now we had the kid away. And then they liquidated the whole ghetto [INAUDIBLE] all these places, and they put everybody into Hasag and Warta into these places where it became a real camp. No more outside. There were a camp where we were producing bullets and other accessories for the war. It was guarded by special fences, special guards, Lithuanians, gestapo, Gendarmes you name it. 

As for myself, luckily I got into a place where the work wasn't too tough. But they ask you to do more and more, and you could do less and less. And every so often, they have to deliver a certain amount of people from each section of the factory to give it away to the gestapo who had another duty to fill out their duties. In order to fill in the quota. They have-- there were so many people to be sent away to the concentration camps. Like Buchenwald, [INAUDIBLE] and so on. 

So every so often, we were put in groups. Each foreman has his group. And we're standing there all night long and the gestapo man came along and the foreman has to pull out from each group so much. And whom he didn't like or all these girl whom he did use as sex pleasures, they had been pulled out the first. Of course, my two sisters, my mother-in-law, they all have been pulled out. 

And the next day when these young ones came back, we asked them what happened to these people. They said, you will never see them again. And as a matter of fact, their clothes, they brought back their clothes. They put them somewhere where we or other people have to select them, which are good and which are not good. And you could see the clothes of your own people. You can imagine the feeling. What kind of feeling can you have? You see a person now. In 10 minutes he's dead. For no reason at all. He can pick you up and just to be a good patriot they'll kill you. 

As a matter of fact that we had a also a privileged group, doctors and Jewish police who has been granted their children and wives to stay with them. And one day, a child has a birthday. He knew about it, the commandant. I don't know how. And he said, well, we have to make a nice birthday. There's a cake. Everybody has to be, all the kids, dressed nicely. And what they did. They picked up the whole group, the parents with the children, and drove them to the cemetery, put them on stones, and killed them one by one, just like that. 

We were also picked up as a group to go to the cemetery to dig rows of graves. Long graves, a mile long. When the war started with Russia, they had picked up these PWs and they brought him in trucks alive to the cemetery. They just throw them over into these graves. And we have to just finish it up. 

Here again feelings. What kind of feelings do you have? I ask a Gendarme who was guarding us, asked me, you have children and a wife. How can you do it? He says, look, all you have to do is just kill first, and then you just kill to kill your conscience. And it never stops. That was the case. 

Well, as closer we came to the end of the whole business, when the Russians were ready in the city, the Germans took-- gathered together all the people from the factory. And there were about at least 10,000. Because they gathered them from all little towns into that factory. 

And in a speech, they said, look, the Russians are coming. We want you to come us. You know how we treated you fine. And you know how the Russians will treat you. But if you want to or not, they put the people in 20 or 25 in a row as they marched them [INAUDIBLE] the trains. As a matter of fact, I was so apathetic that I didn't care where I go, where I stand. But thanks to my wife, who had a little more courage than I have, she [INAUDIBLE]. She came-- 