INTERVIEWER 1: So. 

SUBJECT: So. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1983. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] year. 

SUBJECT: That's true. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just, you have a little piece of-- that you went back to Tolcsav after Miskolc. 

SUBJECT: HB studio. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Hang tight. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 3: So we were just discussing, uh, that you went back for some flour and your last meal, the [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] The cabbage soup, the tomato soup with cabbage and rice. Why don't we pick up there? 

SUBJECT: Yes, and my mother said that, um, maybe next time I'll be able to have some meat in it, but this will do this time. It tasted, it was a delicious meal since we didn't have for six weeks too many cooked meals in the ghetto. 

And I always loved to eat. My mother was always worried. I was running home and I always said, mother, I'm hungry. What's for dinner? She said, oh, all you say is you're hungry and what's for dinner. You never see how it's being done. What kind of a [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] will you ever be? 

Anyway, this was the last meal in the ghetto. And by some manipulation my father has arranged it that we should be in the third transport. So the first transport left, and as I said to you, you weren't allowed to go to the other parts of ghetto to visit. If you were in the ghetto, you just had to stay there. You couldn't go out of the house. 

INTERVIEWER 3: How was it announced that it was time to leave? How did you know? 

SUBJECT: The police came again and they read out a list of names. And they read out a list of names and they said, this person and this family is going to be in the first transport. And the transport is leaving in such and such a day and such and such a time. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you think when you heard transport? What did that mean to you? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. We didn't know. We didn't know. The hope was always there. Now maybe it will be worse or maybe they are taking us to work. My mother has baked some cookies so in case we are going to work. So we should have some cookies, some sweet stuff to give us some energy. 

And I remember that when the first transport went away-- as I told you, I was allowed to move around in the ghetto because I was a helper-- I went to see where my uncle was, you know, from Tokaj and everybody was gone. No one. Not one family was there and the house was boarded up. It was a horrible feeling. 

And I just, I had no knowledge. I stood there and I looked at the house boarded up and empty and lifeless, and I just couldn't imagine what happened to them. I couldn't imagine where they had been taken or what happened. All I know is that they were gone. 

And I remember going back and I wouldn't tell my parents what I have seen. And my mother asked my father, did you see my brother today? You know. And I said, yes. You know. I didn't want to tell them that the house was boarded up but no one was there. Because I felt that it's not going to help anything and I'm not doing anything, so I might as well say nothing. 

And then the second transport was left. The same thing happened. And I went out to check the people and the people weren't there. And as I said, and I, I know that our, our days are numbered. I mean, how much longer? Or there has to be some kind of a miracle that this shouldn't happen to us, even though it was such a tragic feeling that, that you don't, you didn't see the people anymore. That they were gone. 

So the police came to our yard-- two of them-- and they read out the list. And The dreaded moment arrived-- our names were on the list. And they said, in the morning, you'll have to come out here in the yard and line up. And don't take anything with you what you can't carry. Anything that is not personal, it's not necessary. 

So my father made a little blanket for my brother. My brother was born in 1930. And he lined it with a warm lining so in case we going to work. And he rolled it up like a backpack and he put straps on the shoulder. And there was no other material that he could have made for someone else too, but made it for him because he was the youngest. 

And we were so happy that [INAUDIBLE] will have a blanket in case it's cold. Put it on his back and then they were taken to the train station before we had to go to another center in the ghetto where they checked you. You know, every, everything that you had on your person. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you take? 

SUBJECT: What you're taking. Because they said no jewelry, no money, not anything. You don't have to take anything. And of course, they didn't believe you. They have to check you. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you take with you? 

SUBJECT: I just had my little prayer booklet. That's all I took. And he went to the policeman and tore the little blanket off my brother's back and threw it away. And he said, he wouldn't need that. And my, I saw my father's face. You know, it was, it just killed me. 

And he tried to get it back. He tried to sneak on with that and get the little blanket back like, like he felt that was a sense of security. And he hit him so hard on his back. He just let out a moan and he couldn't get the blanket. 

And they walked us to the train station. It was petrifying, that procession. Walking on foot. Just a mess of people, and children, and old people, and sick people. And as I said, my sister just had her tonsils removed and my mother was so worried. Actually, the worry of my sister took away the worry of the happenings around us from her. Perhaps it was good. 

And we arrived at the train station and we were put into the cattle cars. I always wondered that why, you know, when I was studying history and I was studying Hebrew history and our, uh, everything, you know, our origin or where we come from and I read the miracles-- the parting of the Red Sea and on, and on, and on, and Moses having water come from the rock, and then I just looked around, you know? 

I was waiting for some kind of miracle. I don't know why I was waiting for miracle. Because I guess that's the only thing that I had in my mind, you know, that I have studied in miracles. I just couldn't, there was, I couldn't explain what this whole situation is and what this scene is about. You know, the cattle cars and a bunch of people. Innocent, harmless people, you know, gathered around in rows and putting in trains. 

And I was waiting for my turn that when my family has to go into the train. And of course, there was no miracles. Then it just reminded me of the time I says I wish that I could witness a miracle. That would be great. But then we were put into the cattle carts. 

Even on that little window on the left hand side up above, you know, for air, was wired with chicken wire. Even that wasn't enough to escape for anyone, or anyone wouldn't even have the idea to escape because no one [INAUDIBLE]. You know, this, this, this people of ours, we're so-- I don't know whether we were ignorant to the greatest extent that a person shouldn't think that, that maybe their life is threatened. 

I certainly didn't think so. But people, or older people, you know, when you become older and when you become more experienced, you tend to descend some sort of paranoid and you worry for your life. Not then when you're young, you know, you, you have no fear. Even though that there is-- you have to have fear. 

But when you're young, the young people have no fear. So I had no idea. The fear for my life was totally non-existent for me. I never thought of that. So we were put into the cattle cars and, uh, they said sit on the floor. Sit on the floor. Sit on the floor. There's nothing to do. 

You could say, uh, that there was no one to talk to. And they weren't even German people doing this. They were Hungarian chandlers doing that. You see, when Eichmann came into Hungary, he was worried that the Hungarian Jews are going to revolt because he was so late and the war was almost finished. 

And he was scared that the Jews know what's happened, and they know exactly what it is, and they know what's happening with them that they would revolt. No one revolted. No one did anything. No one knew. 

And we sat down in that car, and there were a barrel in the middle for toilet facilities. And there just were so many people and it was warm. And my mother sat down and she put the little package of cookies that she had and she said, we will not try to eat this while we're in the train because we're, we're not active. We don't have to eat. 

Maybe they're taking us to work. Even that, I don't know where the idea of work came from. I wish the idea came that they're going to kill us and let's do something, but no one had that idea. She said, let's save the cookies in case we're going to work so we have a bite to eat. 

And we sat down and there were babies in that wagon, and sick people, and old people, young people, there were about 150 people in the wagon. And after they jammed us in there, they closed the doors and they locked the doors. And that was that. 

And the next day when the train started to go and the people were crying and, you know, I held myself back not to go to that barrel because I figured the less of the stench, then the better it is because there's so many people in there. We were three and a half days in that wagon. 

And they were crying and there were pregnant people, and it was just, it was just horrible. Three and a half days and the wagon. Except one morning, they opened the doors and they were giving us some water. 

And these soldier boys running about with the yellow arm, arm band, we weren't allowed to ask them anything. They weren't allowed to talk to us. Although some people yelled, where do you think they're taking us? Or what do you think is going on? There was no answer. They weren't allowed to answer. And then they closed the doors and that was that. 

My mother was praying. I had to pray yet, but I couldn't pray. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What was your father doing? 

SUBJECT: My father was just sitting there and he says, maybe I could have saved my family. Why didn't I do it? Why didn't I do it? But of course, he couldn't do it. Because if he could have done it, we wouldn't have been there. 

And then the door opened. It was middle of the night on a hazy morning. On the tracks, on a station, a station without a name. It had no name. I didn't see any name. The doors were opened. They said geh raus. 

We saw German soldiers. Shining boots and a spotless uniform. And us being in that wagon-- filthy, and drenched, and overheated, and shocked by fear. They said, out. Out of the wagon. Fast. The faster, the better. 

And the wagons had no steps. You know, it was a high, high jump to go down for old people and young people alike. So some fell, some tumbled, some [INAUDIBLE], some came down. Got off the wagon and they said, leave everything in that wagon. You won't need a thing here. You will be getting TLC-- tender love and care. You will get everything. You won't need anything. Just leave it there, all your belongings. 

I was still holding onto my little prayer book. We got off the train and they said, the women on one side and the men on one side. And that's the last time I saw my father and my two brothers. They were separated. I didn't even have time to say goodbye to them. 

Then my mother was-- my sister and I-- my mother was between the two of us and we were standing in the line. And we see a table on the far end, and that was Dr. Mengele at the table with his monocle in his eye and white gloves on his hands. 

And for some reason, again, the human instinct is something unheard of. You know, the, the feelings, the ESP, or whatever it is. My mother took the kerchief off her head and put it on my head because I was, you know, barely 16 and I even looked much younger with rosy cheeks. 

And, uh, she probably had seen that people do this, you know, ahead of us in the rows and maybe she thought that's protection for me or some, something. I don't know. She put it on my head. She says, there, so you should look older. And then we came to the table. 

My mother was in between the two of us. And even today I feel if we just stood, you know, make believe, not on either side of her, maybe they, he wouldn't think that she was our mother because she was so young. She could have lived. 

But then it was even more passion to tear a family apart. It's not enough that everybody was in the same fate, but it was more passion to inflict some more hurt, you know, to the greatest extent. So Dr. Mengele said-- I didn't know his name then. 

You know, with the flick of the finger, he said left and right. And you-- you know, pointed to my mother. He said, you, to the left. She was a beautiful woman. Young. And that was the last time. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Can I have a tissue? Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. And my aunt was going with her, and my aunt collapsed on the tracks. And my mother was trying to lift her up. And a German with a rifle butt was hitting her. She should just leave her alone. Just motioned her to go on. 

She turned around and she waved. And she says, she says, children, you're going in the front of judgment of god. I said to myself, when are we going to be judged? What have we done? And that was that. 

We remained in the row. The German soldiers were walking up and down, and up and down. We were in a row of fives by then in the roll call. And he said, don't worry about your parents. You're going to see them on a weekend. Don't have to worry about it. Arrangements are made right now. You'll be taken care of. 

You will get meet once a week. Nothing is going to happen. You have nothing to worry. Such lies, such education, such instructions to human beings against another human being that could be done, and it was done. And then they took us into the Lager C. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What was the name of this place? 

SUBJECT: Auschwitz. So from that row, we went into a bed house and they told us to get undressed. You could imagine at the age of that time and being so innocent and someone tells you to get undressed naked. Strip everything. 

I said to my sister, I will not. She says, you have no choice. So when it came to our row, I had to get undressed. We threw the dress in one pile. We were instructed. Everything was so organized with precision. Throw the dress in one pile, throw the shoes in one pile. 

Anyone who had glasses, throw your glasses away. They took my earrings out of my ear that was put in there because when a girl child is born in Europe, they pierce their ears automatically. I had a little ruby earrings from birth. My hair was down to my waist. I had two, you know, long hair in two piece, two, uh, what do you call it? 

INTERVIEWER 3: Braids? 

SUBJECT: Braids. That's right. And my sister had long in two braids. She even had a lot more beautiful hair than I had, but-- thicker hair-- but we both had long hair. Threw your panties in one pile, your socks, whatever you have. And I looked at her and I turned back, and I was standing there naked. 

And I thought that the whole world had undressed. I have never seen so much clothes in my life. Mountains and mountains of clothing, and the people disappear. And I said, where are the people who are going to put those clothes back on? And, of course, there was no answer. 

Then we had to stand in a single row, form a single row. And then the German woman soldiers with clippers in their hand. First one with a big scissor that clipped our braids, and then the other with a clipper, and they shaved us bald. 

I can't begin to tell you, the sight what it looked like, you know? When you see thousands and thousands of bald people. My two cousins were there, my sister and I, and we were afraid we couldn't recognize one another. I mean, I have never seen my sister bald or myself. 

And we right away said that we're going to give a signal so we shouldn't get lost who we are to keep together. It's just amazing. Again, the poetry of the human instinct. They shaved us. We looked like maniacs. They shaved us everywhere that was hair. Pubic hair, under the arm. 

And you had to lift your arms up and turn it on in front of the soldier. They had to see that your skin was without blemish. Because if there was anything that they could point that it wasn't useful, then you just automatically was sent to the death. And after that, we were motioned into a room and made to sit down. 

There were about 3,000 of us sitting in that room. The heat was just so extensive. And there was no room. We were just sitting on the floor, you know, very, very close. Naked, bald, frightened. And you weren't allowed to say a word. 

The, the, uh, German policewoman, the German SS, the aufseherin then they called her, they were walking up and down with a whip in their hands. Ruhig, ruhig, you know. Quiet. You've got to be quiet. So we didn't know what's going to happen. My sister started to faint. I didn't know what I'm going to do, you know? 

For some reason, I always felt that I'm, I'm the stronger and I have to look out for her. And I noticed there was a faucet on the end of the room. I said, if I could only manage to get there somehow and get some water. And I started to move around and I managed. 

And I brought some water. How much water left in your arm when you get back? And I washed her face. She was OK. And I don't know how long we sat there. And then they said, up, And they motioned us into a room with shower heads and we got a nice cold shower after sitting there for hours and hours and overheated. It was so cold. 

They were so considerate giving us a shower to cool us off. My sister said, if you aren't going to get pneumonia now, you are just lucky. Because I had double pneumonia when I was about 10 years old and I was very sick. She was so worried. She wasn't worried about herself, she was worried about me. 

And after the shower, we were motioned out again and handed a single dress, a grey dress, a grey, striped dress. No shoes, bald-headed, and there was a number on the dress. It was a long number. I never learned my numbers. I refused to learn my numbers. 

And we were put outside, taken into Lager C in the Gypsy Lager and made to stand outside all night in the roll call. You weren't allowed to sit down. We stood there for three days. And the sight in Auschwitz, I mean, my sight, what I have seen, there were heaps of people, and barracks, and wires, electric fences, Germans in shiny uniforms, and Germans, women, and, of course, we didn't see any men. 

And we saw a stack of smokes from far away. We didn't know what it is. And there were Polish girls who were the helpers of the Germans, you know, who had been in Auschwitz for years. And then we tried to ask them-- some of us knew German-- that what happened to our mothers? What happened to the people who were separated? 

She says, are you stupid? You still don't know? Look at the smoke. That's where your mother is. They've been gassed and they've been cremated. And we couldn't believe it. We thought she was just giving us, you know, wanted to frighten us. We couldn't believe it. 

Well, then a day after and a day after, we believed it. And we heard the cries of [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] and we heard children cry, and then we have seen people coming from the train stations and disappear, and had to stand outside for three days. 

And then the end of the third day, we got some soup. It was horrible. It was atrocious. I didn't want to eat it. And my sister said, just eat it. And we ate it. And in that soup, there was medication. Medication to make us not to have our periods anymore. Of course, at the time I didn't know it. 

And after the third day, we were put into the Block C in the Barrack C. 10, number 10. And they gave us one blanket for five girls. And the roll call always for five. And we, the four of us, my two cousin, my sister, and myself. It was a good feeling that the four of us were together. 

And, of course, there were selections. There were many nights that we jump out the window of the block because when we saw that Mengele is coming to select, because there was always selections. There were some mothers that remained with the children, with the daughter. There was even a pregnant woman in our block. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Were there any young children? Seven, eight years old? 

SUBJECT: No, not a one. There was a mother and a daughter in our block. And then one night, they were selected and she was taken away even though she was young. And there was a pregnant woman and she went in labor and the baby was born in the block on the floor without anesthesia, naturally. 

And she gave birth to that child and the girls cut the umbilical cord. And then they told her, we have to give the child away because if they find out, then they'll take you with her. Or maybe all of us. And they say, you're the mother. Do with it whatever you want. She said, there's nothing I can do. Anyway, the blockalteste raised her. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Raise the baby? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, she took the child, I believe. I don't know what they did that took it away. And the girl was with us. The mother. Of course. And we had to go out to roll calling and she was bleeding, you know, and the girls were trying to wipe it. And I don't know how, but she, she made it. 

And there, there were men who came to clean the latrines in Auschwitz because there were no bathrooms in the block, in the barrack. They took us by divisions to the bathroom. Not many people had to go to the bathroom. If you had to go, you just made do. You didn't go. 

Twice a day they took us to the latrine. The latrine was a ditch dug and a piece a log laid down on it. And you sit on it, and that's how you take care of your needs. In the front of the supervision, SS boys. And the men came and cleaned the latrines. They called them the Scheisskommando. 

And we thought that, oh, they have it so good because they can come into the lager and they could see, and maybe they can find someone. And, of course, you could imagine, thousands and thousands of girls shouting, where are you from? Have you seen my father? Have you seen my brother? 

What part of Hungary are you from? Who are you? Because you couldn't recognize the men even if it was one of your family. They were beyond recognition. They were dried out. They were skinny. They didn't look like human beings anymore. 

And they had the striped suits on and the striped hat, and they pushed the cart. They cleaned the latrines. That was our only connection with the men in Auschwitz. And, of course, we didn't find anybody. They didn't know any of our family. 

And one day my cousin came over from-- you couldn't even go across the lagerstrasse. Across the lagerstrasse meant, you know, the barracks were on your left side and barracks were on your right side, and you weren't allowed to cross. And everything was, you know, holding against you. If they find you did something, then everybody had to suffer. 

They had hanging in Auschwitz, and you had to witness the hanging. And there were probably some girls who were trying to escape, they were electrocuted. And they showed us, you see, this is what's going to happen to you if you have any desire or any meanings that you want to escape. There's no escape. And we saw then that there was no escape. 

And one Sunday, this cousin of mine from Miskolc, she was across from the other barrack and she sent a message that she has two pieces of bread for us. She heard that we were there. That I should somehow go over and get the two pieces of bread. 

Bread was something that we didn't see already for a week and a half. And I managed to go over across. And I remember I fell across the tracks and I made a big gash on my shin. The mark is still there. And the blood was gushing out. 

But that didn't stop me. I went and I saw her and she gave me two pieces of bread and butter. And, and I brought the bread back and I have never seen her again. She also has never come back. I don't know what happened to her. 

I came back and I was bleeding and my sister was worried. You know, they see the blood is coming, that's the end. They'll take you. So she tore a piece of my dress and she tied my leg up. Then I started to cough because it was very cold and humid in Auschwitz 2:00 in the morning when you had to go out and stand the roll calls. 

And before the aufseherin came and counted us, she was trying to hold me in the back to give me some warmth. She was afraid if I get pneumonia or if they hear I cough that, you know, they'll take me away. Because any excuse to take away, it was fine. And they noticed it right away. 

So I was trying not to cough and I succeeded. And for some place, she find a piece of blanket-- I don't know where she find it-- and put it on my back and between my chest and my shirt so it should keep me warm. So this was this support. Because if I was myself, I didn't think I would have ever made it. 

But, of course, it was luck anyway. And we were trying not to be separated. And we were in Auschwitz only for two weeks. We didn't even get numbers on our arms. We were in a Gypsy Lager. 

And from there, they took us to Riga. We went to Riga and Kaiserwald. 

INTERVIEWER 3: The four of you? 

SUBJECT: The four of us. 

INTERVIEWER 3: When you were leaving, what did you think? 

SUBJECT: We thought it's the last, you know, they take us to the gas. Every time from then on, every time there was a leaving, I always told my sister, or every time they take us into a bathhouse, I, I told her, this is the last thing and just let's say goodbye. This is it. I never thought we ever going to survive. It didn't look like anyone could ever go out of that hell. There's no way. And I think their aim was that there should be no survivors. 

We went to Kaiserwald and Riga. There was, uh, so many people there. So many people. There were Lithuanian people, and Polish people, you know. One big state, but it was like an estate was devoted for the prisoners. 

And us Hungarian girls were in one group, about 3,000 of us. And they put us in a haystack on top of the-- you know, the space between the-- and the house, the roof. Under the, you know, there's a space, and that's where we stayed. That's where we slept. And, uh, the next morning when we got up, we were full of lice. 

Because who knows how many thousands of people were there prior to us. And I have never seen lice in my life. You know, in clothing or anything. I see some white things moving, you know, when I folded my dress and I asked my sister, what is this? 

She says, oh, my god. This is lice. And gosh, now we're going to get some disease and that's it, you know? We tried to pick the lice off, you know, to clean ourselves, and then we, they took us to work. They took us out in the fields and we dug grass squares. And it was very hot. It was in June. 

I had my sweet 16 in Auschwitz, by the way. June 20 is my birthday. That was my sweet 16 party. My mother made me a birthday party when I was 12. And she said to me, [INAUDIBLE] you get 16. I was wondering what, I says, my god, what she could feel now. She wasn't unable to do anything anymore. 

And, uh, we cut grass squares and we had to carry it on a carrier. And the heat was very, very intense. And, uh, my sister cannot take the heat at all. And I was trying to make her sit down in the shade when it was her turn to carry the grass, and my cousin as well. 

My other cousin also. She was older than her sister and we, we made a promise that whenever we can help that we're going, we're going to do instead of them if we have the chance. So I made her sit down in the shade and I carried her share too. 

And really, I see no purpose, I have seen any purpose of our work whatsoever. They said that they using the grass squares for camouflaging the German tanks. So in the morning when we went out and we picked the lice off of us, we were clean. And then when we came back at night, we had to sleep in the same place. 

So the next morning we got up again. It's like, when you lay down with lice, you wake up with lice. And the lice was-- vermin, it was all over. And one morning, they took us to the Baltic Sea because Riga is near the Baltic Sea. And then again, we had to get undressed because we only had one dress. There was no change what anyway. 

They bathe us in the ocean. So that was the way of keeping us clean for the moment. And then one day, they said that they're going to take us away from Auschwitz. And they made us walk to [? Zwodau. ?] 

INTERVIEWER 3: You mean from Kaiserwald? 

SUBJECT: Yes, from Kaiserwald. I mean, from Kaiserwald, yes. And we walked from Kaiserwald from Riga to [? Zwodau. ?] It was a great, uh, it was a very big ammunition warehouse. It was loaded with ammunition. And they had to retreat because the Russians were coming close. 

So they told us to load us up. We could take all the marmalade and all the bread that was there for the German army because we going to go back to Germany. So we can take all the food we want. We can eat all we want. 

So everybody was trying to grab, you know. We had no way to carry or anything. So we picked up the Marmalade in one hand and we dropped the bread on the other. We picked up the bread, we dropped the marmalade. Well, it was just, you know, and they were mocking. You don't see us how we grabbed the food. There was no way of carrying it, and we were walking. 

Whatever we could, we, we got. And as we were walking, you know, we heard the, uh, the warehouse blown up. They blew up the warehouse because they didn't want the am-- leave the ammunition, I suppose, in the Russian hands. And we were walking and, and we just had to drop whatever we had. 

So when the momentary excitement of getting hold of some food after for so long, it was just a mockery. Another episode. And everybody just had to because you can't walk and carry. And from there, we went to Dundanga. In Dundanga they separated us, my two cousin, my sister, and I. 

And we thought this is, this is the end because we cannot be separated. We have to be together as much as we can. My sister was in a different group lined up, and I was in a different group, and my two cousins remained in the block in Dundanga. In that barrack. Already picked to stay there. 

So my sister, she just-- I saw her walk out from her row, you know, and Eichmann was there standing. Turned around and I saw her face. When she saw me in the, you know, that I was separated. And I, I knew, you know, if they catch you, you just don't know what happens. 

You cannot do anything against the rule. And especially the SS. And where we were-- but I just had to. So they turned their faces and I just, just ran. And, of course, if it wasn't the strength of my sister, I would have never had the energy to or, or the will to even to step out. So we went together again and we remained in Dundanga. 

And they took those girls that were standing out there, about 3,000 of them, and they never came back. The rows that I was standing, none of the girls ever came back. They didn't live. I don't know what happened to them. The rumor was that they took them to sea and they, they dumped them. 

There were people from my neighboring towns, there were girls from, you know, I know a lot of girls. Nobody came back. And from Dundanga we went to Stutthof and Stuttgart. And every time you got into the concentration camps, you know, you see the totem polls on the corner, the electrical wire around it, and, and the sign Arbeit Macht Frei, that work sets you free. One lies on top of the other. 

And every concentration that they have taken us in, they taken us into, they give us a bath. They gave us a bath in Stuttgart, and they made us go out, outside and sit down in the dust. There were millions of people sitting there waiting to be probably gassed and then distributed and whatever. 

And we were sitting there in the dust and had just given a bath. So it was just all done so, so purposefully to, just to inflict hurt and to inflict if more hurt they can give you, you know. And then more senseless things that anyone who could think that tried to put the pieces together what makes sense and doesn't make sense. 

And from Stuttgart, they put us on a train and they took us to Leipzig. 500 of us. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What year is this now? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 3: What year is this now? 

SUBJECT: That was in, uh, still, uh, October, October, uh, '44. October '44 and they took us to Leipzig. 500 young girls. And we were together, the four of us together, and they took us into a camp right outside of Leipzig. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: What kind of camp was this? 

SUBJECT: It was just fenced around with electrical wires. It was a work camp. And the SS Commando had the front part fenced around for them, and 500 girls had barracks. And this is the, uh, uh, space for, designed for working for us. And I don't know what was before. Excuse me. 

And they said, you're going to work in an airplane factory. One week daytime and one week nighttime. And if you're not going to do your job the way you are told, you will be sabotage and everyone will suffer for it. If any one of you will try to escape, everyone will suffer for it. 

And there was only 500 of us. We were fenced around and we were watched like criminals, you know? We were criminals. We were just children of Jewish parents. And we went to work in the AT gear and airplane factory. 

I did, I was shooting rivets with a lufthammer, an air, an air hammer into a piece that goes into the airplane from the machine. The front of the airplane. And then you complete it. 

You know, you have to drill the holes, and you have to shoot the rivets in them, and then they were in there. If it wasn't straight, you had to take it out. It had to be just so. And, of course, I was always very efficient. I was brought up to do right. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What were you thinking working in this factory? 

SUBJECT: I was just thinking that if, if I do my job right, then maybe we'll, we will be all right and maybe we will be OK and nothing is going to happen to any of us. And, of course, as long as we were in one place we felt our sense of security. 

The minute we were moved, we always thought that's going to be the end. Where as long as we were in one place, we had no, we had no other thoughts than to just to try to, to obey the rules, and try to do right, and just keep above whatever we have and to do away with. 

And whatever little food, we have to try to manage not to eat it at one time. So we have it for all day or for all week. And we just do our job what we're told and we didn't know. That, again, you didn't know what's going to happen or whatever. 

So we went to work. One week we worked daytime and one week we worked nighttime. My sister and I, we were in the day shift, the weekend. We were always together and my two other cousins were together. We worked upstairs and my two cousins worked downstairs. They were working in the sheet metal section cutting the pieces for the airplane. 

And some girls were working in the assembly hall and some girls, you know, every part of the factory. And, uh, to each five girls there were a meister given. You know, who led us and showed us how to work, but he wasn't supposed to talk to us. It was degrading for a German to talk to a Jewish girl. 

And in that factory there were Italian political prisoners. Men working downstairs. And, of course, they were, they were not going with German SS officers, they were allowed to come on their own. And they were in the political camps. 

Nobody was as severely punished as the Jews. And the Jewish men were treated a lot worse than the Jewish women yet. And us, we were very lucky because we worked. And comparatively if everybody was under condition that we were, my sister and I, my two cousins, a lot more people would have survived. 

And then one day, it was in '45, they came and bombed. Every time that the American bombs, the bombers came to bomb Leipzig, we were just so thrilled. We had to go out in a ditch, you know, to save ourselves. It's, it's, uh, it's like a joke. 

And then when the, um, bombers came, my sister always, you know, we had a little piece of bread because we arranged it so we should have it. It should last for all week. We got one bread and a slice a day and we see that we wouldn't eat more than what allotment for the day. So we have it every day. 

And, of course, none of us would take anyone's portion. Not even a crumb. My sister always knew that, you know, I love to eat and I'm always hungry. She always wanted to give me some of her portion, but I would never take not one crumb. There's no way. She said, I'm not hungry. I said, well, then just leave it there. 

So when we were run out at night, you know, when they were bombing, she, she brought the piece of bread. She says, let's eat. At least we don't die hungry. I says, no. I says, don't eat it. I says, how, I can't eat. You know, the bombs are falling and I can't eat. 

And Leipzig was in flames and we were just so happy. Every time when the alarm sounded we were just so happy because we always welcomed to die by an American bomb or by a Russian bomb instead of the, the German solution because we didn't know what the end is going to be. We know that probably the end is that we'll get killed. 

So we, we survived all that. And then one day our Lager was bombed. And we were coming home from work and my two cousins were sleeping. And the roof fell in where my cousin was sleeping right next to her, and nothing happened to her. 

And we were worried, you know. And as we walked into the Lager there were lightning bombs, you know. The steps that you walk by. So we had to be careful where you step. And I was running to see whether they were alive because the Lager was in, in, just blown to pieces. 

The girls were standing outside. And, uh, we had some 500 other girls that they brought in just a few days ago. When their Lager was bombed on, they brought us to stay with us and two of them was killed. None from our group was hurt by the bomb. 

And my sister was with me and my two cousins were fine. They were alive. So that was our greatest happiness. That they weren't hurt. And this is how life was. I even, I got some premium-- because I worked so good-- some premium money that I could buy extra lettuce or something. It was a French salad or something. 

INTERVIEWER 3: You were paid? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we were paid premiums. And we got, uh, a letter like the aerogram, you know, you have here, that we can write to Auschwitz and write to our parents. Can you imagine? 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you do with that piece of paper? 

SUBJECT: We, we wrote. We wrote. And we were thinking that they mailed them away to them. We wrote them that we were OK. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you believe that they would be delivered? 

SUBJECT: I had no idea. I had no idea. I haven't witnessed personally that my mother was gassed. I couldn't imagine that a woman of her caliber and of her level could be killed just for because she was Jew. I couldn't imagine that all those people were killed. 

How bad we thought maybe she's alive somewhere. So we wrote the letter. We thought Auschwitz was the center. That's where the letter had to be addressed. And we thought that they would deliver it to her. 

INTERVIEWER 3: What did you write? 

SUBJECT: They told us what to write. They told us that we working and we are fine, that we are OK. That's all what you were allowed to write. And I'm here with my sister and we hope to see you. And that was that. 

And then one day the lageralteste, [? Itsa, ?] came in and, uh, she was working with the hauptscharfuhrer, because she knew German, she knew several languages. And she was the mediator, you know, between us and the hauptscharfuhrer, the commander. They give us the word and whatever we have to do. 

We had a, a washroom with cold water and we were able to get washed every night. And you were not allowed to go out of your room at a certain hour in the evening. We had a black coffee in the morning. We got it 4:00 every morning when we work daytime. 