INTERVIEWER: no. 

SELMA ENGEL: No, nobody. From Sobibor? 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, no. Just-- 

SELMA ENGEL: No, I don't know. No, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: But the, um, the Sobibor people, uh, or people that survived Sobibor, um-- uh, they were with you-- 

CREW: OK. We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Thanks, Craig. Uh, Mrs. Engel, would you give your full name, and then tell us about the town you were born and your family. 

SELMA ENGEL: Uh, my name is Selma Engel. Wijnberg, Wijnberg is my maiden name. And I was born in Groningen. That was in bigger town and it northern from Holland. And when I was seven years old, my parents-- it was in 1929-- they moved to Zuidwolde that's another, smaller town. It's town something like New Haven, I think. And it was in northern-- also from Holland, in northern part of Holland 

And they-- they started a-- a Jewish and kosher Jewish hotel. And, uh, so it was, uh, in 19-- in 1930 and '31. And then-- and they-- they had to build another hotel, because that was on a kettle market. My father and mother had-- that in-- in Europe, they have kettle markets. And it was the only Jewish kosher hotel in, um-- in the-- that province. Like, here's Connecticut imagine it was much smaller. 

And, uh, I come from a very well, very Jewish orthodox family. Life is in our house and my whole family was very orthodox. And, uh, it was a nice life in Holland. This was not something sad. 

I grew up in a middle class family, and my father and mother did well in that time. And I went to Jewish camps. There was a Zionist-- Zionist organizations, and when I was 12 years old I went to a summer camp. When I was 16 years old, I went to another camp and, uh, it was a very nice life in Holland. 

And then I was the only girl from four-- from four children. I had three older brothers. I was the youngest and-- and the only girl. And, uh, I was a little bit spoiled, a little bit of a tomboy, because brought up with three boys. 

And then in 1938, it start already with the German Jews came to Holland, and they came also-- stayed in our hotel, and it was always very secretive. Most of the time my parents hold a secret, and I was not allowed to know because, you know, I was the only girl and, you know, very protected. I was brought up very protected this way. 

INTERVIEWER: What kinds of things did you notice? 

SELMA ENGEL: Oh, the German Jews came to Holland, you know, and they, uh-- and what was going on in Germany and, uh-- but already was not so involved in it because I was 15 years, 16 years old. And I remember when I was 17 years old, I wanted to go to Israel. And I went to Amsterdam, and Hachsharah. And, uh, my-- my-- my parents were very against it. 

So I met a boy that was a far cousin of mine, and he had an affidavit. It was very hard to get an affidavit to go to Israel. And then we would-- um, getting married, seeing me getting married, and go to Israel. But, um, was not allowed, of course, and had to come back home. So that was in 1939. 

And then was it already, you know, talking about that a lot of Dutch Jews went to America and sold everything. And my father and mother were very Holland oriented, and they say, how can they do it and go away from Holland, you know? Because you never thought in Holland would something happened. 

INTERVIEWER: What was going on that made-- 

SELMA ENGEL: They know already there was something-- there was-- they know already there was something going on in Germany, and already concentration camp in Buchenau and Dachau. And there was the Crystal Night and all these things we heard about it. And, um, so all the Dutch Jews what lived in the biggest cities, they are more up to date than the people that live in like-- in Maine, in Vermont, and perhaps even New Haven. That's the way we lived, you know? We lived far in the country, a little, um, province. 

And, um-- so I remember that my parents talked about it, that this Jewish family went to America, that Jewish family went away, and they couldn't understand it. Now I can't understand that my father and my mother didn't go away, you know? That they just sit there and waited till the German came, and they came. 

My big brother-- I had three brothers, and two brothers were in the army. They were in the-- in the war. Oh yeah, one brother got married May the 8th, so the whole family came back together in Amsterdam. There was the whole family-- not one of my brother. One of my brothers was still-- was not allowed to go because there was already danger, you know, in the war-- with the war it seems like that. 

So, um, May the 8th my whole family was together in Amsterdam in a wedding. And then, um, May the 10th the war broke out. So that was the war broke out of it. 

We had an hotel in Zwolle, and always we had Jewish, um, people would handle in-- in the cattle, and they-- that is very big business in Europe. And they came, slept overnight in our hotel many times. You know, they slept-- they slept like a family already, you know? These people are like a family already. 

And they came to our hotel, and I was afraid may they broke the war out. Friday was the May the 10th broke the war. So we had-- the cattle market was Friday, and they-- I don't-- middle in the night we woke up, and we know it was the war, that Germany came in and there , there was a breach. 

You hear the bombing and things like that was going on, and-- and, uh, the Jewish, uh, people that were in hotel, they got just crazy. They, you know, they start-- that's the end of the life. You know, that's the way they reacted that moment. 

And, uh, they took the car, and in Holland there's just so much water. And you have to go-- when you-- they came also a lot from the north, but I remember. And they just drove their car in the water, and how they came home to the little-- to the towns where they lived, I don't-- I don't remember. But they thought that was the sabotage what they did when they put the car in the water and the German couldn't catch it. 

And they were all very panicky. Everybody said, you know, the German come and we-- that was the end. Well anyway, it was not. What? The noise from my bracelet. 

So anyway, um, uh, so and that was the war. And, um, I had, um-- and then we were sitting, of course, for the-- for the radio. And the war was only five days, five days was war. And there was a lot of sabotage in Holland, and-- and I had two brothers in the war. 

And I remember my father went looking for them, and brought the bicycle. Everybody does everything in Holland with the bicycle. He went looking for them and-- and he couldn't find him. He went just-- he went just out and looking for my brothers. 

And, uh, he came back-- after that, my brother-- father went looking for him, he came back and, um, he very shortly after that he died. Because that was for him such a hardship to see, I don't know, the war, and-- and that, uh-- also, um-- I don't know. He-- he just had a heart attack and went to a hospital, and he died. He died, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did any, uh, special things happen because you were Jewish? Any different things happen that-- 

SELMA ENGEL: Oh yeah. First of all, I was not allowed to work anymore. I worked in, um, in the hospital. I was, um-- I cooked. I had a Jewish kitchen, a kitchen, a kosher kitchen, and I helped, uh, the cook for Jewish patients and the diabetic patients and things like that. So that was the first thing was you're not allowed to do anymore of. 

And I was not allowed to walk on the-- um, from the beginning first, my-- my mother had-- we had to run the hotel. My father died in '41, and then my mother had the hotel and one brother was home. And it-- you know, it's such an intense time that it's-- first of all, after the war we were so upset that it was such a mess in the house. Remember, we were sitting there, so I fixed it a little bit up the house and it looks a little bit better. 

But anyway, it was after that was such a tense time, because it was every one you thought-- you thought that the Germans will come in and throw you out. And so the-- the-- but us, they didn't throw out because it wasn't, um, an-- an organization, um, in their home town, in Zwolle. And there was from, um, from society, like-- like the Elks or something like that, and they had a clubhouse and the Germans took their clubhouse. 

So the head of the police came to my mother and say, instead that the German come to your house, why don't you give your hotel to the Elk and off to the organization? So they after and very nervous wracking time. I remember my mother had to give up everything, the hotel that she built up from the ground, really rebuilt the hotel themselves. They really builded the stones. Really, they build the whole hotel up by themselves. 

And they started really with nothing, and they did very, very well. And it was a very well known hotel, and, um-- uh, so this these men, the-- took it over. These people took it over. And it was really done-- um, my mother had to go out with nothing, just the things what she had. 

When the Germans would have come, perhaps it would even have been worse, worse done this way. Anyway, we didn't have where to go, and my mother moved in a very poor area, in a very little room, uh, with no-- almost no water and no bathroom. And it was just horrible. And-- and, uh, so my mother went in and moved in there, in that house. And one brother got-- was engaged with a Jewish girl, and they getting married. 

And he was not-- and he was not allowed-- you know, I cannot really give exactly how it was, how miserable it was that you have to give up everything, and you come and live in one-- one little room, no bigger than this room. And you have no another room and there was no bathroom, and you lived really very luxurious before in a nice, clean hotel with bathrooms and showers and everything. And then you-- you just-- my mother was, uh, very nice, fine lady that wasn't used to it. 

You know, she had all these woman helping here in the hotel, and she never had to do the heavy work. And-- and-- and then you come in zone four area, and, um-- and so she was moved out of the hotel with just what she had. And, uh-- and then one brother got married to this Jewish girl, and they were not allowed to stay together because the German didn't let allow you, uh, to move to another, uh, apartment. And so at night he sneaked out to where she lived, and-- and at morning when it was not dark, he sneak back to our house. 

And we were not allowed to go after 6:00 on the street, and-- and, uh, it wasn't-- you know, you had to wear the stars. You had to wear the stars. And I remember once, um, a bunch of Jew-- Jewish men were playing cards in the evening, and another-- and a German and Dutch had vented to German. And somebody had vented to German what was, um, met angrily. 

And he belonged to the NSB. That is an organization like fascistment. And, um, he give up that they-- that these people were playing cards there. And at night, they made-- the German came in there and sent him away, and then started going that the people have to go to arbeit camps. 

So one group brought on by my brother's, had, was hidden in another little town, because we know a lot of people because of the hotel. We know a lot of people. And he was married. He was the one that was married. 

And he was hidden, and the woman what he was married to, her father had to go-- there was the a Jewish-- there was an-- there was an Jewish organization, you know. The Jewish rat was dead. What-- give advice to the Jews. My day tried to save the own life, you know, this-- so this-- her father had to go to a camp. 

Meanwhile, my brother was hidden, for sure he had to go, you know? Perhaps if my brother would go out of his hiding place, he had a chance he didn't have to go. So the-- stupid, my brother went out of his hiding place, and he went to the camp, working camp. So I hadn't-- and he was not too strong. So he went to the-- to that camp, to the working camp. 

And I had another brother. He was 22. And I had a brother from 20 years old, and in between-- in between he was perhaps 23, and I had brother from 21 years old. He say from this brother marriage go, and the other brother whose name was Martin, then I go to. Perhaps I can help him. So this brother from my time went also there, because nobody said ever that there was a gas chamber or killing Jews. You know, the Dutch people were so-- we didn't think about things, you know-- nobody said about a thing like that. 

So anyway, this one brother went and the other brother went. And then I was already not in-- in that home town anymore. When I walked once on the street, there came-- a priest came to me and said, how do you think you can save your life? And I said, the only way that I can save-- that the Jews can save their life that the not Jewish people take us in and that we get-- that we are hidden. 

And the next day, my English teacher came and he said, I have a place for you to go. So I went with the bicycle, and we drove 70 kilometer. And he brought me to a woman that I know from my hometown, and I was hidden there. 

I was, um, hidden there. And then in between, I hear all the news later on what was going on in my mother's house. Because she came also from Zwolle, and I somehow heard all the news what was going on. And, um-- so then when I was hidden there by this woman. I was all alone the whole day in the house, and I was a girl from 19 years old. It was not so easy. And didn't have to talk with anybody and waited till she came home. 

And then after that, I was there a few months, she had some Jewish friends. And she say, I-- I want to hide these Jewish friends of mine, and I have another place for you. So I went to another family, and she took in the whole family in her small apartment. And she saved these people's life over the war. 

Anyway, I went to another place, and I went to a very big house, house with 10 rooms, where there lived a woman with her husband and her brother. Older people, 60 years old, very religious people. And I went to the house and I was the maid. I was really just the maid. I didn't have any money. 

I-- somehow my mother didn't give me any money. I don't think that she saw that I would go away for a long time or something like that. But I heard later that my mother fainted when i went away, and basically she didn't hear anything from me in-- in 24 days that she was very upset. 

But then when I was with this woman and with this family in that house, I hear that my brother-- my-- that my brother was in a camp and my mother was in-- my two brothers were in a camp. And I had another brother what was hidden. He was married and lived in Utrecht. And he was hidden with his two children, with his wife and two children, in Utrecht. 

And I-- when I was with this family in that house-- in the big house where I was maid-- a woman this-- the wife from the English teacher came over one day and say my mother went out of the door and she was planning to hide. The German catched her on the moment that she went out of the door, and, um, they took her. And that was the last thing what I heard from my mother. 

And they went to Auschwitz. I think they went to Auschwitz together. I hate to talk about it. Really, I don't-- so anyway, um, that was in 1943. 

And I went also once visiting my brother what was hidden in a very small room with two little kids, and I saw how they lived. Um, uh, my-- my daughter-- my sister in law was a lousy housekeeper, and I'm a little bit neat housekeeper. And how they lived, and what a-- it very-- I couldn't stand it. So I went there, and then I went back to the place where I was, uh, hidden. 

And, uh, I was very lonely. And I was a young girl, and I was a very outgoing girl. And I was very sport-minded, and-- and I was very locked up in that house. I couldn't go out at all anywhere. 

And, uh, one and not far of us where I was hidden was-- and that was in the build. That was not far from Utrecht-- was another Jewish family hidden by a lawyer, a woman lawyer. And she said, why don't you come and visit this family? 

And I was very glad I went, and I didn't look so Jewish. I could have really go out for not Jewish. And I went there, and, um, when-- the moment when I was there, the police came. 

And, uh, so I say, I'm just visiting here. I'm a nurse. I had a passport, and I took the J out. Every Jew had a J in it, and the underground put the J out. 

Well, when you put it to the light, you could see the J was taken out. This was in 1942. In '42, the underground was not so active yet in-- in Holland. That was not really going on. And later, they made much better passports. And so, he said-- and he looks into these soldiers and he showed that I was, eh-- 

But where I was hidden, there was another Jewish family in between when I came there. There was a professor, and he came there with his wife. And he was also hidden there, in the same house. And I know. Of course I know that. And they handed me over as a maid. And I didn't-- I resisted it very much. You know, they were-- I was a young kid, and I had to do clean-- you know, in homes, you have this coal stove, and I had to clean the stove. I didn't want to do things like that. 

But anyway, when we got caught, the German-- they were not Germans. There were also Dutch police, but ventured to Germany, like fascists, you know. It's an organization. 

INTERVIEWER: This family that hid you were taking on danger-- 

SELMA ENGEL: Then I will tell you about this family. This family took on danger. But this family was not very kosher. But made out after the war. They had 28 Jews there, and all the 28 Jews got caught. And the Germans didn't do anything to them. When they would have been something kosher, the Germans would have taken them, too, and sent then to a concentration camp. So there was something that was not kosher, but I never really found out. And I didn't want to find out, because-- I didn't know. 

They went to the jail after the war, these people. And I think I'm the only one that came back. But I didn't know what was happening after me. 

But anyway, these two people that were there, the Germans asked me, where are you hidden? And I didn't want to tell it to this police, that catch me in that house with this lawyer. I didn't want to tell him, because when he goes-- I said, when he goes right away to the house, then he finds these two Jews there. 

So I didn't want to tell him. And I went to the police station in Utrecht. And when I went to the police station in Utrecht, in the evening, when I knew there was already enough time, I told them where I was hidden, because they-- I don't know why I told him. I think I was perhaps under pressure, or something, after I told them the worst thing that happened to them, or something like that. And they could tell that-- yes. 

And I went over there. And these people didn't give me anything to eat. I didn't get any food there. I remember that when the German-- I came and I slept in the attic, and there were apples. And every day, I stole an apple at night and eat it in bed, and also, a sandwich I had always on my pillow, because I didn't get enough food from them. 

And there was not much to eat. But at that time, there was still to eat in Holland. And in Holland, they didn't-- the Germans took everything out of Holland. But 1942 wasn't so bad. It started in '43, '44, and everyone was not there anymore. 

The Dutch people really didn't have anything to eat. They ate raw sugar beets and everything that they could eat in Holland. And Holland was really very bad off. But the time that I was there was not that bad. There were still lots to get. 

And when I went to the Germans to that house with the SS policeman, went to the house of the fascists, went to the house, they looked at my bed and they found this bread and said to them, see what a lousy girl that is? She still chew bread and she put it under the pillow because she steals your bread. But they had to eat when they went out in the town and worked. And they got them in the house somehow. I didn't have anything to eat. We didn't get anything. 

Anyway, these people where I was hidden, they didn't get punished. And I don't know exactly the story, what it was. When they had hidden Jews in Holland was very dangerous, not so dangerous as in Poland. Everybody was an anti-Semite in Poland. But in Holland, when they got caught, they sent them to concentration camps right away, too. They kill them. They went to concentration with Holland. And these people that I was hidden, not. 

So I went to-- I was in Utrecht in the police station. And I stayed there a week-- met the people where I was caught-- do you know, this Jewish family was caught. And they were asthmatic and they were so sick and everything. Oh, that was terrible. And I remember the head of the police tried to make an affair with me. And I was-- I was 19, 20 years old. And it was very scary. 

And the Dutch police came to me, and they wanted to get me out of there, and they wanted to get me to my brother. But I didn't want to go out. I didn't want to go to my brother. I didn't want to live with my brother there. So I didn't go out. And I could have got out of there, but I didn't. And I didn't want to get out, because I said, well, I have to live. They have my brother that's in hell. 

I didn't know that I would go to a concentration camp to Poland, you know. You didn't know such a thing. So from Utrecht, I went to jail in Amsterdam. And I was three months in jail in Amsterdam. And I was there to get an aid woman in jail. It was very interesting. 

I was in jail with a professor's wife, and a girl from the street-- you know, any kind. when we came in the jail, there was a woman there with long, blonde, beautiful hair. She comes from a very rich family. And she bought the girl, the one that opened the door. How do you call them? And she bought this woman. And she got her to dye her hair. 

And anyway, I was three months-- and we didn't get enough to eat in jail, too. I remember also, I smoked a lot. And I had a cigarette. And I was sitting days with my cigarette on the lamp. And of course, it didn't burn. 

And we didn't get to eat. But because of that woman who was already so many months longer in jail, we did exercise. And morale was very high in the jail, you know. We didn't talk about debt. We talked about that we would come out, you know. 

And I had an aunt in Amsterdam, and she sent me some clothes and some food. And I had always had somehow a little bit of a lucky star, I called it. When I was in jail, we did get very bad food, and we didn't get much to eat. And there was a woman, the guard, that opened the door to give us food. She was a louse. And she would scream at us. 

And one day, I was laughing. She said, did you have a brother that worked there and there in a hotel? I said, yes. I had a brother that was in hotel school. And then, you, have to go in a hotel, and study and learn. And she was their maid, camp chambermaid. And she knows my brother that was there, in jail, in Amsterdam. And from that time, she gives double food to us in the jail. And from that time, we didn't have it so bad, because we could share it together. 

And it was-- you know, when you're young, you do-- it was terrible. Of course, it was terrible. But when you're young, you look a different way at everything. And when you're older, now, at my age, would do something that would be the debt. 

And it was interesting. Done Christmastime-- so we got a little bit of extra food in Christmastime. So then in January, all we had to trade to go out-- we had to trade to go out. And we came together in an office, a big office. And they sent us to a concentration camp in Vught, in Holland, a concentration camp in Holland. 

And I remember one girl, a German girl, and she starts singing-- it was some kind of a song, so, blue is the sky, where we're going-- it was, like, the blue sky, you know, now we're going somewhere, god knows. She knows more the reality, because she came from Germany, then we're Dutch girls, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember the song? Could you sing it? 

SELMA ENGEL: No, I don't remember on the moment. It's not a song that was-- I don't remember the song. And also, she sang something like "es giht alles voruber, es gut alles vorbei" That's what you say to-- you know. But she knows more of the reality. 

And then we went to Vught, in the concentration camp in Vught. And we were the first Jews that came there in that concentration camp. And we were the ones that were Jews, but were not punished. But I was punished because I was hidden somewhere, and I got caught by the police. And the other people that were in that concentration camp that came there because they were Jews, and they were not hidden somewhere-- they were in a better position. 

And the men that were in jail, they came in a Strafkompanie a special camp for the men that were hidden somewhere. But they got a very hard time, because right away they had to cut off their hair, and they didn't get to eat, and they got hit-- they hit them with a whip and everything. That was in Holland and Vught. That was very bad. 

They had a very bad-- we could see them. We could see them, from here to across the street from here, like that. We could see them. And I knew some people from my hometown that were there. 

So I was-- we were in the camp. And we didn't-- I remember, we didn't have salt, we had no salt in the food. And I thought already it was terrible. We had no salt, and we didn't have blankets. And I don't remember much about this camp. 

I remember once seeing-- somebody came to me, and he was a salesmen, and came over to our hotel. And he said, are you Selma Vangverger? I said, yes. He said, do you want to have a job? I said, yes. He said, go-- you can be the head of the laundry. And you go over everything, all the laundry that comes out. 

So good, fine. Everything is better than doing nothing. So I was the head of the laundry in that concentration camp. And it was-- I could have got out of that concentration camp very easy. I could have gone, sit in these big carts that came with the laundry-- and I didn't. I didn't want to go away, because I didn't have any money. And I thought, when you don't have any money, and you come out of this camp, where do I go? I thought without-- I didn't know there was already murder on the ground, that on the ground was not very much money. 

So and it was terrible. They stole the laundry from, you know, that went to the cleaners and they stole the laundry. And the Jews didn't get the-- what was in this inmate-- the inmate, you know, in the camp. Didn't get the laundry back. And it was a terrible thing. I remember it was terrible. It was really terrible. And he showed a-- slept with a young woman, Jewish woman. I coincidentally know her brother. Her brother came from my hometown and was married to a girl in my hometown. And her was just married and she couldn't come together with her husband. And you know, and that was all a very much more serious situation. 

And then we, one that we had to come in appel. We were three months in that camp. End of April 1943. We had to go-- came appel and then we had to go by night in a train. No, by day. It was in the daytime. In a train, we all were put in the train. Ultimately people met a man that was-- they was in another concentration camp. And got not to eat and shaved their head. 

And we went all together in a train and we went to Westerbork. Westerbork you heard, perhaps, about it. Westerbork is an concentration-- camp-- how you call it in English? Every Jew went to that camp, Westerbork. And more from Holland. Every Jew-- did you hear about the [INAUDIBLE] in Assen a few years ago, what was it, fighting in Holland? No. Anyway. That is what is called. All the Jews came to that camp from Holland. And from there they sent them to Auschwitz, to any camp from that camp. 

So I went to that camp in the train. I met this boy from my hometown. And he was in that other concentration camp. And he was-- I would-- perhaps 90 pounds. It was a very intelligent boy. He played beautiful piano. And he came with-- there was a family with three brothers. And they all got-- all got killed. The whole family got killed. You know, where I come from, my hometown, everybody got killed almost in my hometown. There's almost nothing left. 

And this-- he-- that was a big story. Anyway, he was with a girl in the train and-- and he gave up his life because he wanted to be together with this girl. He went to free to this camp. He didn't know he would go to a concentration camp. He went free to this camp. He only wanted to go together with this girl. 

So they went to Westerbork. And from Westerbork we went-- from Westerbork we were the first camp-- first transport to Sobibor. We were in a separate house, because we were punished. We were the group which was hidden already. So we went with group of people. And we were separate from all the other people. And I had a brother for my mother was in Sob-- in Westerbork. 

And brother for my mother was in Westerbork with five children. He was with his wife. And they came to visit me. I mean, they were not allowed to see me but he brought me something to eat, you know. And we were first, and then one day in the morning we had to go up very early in the morning and there was a freight train was standing there. And there were all police outside and they were the German clothes on, and they were screaming. And we had to go in this train, and also this uncle with the five children and his wife. And it was the first freight transport what went to Poland from Holland. And it was the first transport what went to Sobibor with women. 

So we went-- they throw us in a freight train with perhaps 80 people. And straw on the floor and I think a little bathroom. A toil-- a something of a bathroom. A hole that you could go to the bathroom, I think. I don't know exactly exact. It was very bad. No food. And we drove three days and three nights to that camp. In between, they stopped and the police, the SSes, were shooting. "You Jews!" And-- and we saw the people outside, they looking more poor who came in to-- we stopped in Russia. In Poland, the people look also very poor, with patches. But you don't see in Holland. And they say *hand motion* he did like that to us. They know already that-- what was going on. 

We didn't know. We didn't think about it, you know? We've had a-- we camped already together with some girls. I forgot to tell, I met a girl in-- in Amsterdamn in jail, where we went out. And with this girl, I went through the whole shmear. The whole true concentration camp. And I was together with her in the freight wagon, too. And with more young girls, we were there together. 

And you know, what I tell you now, it sounds-- it was just-- all the people and everybody was just thinking to save their own life, you know? And people for 70 years and 80 years. So we drove three days and three nights and then the train stopped. And we didn't even think about that somebody did like that to us or something like that. And-- and they were shooting, and somehow when you're young, I don't think you see so the danger. I didn't see so the danger and things like that. 

But anyway, we went farther, we came on the Sobibor. So And then we came in Sobibor. I-- I still-- the train ride was something very horrible. With all these people in the train, and-- and no bathroom, and sick people, and crying from them. And-- and-- it was just something unbelievable. And then we came on to Sobibor. And all that screaming from these people, from these SSes, with the whips and-- and hiding and screaming and throwing us out of the train. And it was a trolley. You know what a trolley is? A little train that you throw people over where the sand goes in and you keep going. And we saw him throwing in old people and old people that couldn't walk, they throw them in. And they went right away to the gas chamber. They didn't even go to the gas chamber, I think they throwed them in the fire. You know. And that was in April 19-- 

INTERVIEWER: Could you describe that trolley? 

SELMA ENGEL: The trolley is-- when people-- sand. When people working in sand things, they throw in a little wagon and that goes like that, and you kip it over. And the people just can-- the sand you throw out. So that is what they throwing the people. They throwing all the people. So you're still, you couldn't walk so fast. 

And-- and the camp looked beautiful where I came in. The camp looked like you came in in a resort or-- beautiful barracks with geraniums and and beautiful painted. And-- and it just was just-- looked beautiful. So we-- we-- they were screaming and noise and-- and we took together. Our girls just took together. We just-- somehow we-- we didn't know what was going on. It went so fast. We-- and they, with the-- there were more kapos. There were Jewish kapos. With whip things, but they had to do it to save their life. They have to do it, or not they have to do something else for it. 

And we went to one-- what I remember to something and barrack. And we had to throw off everything what we had. We had to throw it away. And I remember one woman throwed away, she said, oh, my child! My child! And the Germans say, leave it, leave it, we bring it to you. We will take care of it. And she says, no, no, my child! My child! They said, we will take care of it. And they took care of it. And we walked and there were standing a whole bunch of these SSes. Very beautiful uniform. Young men. And they say, you come out, you come out, you come out. And we were with eight girls, I think. I don't know. You can read it in the statistics. 

And they took us out. And we thought we're going to be used to raise SSes. I remember when I was in jail, one of these beautiful women with the blonde hair say to us, say to me, she wants to go to bed with a German. And she said when she gets pregnant from a German perhaps she can get out of jail. As she say, one bad and it is all over. So as we were standing down the side I say, one bad and it's all over. I-- we had no idea. We thought we'd get used to it and then I thought I'd go to my mother and my brothers. 

That's what I thought. I go to my mother and my brothers. That's the only thing that I said. I go to my family. And we done, we had to go. Up, up, come together and march to the camp was later one where we worked, lager two where we-- no, lager one where we slept, lager two where we worked, and lager three was the gas chamber. 

And we never-- they got, when somebody came just near to the gas chamber that was the end of his life. So we never saw the gas chamber. And we walked to the lager one, where we slept. And I saw people from my hometown. Say, hi, hi! And they didn't even-- they never even didn't say anything. did they even didn't see me, and I thought so strange. I didn't understood what-- why they are afraid for me? And so they went to work and we went right away to work. And then-- a minute was a day. You know? Then I cannot tell you exactly every minute was what happened in my life. 

That was just-- and then I remember one thing. We went to work and then we came back, and a fire was burning. A big fire was burning. And smell from hair and bones and-- and the music in the evening was playing, and we had to dance. And I danced with my husband, who is now my husband. I danced with my husb-- with this young man, what is now my husband. And I don't know even exactly what was playing or something like that. 

But anyway, then after that we stopped dancing, one of these Dutch people that I know from my hometown took me to the fire. No, didn't took me to the fire. Said, do you see this fire? I said, yes. They said, that is for old people from the-- and I just-- I couldn't-- I didn't believe it. I-- it didn't go up in me. I just, you know, I couldn't. That's something that no one can believe it. I think it took a few days before I got really believed it. 

So what our work was, we have to sort the clothes from the Jews that went to the gas chamber. We had to sort it in first, and second, and third, what was good, what was bad. And-- and the food separate, and the medicine separate. And that was our work. 

And when I was in transport-- I was six months in, so we were. And when I was in transport, we know there was work for us. I mean, this something that I really can't tell, because this is something that you only can tell the people that really know what was happening. 

But can we stop a little bit? I've had for now a little bit. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's stop for a minute. 

SELMA ENGEL: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Just for a minute. I want to ask you a couple of questions. I'm sorry. I didn't want to interrupt her, but I-- look, there are several things-- I mean what did you think was going on? And how, and yes, the Germans, you knew were bad, but the Dutch who cooperated, or the people-- the family who you stayed with, and you felt they didn't feed you. I mean, that was strange. 

SELMA ENGEL: With them it was, in the war, when the-- when we got out of the hotel, I didn't want to stay home with my parents anymore, and I couldn't work anywhere. I couldn't even work. I not allowed to work. And I want to do something. I was just crazy sitting home. 

So I went to families with the all the people, and I helped them. Everything matured in 19 years, you know, got older. And you couldn't go to school. You couldn't-- and I couldn't stay at home. So I helped all the people. And I didn't go-- and that was not in my hometown. So I went-- I was really in a Jewish atmosphere constantly. I had more to do with Jews than with not Jews. We-- we didn't-- that you did not-- Jews didn't want to have. We didn't go to the not Jews, because we didn't want-- the not Jews not bring in danger. And-- and the not Jews don't want to have not to do with us, with that, enough not Jewish people in Holland were very good to the Jews. Yes. 

The Jewish didn't-- the Dutch people were very good. A big person task yes. Yes. There were. There were a lot of Jews hidden in Holland. My brother was hidden in Holland with a family and came through war. And not my brother alone. A lot of Jewish people. And another not Jewish people. Anne Frank got caught, but, I mean, that everybody knows the story. 

But I came back for-- my mother knew Anne Frank. The father for Anne Frank. But the Dutch Jew-- the Dutch not Jewish people were pretty good, yes. And me, as young girl, I went to-- to another little town, and I helped these people. And weekends, I came back to my mother. And so that's the way I lived till I found out that's very hard to do, because more dangerous. I wasn't allowed to go on the train anymore. I was not allowed to go on the train anymore. I was not allowed to walk on the street anymore. And you saw more people going away, and got to hide somewhere. 

So then this priest I met, and this priest-- through this priest-- through the English teacher that I had for school, I went to Utrecht and then I met this-- and I met this one woman that-- that I was first hidden and saved the whole family. The whole family was still alive in Holland. And these people that were ever hidden later, was not so kosher, you know? So I-- I don't think. You get perhaps self-centered. I don't know. I-- I-- perhaps I was self-centered. I don't know. 

Because I was-- I didn't keep in contact with the underground. I can keep contact to do things that I would have done that I would have been in the underground, and would be much easier for me to do something, you know? And then I would have known that there was an underground, I would have gone out of the police station. I would have gone out in Vught. I would have stayed in Vught, but I didn't even know there was an underground. Because of the-- how old. You know, but everybody haves a secret from you. When you know something, what in business, you don't tell somebody else so you can make business to it. That's the way life is. 

And that's the way in the war is the same thing. But if you know there was the underground, you hold it for yourself perhaps sometimes as Jew. You don't tell that perhaps not the other Jew. And I didn't know there was such a thing as the underground, that that would come out, and I don't have money that could have saved my life. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in the camp, and they pulled out the eight girls. 

SELMA ENGEL: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What were-- I didn't understand what you were thinking-- 

SELMA ENGEL: I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to the-- 

SELMA ENGEL: I was not thinking. I thought that they were used just for sexual things. You know, on purpose. But the German didn't do. And I didn't-- I saw they go to-- when I went to Polish, I would go to my mother, and my family, and my brother. That's the issue of what I saw. I didn't think it would go-- that there was such a thing as a gas chamber then and I-- I-- I met my husband even didn't think then he was a Polish Jew and he-- he was hid-- he was hidden. 

He will tell you the story himself. I mean, he was hidden and he had a much more difficult life, and a much more antisemitism man and much more punished. And he didn't even know that it-- you don't realize it. You don't-- it's such a thing that you're not just-- you're not human anymore. You're not nothing anymore. They kill you, when you-- you-- when you don't look good. When they stay up with a headache, and you-- you-- your eyes are red, he can-- he can just take-- just kill you. 

You're nothing. You're just nothing. You're not-- your life-- your life is nothing. I cannot even bring this feeling now back and I don't want to bring it back, because why should I? 

INTERVIEWER: You never felt that Jewishness could hurt you, and suddenly-- 

SELMA ENGEL: Never. Never. Never. 

INTERVIEWER: So what did you think when Jewishness became damaging for you? 

SELMA ENGEL: What I was thinking-- what I was think-- I don't know what I was thinking at the time. I don't-- I don't know. I-- I-- you just take it the way it is, because you try to save your life. And you didn't even see it. You live from day to day. And you don't think, because there's no way out of Jew or not Jew. You couldn't believe it that Jew was Jew. Because you was Jew-- because there no different in Holland. There was no such different in Holland. 

I had not-- I had-- I remember I-- I'm brought up like my children are brought up. We lived in Westport and they had too many not Jewish friends. And I brought up with all the Jewish friends. I had just-- on shabbos and yontif, I had Jewish girlfriends. And weekdays, I said not Jewish girlfriend, you know? And that's the way it was. I had-- I was very-- we were very orthodox at home. We were assimilated on the outside. We were very orthodox at home. We were kosher. In the world, what I was thinking there was no way out more for us. 

There was no-- I remember in the war, there was a man, and he said, I can-- I can get your brothers to England. There was such a way underground. This man was blackmailing us. He was not kosher. In that time, I was still in the hotel. He was a young man. And I believed him. And I felt so I think in love with him. And he got so much money for us and he didn't do a thing for us. He was just blackmailing us. And it was not true. He was blackmailing us. 

And my mother believed him. And my brother what was hidden said, you are getting blackmailed, and don't do it. And we believed him. We believed him that he can help my brothers to England. And nobody-- nobody ever came to us, can I help you? I don't know what-- I don't know what it was. I-- I-- we didn't even say that-- that it was-- I don't understand why we did. 

We came-- see, we came not from Amsterdam. In Amsterdam, down the Jews were much more opposed to things like that. We came from a little town like in Maine, or Vermont, in the country. And they left a lot of Jews there. All the Jews got killed. The Jews in Norden, in Holland, had almost nobody left. My whole family got killed. My mother comes from a family from seven brothers and sisters, and my father come from a family of seven brothers and sisters. They all were married. They all had children. And they all got killed. 

There was one uncle that lived in Amsterdam, his daughter is alive but lives in-- in Holland. And and a daughter-- and-- and a daughter who lived in Amsterdam, who lives also now in Holland. That's the only two that got left for the left in Amsterdam. All the people in Norden, they started in Norden from Holland. All the people before you know, in 1942, they started the earliest in Holland, somehow we didn't catch it. We were too-- brought up two provincial. 

INTERVIEWER: I know this is going to be hard for you, but you were talking about being in the camp and dancing with your husband. 

SELMA ENGEL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: I don't under-- 

SELMA ENGEL: That was not my husband in that time. 

INTERVIEWER: No, but you-- why were you-- 

SELMA ENGEL: We had to. The Germans, it was the entertainment for the German. It was the entertainment for the Germans to let us dance over that fire, and have a lot of artists in that camp, of course, and they had to play the music, and to entertainment for the German. 

INTERVIEWER: They watched you dance? 

SELMA ENGEL: They watched us dance, yes. And we had to dance. Yes. We had no choice. 

INTERVIEWER: And you met your husband there. 

SELMA ENGEL: Ah, yeah, just the first evening that I danced with him and he fell in love with me, I think. I remember I said he looked so strange. He had a hat on, and leather pants on. But-- because he wore over the leather pants, and had another pants under it, because when you get with the whip, he get many times 40 with the whip. You know the whip that you do horses with? 

So we have two pants on and the leather pants on top, you don't hear it-- feel it so much. So he wore always two pants and some riding pants. So I remember the first time I met him. I-- who knows? 

INTERVIEWER: How come they let him keep the riding pants? 

SELMA ENGEL: Oh, we could-- we could use-- we could without the Germans see it, took these clothes for the Jews brought from-- that went to the gas chamber, we could wear that. We-- the Germans didn't know, maybe they did know. We stole sometimes the clothes from the Jews-- from-- we had to sort the clothes where they took you. When the people go in the gas chamber, we had to sort of clothes. So we could wear the clothes. You get used to everything. 

We could do-- you'd eat the-- we stole the food from the-- from the people that-- to the gas chamber. People brought everything with them. Everything. We got not only Dutch transport, we French transport, and Polish transports, and Czechoslovakia, and-- and we got transports from the Jews from Russia ghetto. They came-- the last transport came to Sobibor. 

The Jews from-- and they didn't-- they didn't get to the gas chamber, they got killed. They got killed by dogs, and with shooting. They didn't want to go to the gas chamber, they got killed from the-- we didn't hear that. See, then we got locked up in our verlagerung. And we hear that screaming, and that crying, and that-- and that shooting. And we didn't know what was going on. 

That-- you know, I-- that-- that was-- you know, that was-- and then we said, oh, now we coming. We didn't know we didn't know what was going. We know there was a transport. And something-- there once came a transport from all new people that was half was dead. They were standing-- the live were standing on the dead. And-- and-- and-- I mean, when I tell this now, I cannot-- it's something that I can't-- I don't-- it's something-- all the times. 

You know, there was once came a whole transport from children from Holland. A whole transport for children, and they said, they didn't even get to the gas chamber. And they just dried out in the fire. 

INTERVIEWER: Were-- were these all Jews? 

SELMA ENGEL: All Jews. All Jews. I think. Who knows? 

INTERVIEWER: Dogs, what do you mean? 

SELMA ENGEL: The German had dogs. And the-- see, the people-- some-- the people from Belgie had made an uprising. Of the last Jews from Belgie came, to Sobibor, but they didn't want to go to the gas chamber. They wrote in the pants all the on stories. And they wrote in the pants, take naw-kawm. You know what is naw-kawm. That's in Hebrew word, take revenge. They wrote the whole letters, take revenge, in their pants. 

And they wrote us exactly that they come from the same concentration camp that we were in. The same. Same. They know about Sobibor. Every-- we didn't know about-- I didn't know about that there was-- I thought there was no more Jews left. You know, when we came after the-- you know, I thought all the Jews were-- were killed. That was not-- you know, that-- that's what they said. 

So anyway, they-- so we-- and so what they didn't-- they didn't go to the gas chamber. So they went and they put them in a small area that-- that they couldn't get out. And they-- they would shoot them. They start fighting and dogs and-- how they got killed, I don't know. But we-- when done, we had to go and clean it up, my husband, and all that blood. And we had to sort the clothes. And he's writes and reads Yiddish, and he wrote it in Yiddish in the pants and so he could read-- well, everything that was written. 

INTERVIEWER: When you went to clean up this-- this terrible place-- 

SELMA ENGEL: I didn't. My husband did. 

INTERVIEWER: But he found-- 

SELMA ENGEL: Oh, yeah, they-- I think-- I remember that I found all the clothes from them. Yes. And they found writing in the pants, and all-- everything was full of blood and-- and everything, from all these people they didn't go to the gas chamber, and they got shot there. And that we heard that screaming and that killing. And they know, they know they would kill or be killed. 

INTERVIEWER: But in the pants, you found messages? 

SELMA ENGEL: Yeah. In the pants, they found messages, the writing, from the people that written it, they know they go to their death. They know they go to the Sobibor to the gas chamber. And they say the same thing will happen to you. See, in the time that I was in that camp, there were many things happened. You know, then you open a can of sardine, and when a German find you doing that, he kills you. 

Just from you open-- you're not allowed to touch-- to touch-- so one day, a boy opened-- a Jewish boy, of course, Jew. A Polish boy opened a can of sardines, and they almost killed him. Almost. They almost do that, almost. And they put him on-- they have a door, a piece of wood. And we had to come all together, the whole camp. And they say, do you see this man? That will happen to you when you open a can of sardine. That will happen to you. 

And I always tried to stand next to my husband. At time [INAUDIBLE]. And we had a system not to look. Because you don't get richer. And it doesn't help you, looking it. Of course you see it. I remember laying him dead. Of course. And I mean, the fear when you see that, well, I still stole after that. It didn't work for me. I know somehow hunger is something you do a lot not to be hungry. And I stole all this food. I was pretty heavy in that day. Heavier now. 

From the water syndrome and things like that. I didn't have my period in years and things like that. So I stole all this for a group of people for aid that I helped on, but they didn't do it. So over one day, people worked outside in the roots, with Ukranians and some how the Dutch Jews are the kind of Jews that are not a violent type. Jews are not violent. But the Polish Jews are more clever, the more business, the more shrewder than the Dutch Jews. The Dutch Jews are-- the Dutch people are not a shrewd people. Not that the Polish Jew, I can-- that's-- the Dutch Jews are not thinking about like-- we worked-- they worked in the camp, in the roots. 

And that's all-- I don't know exactly to tell you that this happened that time, and that is that-- that is all periods what has happened in that time that time that I was in camp. And they killed a few-- I had to go and look for some water, and the-- the Polish Jews cut off-- they killed a few Germans. And they run away. They run away. And the Dutch Jews somehow didn't run away. Why not? We Dutch people, didn't speak Polish. 

We don't speak the language of the Pole. The Pole the biggest [INAUDIBLE] what you can have. And we know-- we couldn't-- we couldn't run away. For us, we couldn't run away there. So they didn't run away. And they brought them back to camp. So again, we had to trade up, all together, we have to come together, and they tell us what happened. And that will happen. And this should shoot in front of us, all these Dutch people. Perhaps there was also some Polish in, too. I don't remember exactly. There were 10. 