INTERVIEWER: It will have to be about ten seconds. 

[TAPE STARTING AND STOPPING] 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: All right. When I came into this camp, my friend saw me. For the first thing, it was a question-- where is my brother? I said, Jack, I couldn't take your brother on my shoulders. 

I told him only one thing. If you wanted, you could do the same thing, what I'm doing. But he didn't. He lost his home. 

Then I said, Jack, what do I do right now? He said, if you're going to go to the barrack now, and they're going to find out that you are here, they're going to shoot you. Now at that time, we were not by names. We are by numbers. 

And he said, there's only one thing what is left for you. If they-- somebody going to escape. Because every day, or every second day, every third day, somebody escaped. And if somebody's going to escape, you'll be able to get in. 

I was hiding on the-- between the buildings there, whatever it is. And on the third day, he came to me, and he said, Willy, somebody escaped. Two brothers escaped. Now we could go. 

I went. Overnight I was in the barrack. Everything was all right. Next morning, it was every morning they were counting how many we are, or anybody escape or not. 

Next morning I hear, William Rosenberg, step out. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't call you that. What was your name? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: My name was that time Paul Rosenberg-- German. [SPEAKING GERMAN] I know it. This is it. This is my seconds-- not minutes, but my seconds. 

There was an oberscharfuhrer with one eye. Everyone what did something wrong, what he thought that it is wrong, was shot by him. But I stepped out. He came near me and looked at me. 

He said, so many Germans, so many Ukrainians, and you escaped from there? It's unbelievable. He couldn't believe it. Tell me how! You have no choice, I told him. 

And after that, he said to me, now, you know you're going to be shot. Why did you come into that tent? Now at that time, if guard wanted to give you your life, or your [INAUDIBLE], then he helps you. 

And I was thinking fast. And I said to him, why I came back? I'm still young. I feel strong enough. And I'm still produc-- I think I'm still be able. I'm still productive for the German army. 

He liked my inspiration, and I was the first one, I was not shot. That was my miracle. I had four miracles like that. It's no time now I should stay and tell you every one of them. 

After that, in 1943, they sent me to a concentration camp in Blyzyn in Poland. I was there only a few weeks, a few months. It was the end of 1943, I think. They sent me to Auschwitz. 

When I came to Auschwitz, I saw unbelievable, terrible-- I smelled it-- the gas chambers. Well, I said this is the end. But one thing-- I never gave up my hope to the last minute. And I think, thanks to that, I'm alive today. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see when you saw the gas-- did you smell the gas chamber? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I saw a lot of people naked in Auschwitz-- Women, naked, standing. But I was still on the train. We came by train, a full transport. We were there overnight on the train. 

Next morning, which people-- Jewish people-- were there already. And they said this is the end. Next morning, luckily, we hear that they have a telephone from Germany. They need 5,000 people in a certain concentration camp for work. 

And we didn't even leave the transport, and they took the whole 5,000 people to send us to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Vaihingen an der Emz they called it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you stay there? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I was there, yes. When we came into Vaihingen Emz, this is very important, no facilities that wasn't winter already. When we came into Germany, that winter, in 1943, must be 10 or 15 or 20 below zero. 

Nothing was prepared. We had to start to build our own barracks-- no food. On the third day, they said to us, we are too filthy. You have to go to take a hot shower. Nothing was prepared for us, but the hot shower was prepared. 

We took the hot shower, and the German said, do you see the building up there? Go around to that building, pick up a towel and clothes. That was winter time, cold, naked. We are running to the next building to pick up a towel and what kind of clothes you could imagine. 

People were dying from pneumonia, sickness. Until we picked up the towel and the clothes, we went again to finish up our barracks. We finished up the box about few days. 

The fourth or the fifth day, they gave us the first meal. I think it was the fourth day. I was, from 5,000, I was the last one of 40. When I came, then somebody came out from the Germans and said, we ran out of food. 

And if you don't eat four days, and you hear that announcement, that I'm out of food, then I was pulling my hair with my roots from my head. I said, I'm dying here from starvation. But some way, I survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go from there? How did you survive? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: From there, we went to other concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you survive the four, five days? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: To Gross Sachsenhausen concentration camp, [SPEAKING GERMAN]-- and how did I survive in there? Let me make short, because if not, we're going to stay here for hours, and maybe days and weeks. On the April 1945, when the German feel that the-- they are defeated, they start to liquidate even the concentration camps. 

How? In the gas chambers. Then we supposed to go to Dachau. And at a certain place, we came to a city what they called [SPEAKING GERMAN]. That there was near Stuttgart, in Ost Nahbrucken. 

They couldn't go further, the Germans. We stopped. We are maybe 10,000 on the transport. I don't know, but I estimate. 

They stopped. And they-- we were in between a hill. And the Germans were on one hill, and the American-- were-- American soldiers were on another hill. And the fighting was going on. 

We had-- we feel that the Americans are not far from us. We took off our shirts. We put on the trains. They should know who is here. On the fifth day, the American came. 

We didn't have what to eat. We didn't have what to drink. People were dying from starvation. When the American came in, on April 4, 1945 that was the first division. They called a-- Eisenhower's division. 

When the American soldier came in, and they told me that I am free, then I said, I don't believe it. I couldn't-- I didn't believe it. They were starting to convince us, to beg us, that we should leave the train. There was something in our inside that we will never get free. And because of that, just was unbelievable. 

And when the American soldiers saw what kind condition we were, they gave it away from whatever they had-- their food, their chocolate, whatever they had. We start to eat. Our system couldn't take it, because we were too, too hungry. Our stomachs were too empty. 

People started dying from diarrhea. Then the-- on the third day, the Red Cross came in, and they stopped the whole thing. If not, we all would die. And they said to the American people, please no-- don't give them anything. 

And little by little, the Red Cross took us to a hospital. I was 80 pounds that time. And from that time, little by little. 

INTERVIEWER: How's come you have no numbers on your arm? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: I was in small concentration camps. They didn't give numbers. I was in Blyzyn Gross Sachsenhausen. I was in [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

INTERVIEWER: Did that help you survive that you didn't have numbers? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: No. No. No. Because in those camps they didn't give it. They didn't give it. 

Now I would like only one thing to say. A lot of people ask me, how did you survive? You took so much punishment. How is that possible? 

And I don't blame anybody. An outsider, I tell them the story. He wouldn't believe. Because I myself, sometimes, don't believe what I want through. How is that possible? 

But one thing I will tell anyone. That if you don't give up hope, then you have a chance. I was in a dangerous situation. I was under the eye, under the gun, every day. Shooting, hanging, burning, freezing from death-- I saw everything. 

And I never gave up hope. I said, I must live through that war and live at least one day and see the end of the German people. The one wish was for me, though-- in the concentration camp-- I want to live, and the day should come that on my table should be a bread and a knife on my table. And you know, today, if I sit-- sit down to a meal, my wife knows already-- or I eat bread or not-- bread and a knife must always be on my table. 

INTERVIEWER: Why that particular symbolism? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Because that was my wish. To wish bread will keep you alive, and if you have a knife, you could cut a slice of bread and satisfy your stomach. 

INTERVIEWER: How have you-- how has this experience affected your life now, in addition to the need for bread and knife? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: OK. When I came out from the camp, I was three years in a DP camp. I hate people. I hate people that time. 

Because they didn't do it enough, I said to myself. In the beginning I'm talking about, in the beginning. But after that, I find out they're doing whatever they can. They could do more. 

I was bitter. Always on my mind, I'm the only one from such a big family. But I said, my generation will never disappear. And I have to see, get married, and raise a generation of Rosenbergs again. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh. 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Now, today, I'm United States. I know what-- am I still on? I'm grateful to the American government, to the democratic government. This is the only country in the whole world where you are coming without a penny, without nothing in your pocket. And you start a new-- a new life, and you have a chance to build. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you upset when you hear that perhaps the American government didn't do as much as it might have done during the war to-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: Yes, I am upset. The American government and the English government-- I don't want to go into politics now, because I know it. 

INTERVIEWER: But you still-- 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: What was in 1939 when ship was here near Cuba, and the United States could let in those 900 some people to the United States, they didn't. I know they could bomb the-- the trains, what they used to go to Treblinka or to Auschwitz. And they didn't do it. A lot of people would be safe. But I don't want to go in to politics. I leave that to somebody else. 

Today, I started with nothing. I build a family-- a wife, two sons, a daughter. I send them to school, educate them. Thank God I'm a successful businessman. I'm in the furniture business. 

And again, I say, thanks, America. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you tell your children? What do you tell your children? 

WILLIAM ROSENBERG: In the beginning, I didn't tell my children. Too much-- I didn't want to upset them. But now the last two years, or the last three years, the kids got educated. The kids grow up. The kids themself from survivors want to know more about it. 

Which my daughter is arriving, making a tree from my family. She wants to write a little book. Because, really, she went to school as a journalist, and she wind up with that job right now, and she has the capability. 

And she is sometimes sitting with me for hours. And she wants to find out how big the family was, how they looked, what kind of education they have. And how did I escape from the devil, we say, from the Germans, how did I survive. 

And not only the kids-- I mean, something wake up that people start-- before we are leaving. Because now, you have the survivors-- they are in their 60s and they are in the 70s. We will not be here forever. 

And before I go off on the camera, one thing that I want to say. I did see the shooting, the hanging, and I saw the last saying from those people. There was only one thing they know, when they went to the gas chamber or whatever it is-- they said to us, tell the whole world what the Nazi German did to innocent people. And one thing the last word was was from that, every one of them, I would say-- don't forget what they did to us. 

And this is my responsibility today. I am today with you. We are organizing today. And we are doing what we can. Tell the whole world what the German did to people only because they were Jewish? 

INTERVIEWER: Why couldn't they stop it? 