[BEEPING] SUBJECT: I feel I would like to speak about in order that I would like to forget forever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, yeah. There's no question about it. 

SUBJECT: I am sure that everybody-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Maybe-- maybe in the end, I shall ask-- or you will say something about it. How-- the-- the conflict between wanting to speak and wanting to forget. That's something that we would like to hear. OK? 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, we shall ask as few questions as possible, only to clarify things, to make you repeat a statement. But really, the account is your own. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Our questions is minimal As you speak, please speak to us, but primarily, to this lady. 

SUBJECT: You want me to talk to the-- to the mic, or what is the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, but keep contact with both of us. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your eyes, for to-- 

SUBJECT: Will be-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: From time to time at least-- 

SUBJECT: Do like that-- yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: From time to time, at least, to touch the camera. Because this is what comes on the picture. OK? 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you remember, in a minute or two, when they begin, what you begin with is your name, where you were born, when you were born, and a description of those distant places, both in time and years. 

SUBJECT: I go? Tell me when I go. If you feel that something is wrong or too vile that I say, motion. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I sometimes will motion to you to look there. Because people forget that. 

CREW: Are we rolling? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: OK, so I was born in Budapest-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your name? 

SUBJECT: --in 1909, the daughter of Maurice Davon. My father was a very religious man. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your name is-- 

SUBJECT: My name's Livia Davon. I married 23 years later Etienne Davidovich in Paris, France. My parents were very religious, to the point that it was unbearable-- the strain. And I decided that, on my own, I can't do the same thing. I don't want to be subjected to hardship of [INAUDIBLE] fleissig. 

I had a notion that kosher is not so important. It's later I found out that it is maybe not so bad anyhow, after all. I left Budapest in 1933. I felt that I had enough. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- 

SUBJECT: From that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were born in 1912, weren't you? 

SUBJECT: No, 1909. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1909. What was it like to grow up in-- 

SUBJECT: In Budapest? It was-- the family was well to do. Though the parents were from Polish extraction. We didn't speak fluently Hungarian. And therefore, I had always an embarrassment to say I was Hungarian. 

On the other hand, my father used to say that Hungarian is a gypsy language. Speak German home. I learned German. I learned French later. I ask as birthday gift to start to teach me piano. Because there were other things to be slapped around for it. I learned industrial arts. And I was after my father's business. I couldn't bear it. It was too much strain. 

They wanted to direct my life all over. In everything, I should do what they felt was right. And I felt what I feel is right. And in order to get out of it, I had to leave. 

But they didn't want to leave anything. Because in 1930s-- '33-- there was not usual that a girl from a decent middle class family goes to other state. But since I repeated it every day and all the time, they had given in, and consented that I should go to Paris. Well, in the meantime-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were your parents doing for a living? 

SUBJECT: My-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was home life? 

SUBJECT: Home life was tense. I had one sister who was considered beautiful. She got married at this time already to a Jew-- a Gabor, whom you here. The Gabors-- that was a brother of him. 

She was beautiful, and she was conceited. I had a brother who was younger than me. Was very gifted. I was the least gifted in the whole bunch. And I felt that I still want to be a person, too. And to be a person, I have get away from them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like in the house in the years-- you were how old when you went away? 

SUBJECT: 23. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So in the years during high school age-- 

SUBJECT: High school age, there was anti-Semitism a little bit. There was numerous clauses There was that my brother couldn't go openly. Or he could go only to university if he got a PhD from economics. Because he was premature-- is that the word? That he was mature in his high school mature-- he was first in the class. It was-- everything was strained. 

Besides, I have this Jewish thing that I like when people have. I couldn't stand it to have nothing. That I had known for many people who had nothing and my parents were well off. I had a social difference between my parents' view and my own. And for this reason, I wanted away. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you saying that you developed political ideas or social ideas? 

SUBJECT: A little bit. Not-- I didn't join any party. I just said that I want to get over it. I decided I have to get over it not to-- not to go under in these Jewish commercants, merchant have and the gentiles who have not. And this was-- we in Hungary in the war years. 

INTERVIEWER: Maybe-- were-- were you during the high school times or at that age-- 

SUBJECT: It was a Christian high school and there was an anti-Semitism and there was a caste system in Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel the anti-Semitism, what did you see or experience? 

SUBJECT: What-- I lived to-- in 1919 by the Red Devil, and after the Red Devil came the White Devil that took the Jews and made them during water until they burst. That was in 1919-1920 that it was a tense thing to do many things that the people will be angry at you. Now, I felt double that they angry because I had Polish parents. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt this personally? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I felt it-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any incidents that you could- 

SUBJECT: I remember incidents-- let's see-- policemen coming to my parents, uh-- it was a wholesale place for alimentation, for food. The policemen, they come in and say, you-- you should close already. And my mother, who was not a diplomat, would say, we should close, but we don't close then. If you want that I should give you sugar, I won't give you sugar. It was not a very diplomatic answer. 

But then she got-- she got a big stink out of the authorities and there was no end to it. Not only did she hurt the feeling of the police, but the police descend into us all the time in. The-- the anti-Semitism of Budapest is such that now, after so many years, and that I left 40-- almost eight years ago, 47 years ago. I had a sister living over there. She still wouldn't admit to her husband to whom she's married-- that's her second husband, the first got killed, Gabor got killed. She wouldn't say that her parents-- it is a big secret to know that our parents were born in Poland. Can you imagine the degree of the anti-Semitism was and is and will be ever in Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER: They were Polish Jews, you mean. 

SUBJECT: Yes. There was a time in recollection-- I remember in 1918 that there was the war was so close that you heard the-- the-- the-- the-- the guns. And the lamp, the gas lamp, was shaking and grandparents might come. And I think somehow can they come from Poland? In Poland-- somehow, I thought that everybody is Jewish in Poland. It took me a few years that I realized that in Poland not everybody is Jewish and that only the Jews are more persecuted for some as the non-Jews. So that was how I felt anti-Semitism, not to speak about Jewishness, not to act Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: What business was your father in? 

SUBJECT: He was represent-- he represented French and Swiss firms for Gruyere-- for cheese-- for [INAUDIBLE], for sardines. And then he had-- he represented a sugar factory-- what was the name of it-- [INAUDIBLE], I think was the name. But he got-- it was a-- a fraction of penny income for benefit but a very big turnover. And there was always money home. And he used to say that we shouldn't think that that is the money not his and we have no right to spend. And that was a-- a tirade for never-ending. 

INTERVIEWER: That you should think-- you should spend it? 

SUBJECT: We should not spend. We shouldn't think that it's our money that belongs to the [INAUDIBLE] and not to him. The-- my brother was in the business, a sister got married and she was a grande dame. Now, I got to Paris, where I had the-- when he has given in that I should go to Paris, I had-- I went with the-- the place with whom I was working as apprentice. It was a big salon in Budapest. They took me to go with them. And they put me in a kind of volunteer work and did our paper, because in Paris in the '30s, there was already unemployment and nobody wanted people to work who had no papers. 

So I was volunteer, not earning any money. I worked by Madeleine Vionnet, it was a big firm, for a few months. And they told me that it is-- they don't want me anymore. And my father said that was-- they wrote to me to come home. In the meantime, I met my husband and I met many people. And I had occasion to go to South America or to anyplace that would decided he wanted me to be with him and we got married. I wrote to my parents and they came to my wedding. 

We were married in a big synagogue-- I don't remember the name-- in the-- the Rue Buffault, if you are familiar with Paris. That is next to the Rue La Fayette. The Grand Synagogue is Rue de la Victoire and Rue Buffault is a smaller street. We moved to a-- my-- I had-- we had the difficulties in the beginning, but it worked out that married-- I-- I went to France in 1933. I got married the same year. My husband has given up engineering before. He didn't like to do what all the boys told him to do. 

He was a rebel. So am I. And he was a very good sketcher-designer. And we opened a custom-made model salon. It was more difficult than any would ever believe, but it went against all expectations. And my older son was born in 1937 that we were already gliding smooth. My mother came and my father came for the circumcision and it was everything fine. The place was too small. He found a place in Rue des Capucines. And I said, I start with my life in Paris in the Rue des Capucines. I will end here. Because I am superstitious, too. 

And the controller from the tax scheme and-- congratulated for young people that we have such a well doing fine business. And then was Munich in '38. I was deadly scared that what we had done now, the war-- I had given everything that I had for my older son that I don't want any more children, I don't want anything. I was in suspension. And then it's straightened out, and I get again pregnant. And I said, I don't want to have the child if I cannot go to Europe before in the summer. I went to Europe. I came to-- I wanted to live in Budapest once more in the summer. 

INTERVIEWER: Go to Hungary? 

SUBJECT: Yes, from Paris. I went in the meantime several times, but always in the winter. I wanted to go in the summer. My parents rented a lovely [INAUDIBLE] in Margareten. I'm sure that you don't know where that is, either. It-- I was there the summer-- in Margareten 43 years ago. And I didn't tell them that I am expecting a child. I didn't want that they should interfere and bother me. And then Hitler signed with Stalin and I felt-- I prepared myself to go back, to go home. My husband, who was up there, said stay. 

INTERVIEWER: Go home? 

SUBJECT: I wanted to go back to-- to France, my home, my friends. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because I belonged to France more than to Hungary. And then he called me and said, you stay with your parents. I said, what are you doing? I thought that maybe he'd come. Then I would stay. He said, I'll enlist. I said, then I'll come back. 

INTERVIEWER: He said he was going to enlist? 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the French Army. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, you expected a war to start after the Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact. 

SUBJECT: After Stalin signing with Hitler, I don't know if we Ribbentrop was mixed in it. That I don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. You thought and-- the war will now start. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I had the inner feeling. I don't know everybody else or if I had-- you know, in-- in Budapest it was like a fire, now the war will come. And I said to my father, I don't speak anymore Hitler's German because Ich spreche fluently Deutsch. Ich kann nicht spreche Hitler's Sprache. Do you speak German, do you understand what I said? Er sagt es hat nichts zu tun mit Hitler. Well, we came back with one of the last train, my little boy and me. And there was a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Last train? 

SUBJECT: Last train from Budapest to Paris. 

INTERVIEWER: Before the outbreak of the-- of the war. 

SUBJECT: That was-- that was 1939 end of August. There was a German officer who board that train from there around me, and he was with a little girl. And she said, "Vater, sind das Juden?" And I was very much scared with my little boy. But I had-- I think I had an-- a Hungarian passport. But my child had already a French passport because my husband was very, very alive and intelligent and he put the child that he was born in France, even if there was a law that children, even if they are from foreign parents, can be considered if they are a French citizen. so the German officer said, "Ich weiss nicht." 

INTERVIEWER: I don't know. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I don't know. We arrived in Paris, it was already blacked out everything. It was, uh, winter-- new year. There us no new year nowhere, only darkness. I was very scared. And he said that he's going joining the army and I have an apartment in Rue des Capucines that is next to La Place Vendome, if you know where that is, between Madeleine and Place Vendome. What will I do here? 

He says-- he assured me that he has an affectation for me that I will be contrometteur. You know what is contrometteur? That is forelady for production of the war by one of our previous customers. And I will be there forever until the war ends in Blois-Loire cher and nothing will happen to me. So I left the Paris apartment and went to Blois, had my son there and horrible as it was. In-- in-- in Rue des Capucines we had a lovely, beautiful apartment, the whole floor, all of it, and here I go in sub location with gross with pregnancy, with working as forelady in a fabrication for the army that I don't know anything about. 

INTERVIEWER: In a factory? 

SUBJECT: Yes. It was a shoe factory that he got for them. It used to be our customers for-- the lady, for dresses. Now, she has-- they had a factory for shoes in Blois-Loire cher. Blois used to be a beautiful city where Francois Premier had his castle. And there were-- there were few usines there. 

INTERVIEWER: Factories. 

SUBJECT: Factories there. And that was a shoe factory. So my husband had the bright idea with some people-- you know, he could make friends from nowhere. From everywhere he got friendly with people. That the Army needs warm jackets and for pilots hats. Now, these pilots hats will be made there and the-- um, lamb jackets will be made there. The lamb jackets I know a little bit about. The hat for the aviators, I didn't know a thing about that. 

I was supposed to be forelady to know how that is fabricated. How-- I did a time schedule to make it. It was unbelievably hard. I got smoking-- it was only then that I stopped to smoke and I was smoking for the next 38 years until now I have emphysema and bronchitis. Not it-- that goes-- that are the side products of the times. Now, to go on from there-- 

INTERVIEWER: We are now in September '39 and the war-- 

SUBJECT: In September '39. 

INTERVIEWER: --the war has broken out already. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He had moved me to Blois. He joined his affectation was somewhere to be a-- to get to an education as a private-- you know as a soldier. 

INTERVIEWER: Basic training. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, basic training. 

INTERVIEWER: Your husband joined the army and went to basic training. 

SUBJECT: The people for whom I worked were cursing him and me that he put that together, why isn't he here to make it run? I cannot make it run. He is in the army. What the heck is he working for the army when he should be working here? But it went on anyhow, until March. When my second child was born in 1940, he got the three-day furlough for the child's birth. 

And I don't need to tell you how happy I was to see him, to-- that he is with us and see my older child, my newborn child. After three days, he had to go back. 

INTERVIEWER: It's another boy? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Both of them are in America, both of them are engineers, both of them are doing kind of well-- for good as possible. Both of them are divorced, both of them have their children because their children-- the younger son's wife said that he should care. They had mutual custody. She left the little boy with him. The older boy, who was maybe 21 years, his wife moved out and him and the children said they want to stay with Daddy. And the boy said, it runs in the family to take care of our own children. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Davon as you were in, uh, Paris at the time, did you feel a change in the climate between you and the people around? 

SUBJECT: The people-- thank you for choosing mine. In 1939, as I said before, I had no kosher meal. But then somehow, I went to Rue de Rosiere. Maybe you know where this is or you don't know. That is a small Jewish street next to the Rue de Rivoli. And I bought their meat, and I asked them they send twice weekly meat to us. And there was nothing to it. The-- the elevator came up. The first thing the war broke out, the superintendent was screaming from downstairs "Eh vous sales juif la bas!" 

INTERVIEWER: You dirty Jew. 

SUBJECT: Over there. I said, where does he know even we are Jewish? And then we realize it comes only from the Jewish butcher. But I mean, he was a holy religion man and I have known that long time. It will swallow you up more you scream, and it was a sale juif to anybody that we are sales juifs so of course he said that we are sales juifs. Then since he moved out most of my things to Blois, then he didn't-- first he moved only a few things because I was in a furnished place. 

And then when Danny was born-- that was 17 March that he came already-- he was already full-fledged soldier, he broke-- he brought over the rest and rented a little apartment in the outskirt of the city. I didn't know what-- how he is doing or what he's doing, only that he was behind the Ligne Maginot. And Jews and non-Jews were fighting in the Legion-- volunteer Legion etrangere or something. Legion de volontaires etrangere. 

INTERVIEWER: Legion of Foreign Volunteers because he was a Hungarian citizen, I assume. 

SUBJECT: He was. Now, he on his side-- he loved France. He get to France five years before me. He finished his gymnasium in Budapest and he went to Ecole Centrale Paris for-- to be an engineer. He had-- was very good in math. His family, his father and mother, were dead for a long time. And his uncle, who was supposed to take care of him, asked him if he wants to be made major, no minor anymore. And with the time that he's none a minor, they cut him all the money-- all the income. 

So he had to survive on teaching math. But since he was good in math, that, uh, had him over. He finished Ecole Centrale, but he couldn't pay the last installment and therefore, he never had his diploma. But he was working as engineer until he then branched over to work as designer. Now, when-- what was your question? 

INTERVIEWER: In the years of 1939, 1940, how you felt the climate change. Remember when he called you a dirty Jew? 

SUBJECT: So climate what that you-- I was-- he was in the Army and I was in Blois. And Blois is-- is as I say, it is a city of castles and no synagogue. Absolute only-- you cannot feel anti-Semitism. It is only Gentile, it is only Christian-- nothing else. You have the crucifix all over. You have all the little old women go to the church in green-black, in blue-black, in brown-black but everything is basic black. And there-- there was no anti-Semitism in Blois felt until now was the invasion that was in June 1943. 

When he was back in the army, I didn't know where he is. I have been told that the Germans are coming. The people for whom I worked didn't drop us like a hot potato. I was a woman with one small child and one newborn. They said, you stay here in the factory and when the German come, you don't say that your husband is in the army; you said that he deserted you. Now, that was another window in my life. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, in 1940-- 

SUBJECT: 1940, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --the war broke out with France. Germany occupied France. 

SUBJECT: Let's see. In '39, that was in September, was the war, one part of the war. Then France has to mobilize already. So I think that the French went in the war 10 minutes, maybe two-- two months later. 

INTERVIEWER: It was in the spring of 1940 that Germany attacked-- 

SUBJECT: They occupied already in 1940. They came behind into-- the Maginot couldn't be broken. They came around, they came from Belgium. But it-- it-- it was war from '30, it was the blackout from '39. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. It was official war from '39. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. But when you live there, it was already-- yes. Now, I was in Blois and I-- the-- of course, the Germans broke in. I was left the factory and the factory, they said that we should hide the cellar when people came to the-- this factory. And they said I should hide in the cellar. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say the Germans broke in, they broke into the factory, the-- the town? 

SUBJECT: They said-- we were told that the Germans are coming to occupy. In June, in 1940, the German marched to Blois. They came-- I don't know if they went to Paris or they didn't go to Paris, but in June they came to Blois. And the factory, the owners, left with all their precious books and left me with the two little kids over there. I used to have a-- a-- a young girl helping me to take care of the children. 

She ran home to her mama, lived maybe 50 miles from Blois. And she said if things turned bad, I should come there. So we were in the factory. To representative of the factory came and he said, you cannot go down in the cellar if it is bombarded because we didn't know when the city be bombarded or will it be declared open ville-- ville ouvert. So he said, you cannot go in the cellar because they are missing five steps. If you go, you fall in and you are over. So forget about the cellar. You have to come with us. 

Now, we wanted to get a-- a camion, a truck. And I learned at this time that the way this work, when you rob that you go and take something that doesn't belong to you. I said, we can-- there, I know a truck. They said, we cannot go take it. It is not ours. 

INTERVIEWER: Who said this, you said this? 

SUBJECT: I said that we can go there, I know a truck. And they said, that's robbery. You don't do that. Then I went-- there was a-- a man who used to be like a senator lived there. I went there to ask him that he should give some-- some truck or car that we can leave Blois because we were so scared that the German stormtroopers will come and we are there, stuck. 

And the minute that we get there, a bomb fall and there was a man they took him out dead, Blois was very high-- much bombarded in 1940. So we left a few hours before the stormtroopers arrived by foot. 

INTERVIEWER: When you say we, who do you mean? 

SUBJECT: That was me and the two children in the carriage that I pushed and some on who came, business associate from these-- [INAUDIBLE] was the name of these people in Blois. And I joined them because to walk alone-- I had no courage to walk by myself on the highway. And the highway was bombarded. Every 10 minutes, the Italian came and bombard, and it was not here safe. Here I walk and here is a-- I hear the noise. And we lay in the gutter. 

And the bombs go over and there is such a hole that some cars fall in. And we creep out and we go on. And we went-- we got to the little Bonne. You know what is Bonne? Little domestic, a young girl, to her parents' house. And she sees that I come with 20 people. She said that they should go away, she cannot give them even water-- one glass water costs so much, and there's no water. I can stay with her two weeks. Now, there is already-- they hear the noise from the-- from the troops, you know, the stormtroops. They hear the noise first. I mean, I don't know how-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tanks, probably. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Something like that. And it was everything is on the highway, near the highway I am. And the-- the woman with her daughter, they hide behind and I am stuck with two little children there. And she says the same thing what the other people said, you just say that your husband abandoned you and nothing will happen to you. And I am lucky because Feldwebel comes in, a German and asked me maybe my name or-- 

And I said-- I said, my husband is in the French Army I don't say-- I mean, that too much as for me. I said, what will happen to him? He said he will prisoner. I said, but he is Jewish. He said-- he said, I don't think that the French-- the German Army will make difference between Jewish combatant fighter and gentile fighter. And then the way I was there, the people came out. And I was standing on the road waking-- waiting because we have seen after the German, in between the German Army, French soldiers walking by in locks, in torn shoes, hat. It was frightening. 

Of course, he didn't come. I thought that he might come. Who knows. I mean, I always believed in miracles, but he didn't come. But on the other hand, the [INAUDIBLE] came-- the people whose factory was. Then they have seen that we are alive there and they get embarrassed so they took us back. And we even back to the-- to our place in Blois. In a little while, the Germans occupied Blois and everybody has to go to the commander to-- I don't go to work anymore because there's no more to make hat for the aviators and there's nothing anymore to do. And I don't get any salary and I don't know from what I will live the next month. 

And I go to the commander, too, and I say my name is Davidovich, Etienne. And we didn't you come before? I said, I didn't know. I live in [INAUDIBLE] was the name. I didn't know. Are you Jewish, he said, by any chance? I said, yes, I am. Oh. That's the reason you didn't come. I said, no. I didn't know that I should come. so he wrote on all my papers, Jewish, Jewish-- Jude, Jude. Now, later after ...hatte ich herauf gestellt, it came out I was the only-- we were the only Jews they grabbed in the whole state of Loire de cher. No one else said that they are Jewish. 

I-- of course I didn't know. I thought that it would be a-- a crime against my religion to say that I'm not Jewish. Well, 18 months later or 12 months later, he escaped from Germany, my husband. He was a German war prisoner and then he escaped and he got demobilized. They put him in the dirty Jews because I was Jewish. I wouldn't have said that I am Jewish, we wouldn't have ever been deported. 

Well, so now the Germans are in France. I am Juden. I go through all I can go through. I don't have income, I have to hock things that I have, I have to play very sharp that I should survive to have food that the Germans are all over. I got it a-- a wagon-- no, it was a big cart of wood and with the girl who came back to work for me, we carry up the wood and there are German solider who were around. 

Because we were living in a small house, only place that they work the wood, you know, scierie. 

INTERVIEWER: Saw mill. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Scierie? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, scierie. Yeah. And the German soldiers were there many times and here they see I am with a young girl with me and two small children. And we arrived at the ...muss helfen werden...die Frau. I said, "Ich verbrauche nicht erholen, Ich brauche keine Hilfe." "Helfen nun wir mussen.". 

INTERVIEWER: They want to help you and you said, no, we don't need it. 

SUBJECT: Yes, we want to help. And they take the wood up go up. And here I am in the grenier, you know what is a grenier on the top of the house. How do you say that in English? 

INTERVIEWER: The roof, you mean? 

SUBJECT: Roof-- on the-- the roof. I am with six German soldiers that they want to help me. I said, you-- you shouldn't help me and you have no right to help me because I'm Jewish. And they looked because I had known and it was known in the neighborhood that we-- that the German soldier, there are not too many ways around when you are a woman. I was 32 or 33 years old. It was really, you know-- I had no-- no business to play around to have them working for me. 

I said, ich bin-- I am Jewish and you shouldn't help me. They looked at themself and in one minute, they left. So that was one of my bright ideas of how to get rid of them. A little while later, I get a note-- a letter from my husband that he's war prisoner and he's fine and a few months later, he sends me a picture of himself. And I understand that in the-- in the envelope in the paper there is money that he put in. And he was so-- such a genius. 

He didn't put it in the painting because the painting got X-rays-- X-rayed, but he put it in the wrapping and I find it and so I have a few months longer to go. And then I get an order note that he will try to visit my father's business after he is in Switzerland and I know that he will try to escape. And a-- in a little while, he's in France. We go to stay with him to some friends in-- on the zone non-occupe, the-- there was the occupied zone and the free zone. 

INTERVIEWER: When was this? 

SUBJECT: That was already 1941. In 1941, maybe around January or February, something like that. He's in the zone non-occupied and we should come, he says with both children. So George is-- he was born in '37 and it is '41, he's five years old-- four or five years old-- but the other is only one year. I cannot help him in the zone non-occupe and we have to cross some bridges and go through. 

So I let the girl to stay with the kid-- with the small one and I go with George. And, uh, she is demobilized. And since I've asked-- I've said that he learns that I said that I'm Jewish, he gets the Jude and is Jude is-- how do you say, escape. He has no right to do anything anymore, only to work the soil. Now, he's quite good in engineering, and he makes a [INAUDIBLE] for someone he got some money. And then after he goes and he makes mutton kothu, lamb kothu. 

He rents a house in Bois, Bois so that is 1941. Bois was... no, he rents in Farandou. The old, vieux Farandou, and the owners are Salembier. These people, the get very angry at him and at me, denounce him already at the kommandantur that he is a Jew who claimed that he was a soldier. He-- he parade under-- he's Davidovich, but he-- the business then on my maiden name, Davon, was easier always than Davidovich. 

And this woman said they make a deposition by the kommandantur that we are absolute fool and liar and that they should surveil us. So I will get surveilled from the-- there's no Gestapo there, but from the police every week. We have no right to do anything. Everything is an infraction on the law. As I told you, that my husband got friendly with everybody, he gets very friendly with the farmer Anderson and he learn a lot about farming. And he says, they don't want us to do anything, I will rent the farm and we will live on the farm. 

What will I do on the farm? I never have seen a farm-- never in my life. He said, don't worry. He buys the books, he studies the whole thing, and he only go to Bois with the two small kiddies and him and me. He buys a horse and a cattle and some bulls and he does everything and I-- I watch. 

Until at the time, there is news in-- we have the radio like everybody else-- please turning what goes on and I read that Jewish women are gathered together in Paris and deported and that they commit suicide. And I develop-- 