INTERVIEWER: And oh Linda, I'm sorry-- 

CREW: It's time. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. I'm sorry. We'd want to just continue if we can so right now-- 

CREW: Take five, rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: When we left off I asked you, how the Germans could prohibit you from taking public transportation by virtue of the fact that you were a Jew. How did they identify you? 

SUBJECT: Well, um, there were two things. First, we had this um, you know, identification booklet with a stamp of um, being Jewish. 

And everybody had-- everybody had to carry this book-- identification paper with him at all times. Because the Germans constantly used to check and to examine people um, um, not around only being Jewish, but there were underground activities. 

And they were, um-- people who, who were actively engaged in sabotage acts from the very beginning. They had that underground was a very potent factor. So everybody always had to have these identification papers for possible checks. So there was a Jewish stamp in there. That was number one. 

Number two, the Germans were part of this legislation. Um, was having to wear-- and this was a shock. A Jewish star. This yellow style was-- where with Jew, with J, I don't know whether you ever saw that. 

But this was-- this was a real shock. This was the first time when we-- when everybody realized things are very, very serious. 

I don't remember whether this was the beginning of 1942 or the end of 1941. But this exposed everybody in the street. 

INTERVIEWER: Couldn't you put it under your coat? 

SUBJECT: No. There were very clear regulations that every Jew had to sew-- not, not with a pin-- to sew on his coat or on his dress or on his uh, jacket, the Jewish yellow star. 

And I'll never forget the first day when we had to go into the street with this star. And everybody's uh, looking at us. And at that time, the Dutch population-- part of the Dutch population, out of identification, they put on them some-- many people themselves, a star. 

And there were lots of manifestations of identification of the Du-- Dutch population, with the fate of the Jews. And this was a great source of support. 

I mean, you asked me how we felt, how we, uh, how we coped. As a whole we coped by trying to support each other. Uh, uh, very strong community support. Jewish community-- family support, community support. And environmental support. Your friends, your non-Jewish friends, in school uh, in town, they really, they were very, very, very close to us. And they identified with us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- 

SUBJECT: And this helped a lot. I could-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did your friends wear a Jewish star? 

SUBJECT: Oh, this was only the first day. This was an act of demonstration. Afterwards, of course, it was that uh, no-- everybody got used to it. It took a month. And everywhere it became a part of the street picture. 

But the first real shock was this uh, having to wear the Jewish star. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they take the Jewish star off once they had worn it? Why didn't they leave it sewn on their coat? Your non-Jewish friends? 

SUBJECT: The non-Jewish population? Oh, look. Uh, because it's-- it become an object of de-- you're da-- in danger, constant danger, once you wear this star. You, you were actually an object for, you know, free for all on the part of the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your friend apologize to you for not-- 

SUBJECT: For not wearing the star? I think because when they were born nobody expected them to continue to wear the star. I mean, this was only a symbolic act. 

But for instance, to, to give you another example of community support, we went to a school of, um-- where there were about 400 or 500 students. Upper middle class students. It was a very-- it was a private school. 

Um. About 100 Jewish students. And the day when this law was passed, that we had to discontinue to, uh, to, as Jewish students, to attend this school-- the Director assembled all the students. 

Director of the school assembled all the students. And gave a great speech in uh, support of the Jewish students. And against this law. And very, very, very supportive. 

And from this year, 1942, every year we got a birthday card into the concentration camp, still. From this Director, who, all to all the Jewish students. To, as a, as a sign of his support and um, um, um, compassion. 

And this was part of the, um, you know-- this helped to cope. Un-- until a certain point, of course. But that's the way we, we, somehow, um-- um, managed. 

And then of course the Jewish community uh, was very active in finding uh, new solutions. All the children who had to leave school were after three months in Jewish schools, they established a new, a Jewish school. 

INTERVIEWER: You never went to get a ghetto in Amsterdam. Was there a ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Um. In Amster-- the Jew-- that was a next step. That's the next stage. 

I mean, after this legislation of isolating the Jews from uh, regular activities and fro-- and uh, exposing them to, well you know, the stars are on, the Ger-- the next step was to start a process of ghettoization, meaning Jews were to be concentrated in one part of town. 

They tried to move Jews out from the middle class neighborhoods into very uh, you know, low, lower class neighborhoods. But, um, this was a beginning process. And they managed to with part of the Jewish population. 

But since they started depor-- deportations, the beginning of deportations was in June, 1942. June, July 1942. They didn't manage to concentrate the whole population in these ghettos. Because they succeeded before they-- this full concentration to deport already part of the population. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone-- 

SUBJECT: From their, from their actual-- from their old homes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they know where they were going? 

SUBJECT: Well, this is now the uh, the uh, the last stage in this whole process is of course the beginning of deportation, and how they prepared for that. 

It started out this way. The Germans published and announced that they would send able-bodied young people into work camps. And that was beg-- the first transport. Transport consists of young people, non-married people, able-bodied people, who supposedly were sent to work in German camps. 

And they asked for volunteers. And believe it or not, many of my friends volunteered. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because uh, at that time already we were completely um, um, crystallized as, um, as, um, resistance. I mean, we were on the other side of the-- of the, um, of this whole thing. 

We were-- we joined the resis-- the Dutch resistance. We were um, involved in all kinds of resis-- resistance activities. We um tried to, to do just the opposite of any kind of cooperation, or certainly not collaboration. 

This means listening to the English radio. This means going um, um, using bicycles, going through without a star from a certain point. From a certain point on 1942, end of 1942, end of 1943, we took off the star. 

But this was specific to us. This was not the general kind of, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who was us? 

SUBJECT: Um, us. Young people. We were adolescents. We were in the Zionist Jewish youth movement. We were, you know, we rebel-- we rebelled against this. This whole conformity. 

Now there were three types of attitudes. One is a conforming attitude. And this was the attitude of the majority. To do what were you were expect-- what you were expected to do. And not to think too much. To hope for the best. Nobody thought of, you know, what really was behind this. Nobody, you know, nobody had the slightest fantasies about this. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you getting educated at all during this period? You said Jewish schools had opened. Were you expected by the conformists to attend school? 

SUBJECT: We did attend school. We did attend school. Very-- we had excellent teachers. Because the teachers from the, who taught in the non-Jewish school, the Jewish teachers, they were our teachers in the Jewish schools. We, we, we went to school until the very last minute. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't you have to wear the stars? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We went by foot for half an-- the Jewish school was in this ghetto kind of uh, uh, district. And we went by foot every day at least uh, for 40 minutes each way. To cut, to get to school, winter, and, winter and in rain. And we went to school and we studied very seriously. Very seriously. 

So that was on the one hand. The, um. But we did not, um, conform with the German legislation. As much as we could. We tried to evade it. 

The other-- the first reaction was complete conformity. The second reaction was our reaction to do the things we thought we had-- we should do, not to lose education and so on, but not to conform. We had our, we had people in hiding in our house. We, we, uh, we worked with the underground to uh, save all kinds of Jewish children and so on. And we did all kinds of things which were definitely breaking the law. Seriously. 

The third reaction, and this was a reaction of, of, in the beginning, of a minority, later more, was to um, get in-- go into hiding. Meaning you, you disappear. You get uh, from the underground movement a false papers. And you go into hiding with a Christian family. And you are not seen anymore. 

And as you know, in Holland, many people went into hiding. Some of them survived. Some of them didn't survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was her attitude during all this? She was hiding people? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. We were hiding people. We were hiding. We were-- but we ourselves didn't go into hiding. For, we-- for-- very dubious reasons. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your mother-- did your mother approve of your being in the-- underground? 

SUBJECT: Underground? Yes. Certainly. I mean, she, she was part of it. Our house was a transit of people who, who, went, you know, were on their way to the underground. Because this was not a simple process. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get money to live, to support? How did your mother? Your father was dead, so? 

SUBJECT: Very good question. Very good question. Because uh, part of this whole legislation of the Germans, in the first stage, before the deportation started, was to, what they call alienize all the Jewish enterprises. 

Jews, first of all, they cou-- those were workers couldn't work anymore in non-Jewish enterprise-- in non-Jewish outfits. And um. Those who were independent businessmen and so on, before they had to hand over their um, businesses to Ger-- to non-Jewish caretakers. 

So my brother was actually a businessman. We were living on, on the, from his firm. He had to hand his firm over. And we were living by selling um, jewelry, by selling um, carpets, by selling all kinds of belongings. Valuables. 

And that, I forgot to mention, that was a time when the Germans already um, again legislated that the Jews had to hand in all their valuables. Their gold and silver and jewelry. And the Dutch had a lot of valuables. Middle, upper middle class, middle class community. 

And here again. Those who conformed, they handed in everything. Everything. Until the last ring. 

And those who, like us, did not collaborate, we handed in something, but symbolically. And the rest we put into hiding or sold. And from that we were living for at least two years. 

And the third, you know, they went into hiding. But they were in the minority. 

Now, the Ger-- this process of that, of that deportation began with the lie of recording young people for work. And the um, promise was that these young people would be treated very well. And they would uh, put-- their families in Holland would be protected. 

And the Germans developed a whole system of protection, of protecting certain groups, from uh, future deportations, by um, um, um, all kinds of, you know, by cheating. And, and, um, um, misleading the population. And making them do all kinds of things. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, but did they do things like uh, show, to prove that they were going to protect those people who cooperated? What did they do? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I'll give you an example. The Germans would use the psychology, the mass psych-- or the group psychology, something, which is it's hard to believe. 

The Germans, there was a big Portuguese Sephardic community. I don't know whether you know Amsterdam. It had a very famous Portuguese community. It was a long tradition. And this was a very aristocratic community. 

And many-- and they came from Spain, Portugal, in the 17th century. The sixth-- 16th century. And some of them even earlier to Amsterdam. 

And many of them were Marranos in Spain. Now the Germans convinced this Jewish community that they were not Jews. They convinced-- they, um, presented a whole scientific kind of argument that these people-- these Jews actually, were not racially not Jews. 

They had mixed with the Spa-- Spanish population. They were Spanish aristocracy. And they issued to-- this was a community of about, I don't know, 20,000 people at least, if not more. Probably more. 

And they issued special papers to this whole community that they were not considered as Jews. And that they were not subject to all this Jewish legislation. Meaning, they didn't have to wear the star, they didn't-- they were free. 

And th-- this was registered them from a, everybody, registered of course, to get this uh, great privilege, to be exempted from this legislation. 

And after they had registered all of them, on block, they were all deported. They had them all concentrated. And they were all deported. And that's why there are practically no, no Spanish, Portuguese Jews who returned who survived. 

And they bought this. And everybody bought this. This is something incredible. The, this-- the wish to really evade the reality was so enormous that people bought these stories. And they co-- they collaborated. And there are many such examples. 

INTERVIEWER: But the people-- 

SUBJECT: In the beginning it was the young people who really-- some of them volunteered to go to work. It was [NON-ENGLISH] why not? 

INTERVIEWER: And how did they prove to their families, to their satisfaction, that because they're young people that volunteered, they would be protected? 

SUBJECT: The Germans? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Well once they uh they deported these people, for a while, there were some postcards. From some camps. And then this whole thing stopped. And I would say by 90-- by the end of 1942, everybody already knew this was all nonsense. Everybody already knew that um, deportation is something terrible. 

Nobody knew what it was, really. But everybody knew that deportation was something terrible. And there were various um, degrees of this uh, disaster. 

For instance, to go to Theresienstadt was, again, this was a German myth. They spread this myth very carefully and very sophis-- in a very sophisticated way. 

They declared Theresienstadt-- I don't know whether you know what is Theresienstadt. This is a special ghetto for privileged people. And they issued a, again, they created a class an upper class of Jews who had all kinds of privileges, merits, from their past. 

German Jews who came to Holland who had in the First World War, uh, you know German, um, ordre du merite how would do say that, extinctions in service. They were allowed to go to Theresienstadt. The job-- 

INTERVIEWER: Distinctions. You mean special, that they had done special things. 

SUBJECT: Yes. In the German. In the First World War. Then they were allowed-- the, the, Jewish intelligentsia, high professors, very distinguished professors, to Theresienstadt. Judges. That. Um. German judges. 

Very distinguished artists. They were all-- they, they-- it was a tremendous achievement if you could go to Theresienstadt. 

The second achievement was if you could go to Bergen-Belsen. Bergen-Belsen was considered to be a um, a camp where you could stay until the end of the war. 

Those who could not go to Theresienstadt and not go to Bergen-Belsen, they knew that this is into something unknown. That this is much, much worse. 

Of course, Theresienstadt was also one big lie. Because most of the people who were sent to Theresienstadt afterwards were deported to Auschwitz. Since after the war this became, um, evident. 

But so this whole process of deportation, and who went where and what kind of protection, temporary protections, was issued by the German on the basis of all kinds of very, um, implausible factors, which people accepted. They bought this. 

This was what, part of the whole uh, system. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you? 

SUBJECT: And thew Jews were part-- you know, the Jews, I said they collaborated, because the Jews themselves, they, they, they, established a machinery by which you know, they categorized the population, according to merits or no merits. 

And everybody tried hectically to, to achieve some merits in order not to be with the masses. So the masses were sent um, to Auschwitz was already known. What was Auschwitz, nobody knew. 

And those who had some kind of privilege were sent either to Bergen-Belsen or to Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? What happened to you? 

SUBJECT: Now, we were part of this folly. My mother uh, came from Hungary. And she had still her-- Hungary and Ro-- one sister in Romania and one sister in in Hungary. 

And these were two countries who, that were-- not part of the German uh, of Germany. But allies of Germany. And uh, at one point, uh, the Germans-- uh, one thing I have to mention. 

The Germans did, for a long time, um, um, extend special treatment to people with foreign passports. Uh, if a person had an American or an English passport, he certainly would not be touched. 

He would be sent to a, uh, a camp of foreign, of nationals. And they would put them in there. They wouldn't-- nothing happened. 

I mean, they would be sent to camp. But at the end. But they were, were not deported to death camps. Because this was an international kind of arrangement. There were many Germans uh, uh, abroad in America. And here in Israel and so on. 

Then there were the South American passports. The people who had South American passports. And here too, the Germans, for a long time excluded the, these uh, nation-- nationals of South America, or other countries, from the deportation system, and also from the legislation. 

So what happened to us. We got two, in, you know, quote unquote protections. We got our family from abroad through the Red Cross, send us, so Sweden, South American passports. So we were had South American passports. 