CREW: That's number 21. Take 21. 

INTERVIEWER: Take 21, you want me to say take 21? 

CREW: Take 21. Tapes not rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: You're not rolling. 

CREW: Not yet. We have to record bars for 30 seconds on agitate. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. I'm learning all those-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Particular that helped you sort of-- was there anything particular that helped you get your strength, or keep your strength? Was there anything you thought about? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I always thought about my parents, that they would like me to survive. I was-- I was brought in the atmosphere that study is very important, and I have to study. And it was difficult for me when I came here penniless, without any money, and I become engineer, and I have done a lot of research work. 

Just because, you know, I was brought in such a atmo-- whatever I have done, I was thinking that this would be the will of my parents that I should do it. Because I brought in such a atmosphere that I'm going to become-- I even didn't like to be chemist, but my mother desire was I should become a chemist. I went to study chemistry even though I didn't like it. 

INTERVIEWER: So what did you become? 

SUBJECT: I am a chemical engineer. 

INTERVIEWER: You're a chemical engineer. 

SUBJECT: Yes, and I got my own office, I am advisor. I am consulting engineer. And everything what I am doing, really, I think I should do it-- if they have been alive, they should be proud of me. Such like a-- their last will. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This will please them. 

INTERVIEWER: Your children, they don't ask you about this? 

SUBJECT: I have only one daughter, and no, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old is she. 

SUBJECT: She's 24. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Has she ever asked anything? 

SUBJECT: Not much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you feel that-- did you ever want her to ask? 

SUBJECT: Maybe it wasn't our mistake from beginning that I didn't brought her enough up with this, you know, what happened. She knows about my family, but very roughly what-- how it was, and what I have done, and what happened to me during the terrible time. It's also her self-defense, if I think-- self-protection. She would like to-- something, maybe it's my fault. 

INTERVIEWER: Other people in Israel, they don't ask you about it? 

SUBJECT: I tell you what happened. When I came here, '44, November, '44, and people didn't understand us, because they didn't been aware of what happened. And I remember, later on, meeting people here-- young people in Israel-- when I entered for instance, Technion, and meeting my friends. And they ask us some question with such a-- not pity. They didn't-- they feel a little bit ashamed what happened to the Jewish people there. 

I couldn't even try to persuade them they have been-- we have been so few against such a terrible power. And everything was done so geniously so according to plans. It wasn't step by step, it was not doing-- done suddenly. They first broked us, you know, from like human being. 

INTERVIEWER: Broke your spirit. 

SUBJECT: Till they have done what they have done to us. It was everthing really step by step. But there at Dachau, how did you go like-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like sheep. 

SUBJECT: Sheep to a execution. We are ashamed of you, we wouldn't-- it wouldn't happen to us. So we are all-- not me only, I think some other friends-- we just close ourselves. We didn't discuss, because it was too painful to discuss, and they couldn't understand, you know. They have been ashamed of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever feel anything like that? Any shame? 

SUBJECT: Not at all. Because I think the people have been very, very brave. I don't know-- and as a nation, who could be as bright as so not to lose their human, you know, dignity. Like the Jewish people did till the very last moment. I'm not ashamed, it is the opposite of it. I don't think other people could be as the Jewish have been. 

Very, very with-- it happened, but here-- they have been some cases when people lose their dignity, and became not as you should be. But normally, the majority doesn't-- it was not depending if somebody was more sophisticated or less sophisticated. It was a very simple people, became all right. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that it's something you could tell your daughter? 

SUBJECT: See, and we don't discuss, but if-- maybe I will explain to her, but today you can't explain it much better than it was could be explained this time, you know? Today they understand much more. And after the Yom Kippur Wars, happened something to the people here. So they are facing this completely different point of view. 

But till this-- I don't think they feel such a superman and everything. It was such a difference of psychology between these people who came from the Holocaust, and they who were born here, and brought up here. It was a great difference in mentality. 

INTERVIEWER: But it's better now. 

SUBJECT: Yes. I'm not going to-- it's different now. They understand much more. We don't teach enough to children in the school. It's something, you know-- I have done this mistake at home, the school are these mistakes. Our program of education didn't-- was not aware to put it in the right way. 

Maybe something that-- I think Jewish nature is not to hate. We are people who forgive. I don't have the feeling of hatred, you know? Just terrible, but this is something which maybe is typical for Jewish people. We try to for-- not maybe to forgive, but to forget. 

INTERVIEWER: You said it all. I mean, you said it. 

[SIGHING] 

SUBJECT: It's not so-- 