SUBJECT: I came to America when I was a year and four months old. But she remembers the program. I don't remember. Although, I was in the program. But I came here in 1948, and I gave concerts for soldiers and also other concerts that went for the benefit of the-uh-tonigh- Today, they are called Na'amat but I don't want to get into that. 

INTERVIEWER: You don't want even-- 

SUBJECT: --to come into-- you know, you get into part of some things, and I don't want it. 

INTERVIEWER: So I'll ask you-- 

SUBJECT: Wizo was doing the same thing, and Hadasa does things. And I was of course [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: I'll ask you about how you feel about living in Jerusalem. OK? Can I ask that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. 

INTERVIEWER: muchanim? How do you feel about living in Jerusalem? 

SUBJECT: Well, I feel good about it. Although, it's not simple, because it's a choice that I had to make. Because I am alone here. My entire family, my son, my grandchildren are in the United States. My brother, sister, their family-- but that was a choice I had to make, and I made-- and that living in Israel and particularly to live in Jerusalem, I feel, again, that is a special privilege. And for everything you do, I think, in one's life, you pay some price for it. But if that's meaningful to you, you pay the price for it. 

INTERVIEWER: And why did you want to live here? 

SUBJECT: Well, I have been a Zionist all my life. I think I was a Zionist before I could say mama and papa, I think. I was born into a Zionist family. 

And Zionism was the topic of the day. We'd get up in the morning and know what's happening in Israel, and we'd go to bed with that thought. And that was at my parents' home. And of course I married a man who was also a ardent Zionist. And so, we had that very common goal, the common dream, and that is the answer. 

We've always thought of coming to live here. My husband unfortunately didn't-- he did not live to come here-- to live, that is. We visited Israel very, very often. So I'm fulfilling a dream of mine and also fulfilling some of my husband's unfulfilled dreams and hopes. And I'm occupied with many, many things musically and otherwise at the Hebrew University, with the Sholem Aleichem Institute. 

We've just now published-- we've worked on an anthology of Yiddish folk songs, and it is going to have-- the first book is finished. It's going to be four volumes, which contains about 340 Jewish folk songs. And we've already-- it's already gone off with a great-- quite successfully. So I mean, there is many things that I'm busy with here. 

INTERVIEWER: You took part in a concert, which is remembered in the annals of the founding of the state. It's the first concert at the Israel Philharmonic, or the Palestine Orchestra. It was a night after the lifting of the siege of Jerusalem. Can you tell us about that concert? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was-- we came to Israel that year, in 1948, about two months after the state was declared. And that time, Leonard Bernstein was a very young, and attractive, and very dynamic conductor. And he was-- one of the symphonies that he was preparing was the Mahler's Second Symphony-- what he called the Resurrection Symphony. And there are two soloists in that symphony, and I was asked to be one of the soloists. 

INTERVIEWER: And how did it feel to sing in Jerusalem? What was the reception? 

SUBJECT: Oh, by that time, we gave about eight concerts-- that symphony was given about eight times. I think we gave five performances in Tel Aviv. Don't forget that was before the Main auditorium, and we sang in Ohel Shem That was a smaller place. And then we gave two performances in Haifa. 

And then the siege of Jerusalem was lifted, and we came to Jerusalem to do the Mahler Symphony. And I needn't tell you it was something-- it was such a tremendous occasion, because it was the first time the symphony came to Jerusalem after so many years and together with this very, very dynamic conductor. And all I can say for myself is I was just one of the cogs in the wheel, but it was a tremendous experience. 

Because I think every Jew in Jerusalem wanted to be at that concert. And at that time, I sang at the Edison Theater, and well, there was a lot of commotion out in the streets-- people trying to break through-- but it was a tremendous-- after that, of course, I've given some solo concerts in Jerusalem. 

INTERVIEWER: And finally, can you just tell us a little bit about your background, where you were born, and when you came to Russia and under what-- when you came-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I was born in Russia in a little town called Kaminskoya It's about 30 miles from a bigger town that was called, at that time, Yekaterinoslav. Today, it's called Dnepropretrovsk And that's where my mother and father-- they were married there. And I was born there. 

And during that period, there was also-- well, if I want to tell you how old I am, I can tell you exactly. It was in 1906, there was a pogrom in the little town, and somehow or other, my grandparents arranged-- some of it from the small town-- we escaped to a larger town. So they tell me. I don't remember. I don't remember it at all, but I've heard this story told so many times that it seems to me that I do-- maybe there is something that one-- a child-- some strong experience does remain with one. 

INTERVIEWER: The way it did with Golder at the same time? 

SUBJECT: Well, not Golder was a little older than I, and when Golder left to Russia she was about, I think, eight years old. And she remembers the pogrom I don't. I only remember by stories told to me and maybe this unexplainable thing. 

So some scientists say that children have certain things that happen in their early childhood that remains with them. And I think that also, together with the background of the home, I have formed this-- 

INTERVIEWER: So your family then left for America? 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Your family-- what happened to your family after that? They left for America? 

SUBJECT: Yes, my-- then we came to America in about that same year. And we came to Rochester, New York, and then we did the usual traveling of early immigrants. We went from one town and then finally settled in for a few years. 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry. Where did you train as a singer? 

SUBJECT: Beg pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you train as a singer? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I trained as a singer when we came to Detroit. I arrived in Detroit when I-- we arrived in Detroit, I was about 11 years old, but I always wanted to sing. I could remember as a three-year-old, I always wanted to sing. And my greatest wish was that I should become a singer one day. 

But I don't know what is stronger within me, whether this desire for singing or my Jewish-- I don't know what word to use. The strong Jewish [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Drive? 

SUBJECT: I can't find the word? 

INTERVIEWER: The drive? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: The drive? 

SUBJECT: No, this being Jewish, I always felt that I was a privileged person to-- I felt sorry for anyone or everyone that I met that wasn't born Jewish. I was very comfortable with my Jewishness no matter where I was. Other people-- I know that my brothers had it a little bit more difficult growing up, because they had to-- they met other boys that were not, and there was constant calling of names, and fighting, and things. But I was very, very comfortable in my Jewishness, and I think that played a very big part in making me what I am today. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Enough? 

