INTERVIEWER: But this is going to be very brief right now, and then we're going to change tapes. Because I don't want to-- I'm very chintzy, and I don't like to waste tape. Because this is an expensive project. Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: You want me to talk into the camera? 

INTERVIEWER: No. You talk me, sir. 

SUBJECT: I talk to you. All right. 

My name is Maximilian Kaufman. I was born in Vienna, November 19, 1925. Hitler marched into Austria in 1938. I was 12. 

INTERVIEWER: Start back a little bit and tell us about your family and life in Vienna. 

SUBJECT: All right. My parents-- of course, my family, grandparents, aunts, and uncles-- my father had a taxi business. And he was a banker at first. But during the Depression, they closed his banks, and he went into the taxi business and became a taxi driver after. 

My mother was selling insurance in the last few years before Hitler to, more or less, supplement our income because we weren't rich. And of course, we lived in a comfortable apartment. And my brother and I were a happy family, more or less. 

INTERVIEWER: What was school like? Did you have-- 

SUBJECT: I went to a public school. That is, we went to the first four grades in Europe, called the public school, and then you go to a four years of a higher school. And then, of course, you can go on to college. And what else would you like to know? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, was there anything in school? Did you ever feel anti-Semitism? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no, not really. The worse-- there was some, but it was very, very remote. We were what you would call an assimilated family. We were Jews, but we had mostly Gentile friends. 

And Vienna, at the time, was sort of an integrated city. There were certain Jews who were wearing the kaftans and the hats and all that, but they were sort of segregated and lived in their own district. But of course, we lived in the city. And as a matter of fact, I was the only Jew in my class. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember people wearing uniforms before Hitler came? Were there people? 

SUBJECT: No, not in Austria. Austria was not a very uniform-conscious country. There were-- you'd see a policeman, and you'd see some of the Army. But of course, Austria never had a big army. They were not in the foreground. Uniforms were not big. 

As a child, I felt very little of anti-Semitism. I was, of course, brought up Jewish. And we went to temples on Saturday, and I was singing in a choir with my brother. But we never felt different from other children. We played with them, and we associated with them. 

INTERVIEWER: But you must have heard what was going on in the neighboring country of Germany. 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing. As a matter of fact, I was only 10 or 11 when these things happened in Germany. And there was never a mention that I can remember. 

INTERVIEWER: No news? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Absolutely, absolutely nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: You never heard your parents speak at home? 

SUBJECT: No. No. And the only time we heard was when there were rumors of the Germans marching into Austria. But before that, there was never a word that there were atrocities in Germany happening against Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: When you think back at that now, about that now, what-- how do you-- 

SUBJECT: Not that you mention it, this is the first time I'm thinking about it that I should have heard, and I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: There were radios. 

SUBJECT: Well, there were, but there was no news, ever, on the radio about it. And I listened. Of course I listened to the radio, even as a child. But I never heard anything ever mentioned about Jews. in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Your friends-- was there any anything special you remember about your friends? 

SUBJECT: My Gentile friends or my Jewish friends? 

INTERVIEWER: Either, both. 

SUBJECT: Nothing special. We were children doing children things. We were playing. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father-- what was your relationship with your father? 

SUBJECT: We were very close. He was a very good father. He took us out on his days off, and we'd go to see him at his taxi stand and ride with him in the taxis and things like that. It was a very-- we had a good family relationship. 

Now, we had-- of course, our grandparents lived with us in the last few years before Hitler because we had a very close relationship with my grandparents. 

INTERVIEWER: Now describe what happened when the Nazis came into Austria. 

SUBJECT: Well, a few months before the Anschluss, there were signs of people starting to talk about Jews and people wearing swastikas-- hidden. It was what they called illegal. And they were the illegal Nazis who were, of course, very outspoken. 

And they would tell us, all right, you guys-- you'll be able to stay, talking to me and my brother. But the rest of the Polish Jews, they'll have to get out. And we didn't pay any attention, because I don't know. When you're 10 years old or 11, you're not paying any attention to it. One day in 1938 in March, when Hitler marched in, everything changed. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that day? 

SUBJECT: Very well. Very well. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, I remember the night of, of course, all the Viennese running down to the ring where Hitler marched through in the parade. And they're all having these torches. It was a was a Night Parade. They had torches, and Hitler was-- and the army was marching through, and Hitler was, I believe, in one of the cars. And I was there myself, just looking at it. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were there? 

SUBJECT: I was there myself. 

INTERVIEWER: You went to the parade? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You weren't afraid? 

SUBJECT: No, no. Why be afraid? Nobody was doing anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, you had heard about-- 

SUBJECT: No, I had not. 

INTERVIEWER: Jews. 

SUBJECT: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: You said a few minutes before-- 

SUBJECT: Just slurs, just hearsay, but nothing threatening. 

INTERVIEWER: So you went. 

SUBJECT: We went to the parade, and we watched. And then we went home. And of course, basically, I really don't remember exactly how I felt. But it was an eerie feeling to see all these people screaming sieg heil, and heil, and heil. And of course, we were just standing there looking. But we weren't accosted by anyone. 

INTERVIEWER: There were no anti-Jewish references in Hitler's speech? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, I didn't listen to it. We didn't, at that time, listen to anything. Because before March 12, you didn't hear any of Hitler's speeches in Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said there was a torch parade. He wasn't there? 

SUBJECT: At that parade, yes. There was just a parade, and I was there. 

INTERVIEWER: No speeches? 

SUBJECT: Not at that time. Now, of course, then, the next morning when I went to school, my friends all of a sudden wouldn't talk to me. 

INTERVIEWER: Just like that? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Now, there was-- in my class, of course, I was the only Jew. And there was only one of all the boys-- now, there were only 12. But there was only one boy that came over to me and said I'm sorry about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Only one? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did he say he was sorry for? 

SUBJECT: Well, he was sorry that nobody would talk to me and that he couldn't talk to me. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ask him why? 

SUBJECT: Not really, because I knew. I knew then that the Jews were an outcast. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know then? 

SUBJECT: Well, it got to you very quickly. As soon as-- as soon as they marched in, the following day, the Jewish doors were smeared with paint, and Jew was written on the windows. And the people were out there with signs-- don't buy at Jews. Don't buy at Jewish shops. But that happened in one day. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think that people would accept that anti-Jewish behavior when only the day before, for you, it wasn't there? 

SUBJECT: I really don't know exactly how I felt anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk about it with your parents? 

SUBJECT: I'm sure I did. I don't think-- at least I don't remember what we said about it. But the following next few days, we found out. And I found out what it meant to be a Jew. 

My teachers, who all of a sudden became ardent Nazis-- and I was still in the school-- would tell the story where they had their Nazi flags hidden on the roof. And when Hitler came in, they quickly unfurled it and dropped them out the window, which I could hardly believe because they were such nice people. 

Now, nothing-- they said nothing derogatory to me personally. But they just said what ardent Nazis they were, which was hard to believe. It was one day. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they express this? 

SUBJECT: Well, they just believed that Hitler is their salvation and that from now on, everything will be good for them. And see, this transition was very gradual. I think at 10 years old, of course, or 11 or 12, you're not into politics. And the place we lived in, Vienna, was a very integrated place. And we just never had much of anti-Semitism before. 

INTERVIEWER: After that day at school where you felt uncomfortable, at least-- 

SUBJECT: At least, of course. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? What did you do? Where did you go? What did you do? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing. Life went on the same-- except that, let's say, we would hear at night that some people were rounded up and taken to clean the sidewalks, for instance, where the Austrians had written Austrian slogans before Hitler marched in. And they were taking Jews and making them clean with brushes and soaps and wash the sidewalks, and beating them. But I never saw it. I never came across it. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? 

SUBJECT: But I heard. 

INTERVIEWER: From whom? 

SUBJECT: From people, that this was happening. And of course, then on the way home, other kids would try and call us names and chase us home from school. But we would fight. We would turn around and fight back. And it was just a normal, more or less, fight. 

INTERVIEWER: But it wasn't normal. 

SUBJECT: But it wasn't normal, of course. But still, we just-- we wouldn't take It most of the time, unless-- one time, a bigger boy chased me home on a bicycle. I was riding a bicycle, and he was after me on a bike. And I just made it into my house, and he came after me. And I remember my grandfather came down and saw it and screamed at that boy. 

And he said, what are you-- what are you trying to do, take on a little kid like that? Why don't you come up here and take me on? And then, of course, the guy ran away. 

INTERVIEWER: The guy said nothing about your being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. That's the reason he chased me. 

INTERVIEWER: He said it? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he say? 

SUBJECT: Well, he said, god damn Jew, a lousy Jew. And I'm going to beat you up, and things like that. But that was very remote. It didn't happen that often until November. I was supposed to have my Bar Mitzvah on November 19, my birthday. And in November-- I believe it was around the 12th-- they bombed all the temples in Vienna. 

Now, we-- that morning, we heard this tremendous explosion, and ran down. And the temple was only about two or three blocks away. And of course, we saw the temple destroyed. And this time, this was the time when everything started. It was the time when Grynszpan killed that German in Paris, the young boy. by the name Grynszpan killed a German diplomat in Paris. 

And Hitler and Goebbels made the Jews pay for killing this German. And that was the start of what they called the Kristallnacht the Crystal Night, where they went into all the Jewish homes and broke all their dishes and their crystal and their chandeliers and whatever. And that is when it really started, when you really found out that you haven't-- it's going to be bad. 

Now, before that, you'd tolerate it. You could tolerate what was happening because nothing really was happening, especially for you personally. Now, after this-- after November-- my father had to leave his job. They took his caps, and he had to go to work in a factory. My mother had to go to work in a brick factory. 

And then we-- my brother and I had to leave school. And we had to go to a Jewish school. And then is when it started. It wasn't until November, until the Crystal Night. 

INTERVIEWER: You were living at home, though, with your parents? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the conversation at home? Fear? 

SUBJECT: I think we tried to live as normal as you could possibly live under the circumstances. Because you didn't know what was happening. You really didn't know. Now, my father was Austrian. And he said, I'm Austrian, and this is my country. I'm not going anywhere. This can't last forever. 

And there were, of course, jokes starting. The Jews always had jokes. And they started with Hitler invading one country after the other. And then the joke was that they said on the radio that our aging pharaoh just invaded the old German city of Peking. So the Jews said, well, this will break. Now he's going to break his neck. 

Because every time he invaded some country, they said, now the Allies are going to get him. But he kept going and going and going. So the joke was he was an ancient-- he was ancient, and he invaded Peking. And they said, well, now they're going to get him. 

MAN: Let's hold it there. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. I'm sorry. When do we want to change tapes? I'd rather have leeway on the tape than run out in the middle of a story. You're absolutely right. That's why I was writing notes. I'm sorry. But it seemed a good-- 

SUBJECT: It's warm in here. 

INTERVIEWER: It seems a good place to-- 