LIONEL ROTH: My name is Lionel Roth, R-O-T-H. I live at 441 Baldner Road in Maplewood, New Jersey. 

DORI LAUB: Born? 

LIONEL ROTH: I was born, the date, uh, 1926. 

DORI LAUB: Where? 

LIONEL ROTH: September 12th. And the name of the town, at that time, it was Nowe Clernowitz. That's, a, uh, Slovak-- in Czechoslovakia. 

ARNOLD ROTH: My name is Arnold Roth. And, uh, I was born in December 19, 1928 in the same town as my brother just mentioned. But I think the town's name was Nowe Clernowitz. 

LIONEL ROTH: Clernowitz, Czernowitz... it depends how-- how you use it. 

ARNOLD ROTH: That's the way it was named, the town. And I live now at 108 Kipling Ave in Springfield, New Jersey. 

DORI LAUB: Let's go backwards. You open an album, you see those early days. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, as far as the dates go, I cannot remember every, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: No, the days of the town. You see the-- you're going back to your childhood. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yes. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember the way that it was when you were growing up before the-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, we-- we were growing up, basically, in a, uh, orthodox family, which, at that time, I guess, the majority of the people in our part of the country was-- were orthodox. Uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: It was a small community. 

LIONEL ROTH: Small community. We were about, uh, 40 families, 40 Jewish families. 

DORI LAUB: Now, if you could just speak louder 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah. 

LIONEL ROTH: About 40 Jewish families. And as children, normal, growing up and playing with the kids the neighborhood. We had no, uh, Jewish friends, non-Jewish friends together. We went to school and the same school. In the morning, we started, went to what's called cheder, Hebrew school for, uh-- from 5 o'clock in the morning 'til about 8:00. Then we-- from there we went to public school. And after the public school was over, we went back to the Hebrew school again. So we really had a full day of schooling. And this was the basic life, our basic life in, uh, that time of the period when we were growing up. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: Who was in your family when you-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, there was, uh-- we had two of us and a sister. The sister was the oldest one. 

ARNOLD ROTH: She, uh-- she didn't come home though. She died in Auschwitz. 

LIONEL ROTH: Bergen-Belsen. Bergen-Belsen. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Bergen-Belsen. 

LIONEL ROTH: Bergen-Belsen. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, she worked in Auschwitz. Just before the liberation, she was shot. She was going-- she was running somewheres for food. 

DORI LAUB: Let's go back to the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: --town. 

ARNOLD ROTH: OK. 

DORI LAUB: The-- the questions and-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah. 

DORI LAUB: --sister at home, father, what was he doing, mother, what was life like? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, uh, father was a cabinet maker. He had a shop and he was working with a few people. Besides, he had about two different other business which he tried to earn a living, which was very difficult, especially during the, uh, Hungarian and then the German occupation came because they raised the taxes to a point where he just couldn't earn enough, no matter how many businesses he made. 

Our mother was a dressmaker. So she helped out and she was sewing, keeping us in rags and keeping, you know, earning some extra money for the family. Also, our sister, she was learning at that time to be a dress maker, but she was still too young. She was still in school, really. She just about finished school when they took us away. And, uh, it was rough, as far as when the occupation came. You know, we weren't allowed to go no further than our area from the house. 

LIONEL ROTH: Too, that was after, I think in 1930, and '34, '37, when we were occupied by Hungary. That was when the war was started-- was starting to move and we were occupied by Hungary. That's when they put us-- we had to wear, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: In 193-- 

LIONEL ROTH: '7 or something, I don't remember exactly the years, I'm not good in dates. 

ARNOLD ROTH: I think it was like 19-- like '39, around '40ish because they took us away while in '44. 

LIONEL ROTH: '44, it was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, because around '39 it was getting to be really tough. 

LIONEL ROTH: And we were occupied in the '30s, exactly when it was. But then things were st-- when Hitler started to move, they really clamped down as we couldn't go to schools, we couldn't go shopping where we wanted. We had to report, ask for the police permission to leave our community, go some place. 

ARNOLD ROTH: As a matter of fact, they took, uh, our father away to a, uh, they call that in-- 

LIONEL ROTH: It's a-- it's a Mucker Arbeit... it's a-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Working-- working with the army. 

DORI LAUB: Mucker Soldat? 

LIONEL ROTH: Mucker Soldat. It's a-- it's the army, part of the army, but they were labor, labor detachment. They were-- just with no, uh-- no, uh, weapons. 

ARNOLD ROTH: The Hungarian uniforms, they had to wear, but they were strictly working. So naturally, they took him away from the family. The family was left without any income or, uh, without food. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: Was that the very first thing that you remember that changed for you? 

LIONEL ROTH: That was the change, right. Because they wouldn't do-- do in the beginning when-- while we were in Czechoslovakia things were-- were, what we can remember, normal as children, playing around, going to school, in summertime, swimming and running around and picking, go out, go pick fruit on trees and so on else. 

ARNOLD ROTH: The restrictions came really when Hungarian-- Hungarians came in. As a matter of fact, this is a funny incident, one time, uh, mother send him to a-- a city which was about, what? 

LIONEL ROTH: Munkacs. 

ARNOLD ROTH: About 10, 12 kilometers away from us. And, uh, he was supposed to pick up a goose, you know, stab goose for meat. 

DORI LAUB: Katchka? 

LIONEL ROTH: No, no, it was a goose. It was not a Katchka. 

ARNOLD ROTH: A Gans? 

LIONEL ROTH: A Gans. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And then where the gendarmes, uh, picked him up on the way. 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, the reason was because we had-- we had, uh, similar to what in Germany, they had the-- the brown shirts. They used to train the children. 

DORI LAUB: [? INAUDIBLE] ? . 

LIONEL ROTH: The children had to go once a week in school, uh, uh, drilling and, uh, training and military, uh, march and all-- all military, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Except we didn't train. We had to work while the other kids were training. Because we were the Jewish people. 

LIONEL ROTH: So we were-- Jewish people weren't allowed to go so we got sep-- we were separated. Yes, and one day, that's the day I went to, uh, to the city. And the police stopped me because I was a Jewish kid. They knew who everybody was, you know, there was-- wasn't-- wasn't that many of us so they recognized us. 

DORI LAUB: They wanted to tell us what's best. 

LIONEL ROTH: And so they knew I was supposed to be in the-- at Alpine during the training. So, problem, so they-- they held me there. My-- my father had to come and get me, you know, to go to the teacher and, uh, my father knew the teacher. So I got out and-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: After that-- a-- after that incident, he never wanted to go on the street. When he seen the gendarmes coming, he ran away back into the house. He just, how do you call this, uh, uh, uh, pho-- not a phobia, he just got into that sk-- 

LIONEL ROTH: I was afraid of them. I was afraid of them. That's it. I stayed away from them. But, uh, the-- up 'til before the Hunga-- Hungarians came, life was hard because like every place else, you know, we didn't-- we were not rich. My father worked hard, mother worked hard. But we were-- we had a normal life. We had, uh, aunts and uncles and families living in the town. 

Some of our grandparents were still alive so we used to go to school and-- and like every other child, stopped on the way home from school, the grandparents. And they had-- always had, uh, my, uh, mother's parents, she always had a pot of tea on the stove. We had to have tea with this much sugar. Yeah, that's what I still like, still like sugar in my coffee. 

So that was-- that was normal growing up, 'til the Hungarians. And that's when the problems started. That's when, really started to feel the-- the difference. But, of course, we still lived in a closed community. It was-- We only knew what was happening just by hearing. We didn't know what was happening in the other, in Poland, and so on, what the Germans were doing. And it was-- the papers didn't write anything. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: When did you first hear about the Germans doing whatever they were doing? 

LIONEL ROTH: Believe it or not, I did not know about them, personally. As we haven't heard what they were doing 'til they took us into-- 'til we came into Auschwitz, I did not see a German soldier, only Hungarians. They were no different. They were-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: You did see-- you did see German soldiers because we were occupied by the Germans while we were still in school and-- and-- and, Hebrew, we were occupied by the Germans, if you remember. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, Hungarians, no, we were never-- no, we were never occupied-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: The Germans they-- they came in. They came in. German tanks came into the town. 

LIONEL ROTH: I don't remem-- I don't remember. 

DORI LAUB: Your memories can be different. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And they were not-- no, they were-- they were definitely. You don't remember? 

LIONEL ROTH: No, I don't remember. I don't remember. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: What do-- what do you remember? 

ARNOLD ROTH: They just-- they just came in, a few German tanks came in. The German soldiers, they came in. And as a matter of fact, they ran into the street where the fire house used to be. And they wanted to go towards the area, you know, where, uh, like, the direction of Poland but there were no roads that way so they just turned around in our town. They didn't notify that it is occupied by the Germans now. And, of course, they have left and the Hungarians were sort of acting for them. 

LIONEL ROTH: That part was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: It was-- It was German occupation. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, that was already-- that was already around 1944, I think, '43. It was in '43. It was definitely occupied. I remember the German tanks, the German soldiers. They came in and the Jews, instantly, they, you know, how in-- in the Shul, they just start talking. They were af-- afraid. They, already they were, bandaging their face that they shouldn't be seen with beards. 

They didn't want to cut their beards off. So they make believe that they have a tooth ache and they covered their faces. But they were talking already that, not to go out in the streets during the day, not to go out, uh, you know, girls shouldn't be seen in the streets during the day. If you had to go to temple, you make sure it's at night. Uh, it was definitely after the German occupation. 

DORI LAUB: Then something must have been known about what Germans did, it was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: It was sort of an automatic thing. Because the people always talk politics, rumors. You didn't have to-- 

DORI LAUB: What were the rumors that you knew of? 

ARNOLD ROTH: The rumors were constantly about the war, that the Germans were winning the war, the Russians were winning the war. But most of the time, it was a sc-- uh, we were always heard scary things that the Germans are just no good for Jews. 

DORI LAUB: What, uh, rumors did you heard? 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, the rumors-- wha-- what we knew what was happening, like they took, we had-- we had, for example, the rabbi in our Synagogue. And he was also the teacher in the Hebrew school. Because he was born in Poland, they picked, as an excuse, all the Jews that were born not-- not in this country they were born in Poland or in Russia, they used to take them and send them into Poland. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Across the border. 

LIONEL ROTH: Across the border. And they left them and that was it. Never heard from, if they died. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They did found his, uh, his bones. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, his remains. Well, they never foun-- they never heard from, never saw him, that was it. 

ARNOLD ROTH: As a matter of fact there was other families that, uh, were hiding out in our town that, originally, the Germans, the Hungarians, whichever, took them away across the border and just left them there. And they wandered back. They found their way back to their home. But they were afraid to stay in their home so they came to our town because this is where they were not recognized. 

They had family over there. I remember we were going, one boy, do you remember? Uh, let me see if I can remember his, uh, family name. Um, sh-- they had a grocery down the street. ?Stern's? family. It was a little boy that was going with me to school that his mother did wander back with the children. But the father died in the forest, somewhere in the Polish forest. So when you heard things like this, so the people had an example. See, this is what they are doing here. They are taking away people and they're killing them. 

DORI LAUB: What were they telling you about things happening in Poland? What kind of-- 

LIONEL ROTH: We didn't know. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We never know. 

LIONEL ROTH: We didn't know-- No. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They were telling us-- they were telling us, not about the people in Poland, they were telling us about what they're doing to people. That they're taking them away, and they're drowning them in the water. They-- they-- they-- were talking about, I remember, uh, there were two rivers, they're called Dnieper and Dniester It's-- I think it's in, uh, Romania somewheres. Where they were burning people an-- and locking them in barns and, uh, burning up the barns. So, in fact, one of our cousins died like this. And then the people that can't work no more, they were pushing them into those, uh, rivers. 

DORI LAUB: Hm. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They even said that the river was full of blood. You know, as a child, I can remember vaguely. Because when the grown-up people were talking about those things, they always wanted to push us away. We shouldn't-- 

LIONEL ROTH: We shouldn't know about it. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We shouldn't know that they're talking politics because it was dangerous. You know, if-- if people were talking politics, they would take them away instantly. 

LIONEL ROTH: The radio, you couldn't have radio. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But as far as-- as far as what was going on in Auschwitz, we had no idea. 

LIONEL ROTH: We didn't know about that. The only thing we knew about Auschwitz is-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: When they took us away into the ghetto. 

DORI LAUB: What year was that? 

ARNOLD ROTH: That was in 1944. But I can't-- I can't remember it well. 

LIONEL ROTH: The beginning, it was right-- it was right after Passover. As a matter of fact it was-- they took us and we didn't have enough time to put the Passover dishes away. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Because I remember, we slept in the-- in the outside. And it was still cold, you know, and our mother she tried her best to cover us up. Because there was nothing when they brought us into the ghetto. There was no-- no-- no place to sleep. They just-- in the field. 

LIONEL ROTH: But the only thing we knew about Auschwitz, when we were going in the trains. The cattle cars close and they had those little windows on top so that-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: You don't know where you are going. 

LIONEL ROTH: The eldest, no, no, the eldest, the older people, they were looking out in the morning, when the morning-- when the sun was coming up, they said, we were going east. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Towards Poland. 

LIONEL ROTH: Towards Poland. That's all they knew. We're going towards east, towards Poland. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yet, in the ghetto they gave us to expect rumors. 

DORI LAUB: Do you know how it began with the gh-- into the ghetto? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, they took us. One day, they just-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Came in. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --put out bulletins. They just put out bulletins that all Jews have to be ready. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, but the way it happened first, they ca-- they, uh, every Jewish family, by the house, they posted a guard. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Oh, yeah, that's true. 

LIONEL ROTH: And they posted a guard, with a rifle, matter of fact, our house-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Our best friends-- 

LIONEL ROTH: --uh, was guarded by a friend our age next door. He was our best and became our worst enemy. He stood there by the house and wouldn't let us get out from the house to the street. I-- one day I asked, look, I just want to go to grocery to get something. You cannot go. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: How was he chosen to be your guard? 

ARNOLD ROTH: They volunteered. 

LIONEL ROTH: We don't know. They volunteered. I don't-- we don't know. We don't know how the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: He was given a piece of bread and a gun and they were ready. 

LIONEL ROTH: So they gave him a gun, he was guarding us and that's they-- they kept us in the house, I don't remember exactly how long, a week or a day or-- but I know we-- we stood in the house for awhile. We couldn't get out. We couldn't see anybody. And then one morning, they came just pack, take your, uh, just whatever you can carry, small package. And everybody out. And we had to, uh, they marched us down to Munkacs. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yes and my sister came out. When our sister came out from the house, she had a star of David. A ?SPEAKING YIDDISH? You know, with a gold chain. And one of the gendarmes just put his hand and ripped it right-- right off her neck before they even took us out of the house. 

DORI LAUB: Uh-huh. 

LIONEL ROTH: So they-- they marched us down to the ghetto. That's when we left the houses, we left everything in there. And we never-- never came back. 

DORI LAUB: And it was the four of you? 

LIONEL ROTH: There was the five of us. Five of us. And we were all five, as a mo-- father and mother. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They released pop from that work camp. 

LIONEL ROTH: Work camp. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Because they claimed he was getting old and they were taking only younger people. See? 

LIONEL ROTH: So he came home and so then all five of us-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: He was no more of military age. And then, in the ghetto, they gave us, uh, to work, they selected, you know, carpenters. And what do the carpenters do? Make gates around-- make prisons for ourselves, really, that's what we were doing. And since because we were small children and, uh, pop was always telling us, you have to have a trade. If you have a trade, you're going to survive anywhere, which he was right. But fortunate for him, because, uh-- because we said that we have trades and we worked with him, we actually saved his life. 

LIONEL ROTH: And he saved us. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But, uh, in the ghetto-- in the ghetto they were, uh, this was just temporary. We were there how long? A month? Two months? 

LIONEL ROTH: Just-- no, just about a month. We stayed there. And there was a brick, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Brick factory. 

LIONEL ROTH: Brick factory, we call, a, uh-- So we stayed there for a-- for a month. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And they gave us, they spread a rumor they gave us to understand that we're just going to be relocated and we're going to go somewheres in the Hungarian capital. 

LIONEL ROTH: Inland. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Like Budapest and we're going to be working over there. And the whole family can stay together. And, uh, nothing is going to change as far as family is concerned. 

DORI LAUB: Uh-huh. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And that was, uh, until we came to Auschwitz. Because-- 

DORI LAUB: Tell me about the evacuation. 

ARNOLD ROTH: The evac-- from-- from the ghetto? 

DORI LAUB: How did they proceed? 

ARNOLD ROTH: From the ghetto? 

LIONEL ROTH: They just took, uh, like, they brought the-- the-- the factory was right near a, uh, a siding. So they put all the-- the rail cars and just packed them in. Down, down, as-- as many people as-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: That was without any notice. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, just-- just, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: You-- straight from the factory or from home? 

LIONEL ROTH: No, no, we were just at the ghetto. The-- the fa-- the, the, brick factory, that was a ghetto. 

ARNOLD ROTH: That was a ghetto. 

LIONEL ROTH: They ju-- they-- they gathered the people from-- they had one there and they had another one on the other side of town had the same, uh, the same fac-- the same brick factory, two different company over there, the same thing. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They, probably, in each factory, they packed-- 

LIONEL ROTH: So they gathered all, practically, the whole-- the whole part of that country, of Czechos-- of, uh, what's called the Carpathian. They-- they get to-- got together all for miles and miles, all the Jewish community. Because there wasn't-- there were only small villages that 10 families here, 20 families here. So the biggest, uh, city was Munkacs, which they had their own ghetto at a different place. So they got them all together. And that's where we spent, uh, about a month there. 

DORI LAUB: In Munkacs. 

LIONEL ROTH: In Munkacs. That was the ghetto, in the ghetto. 

DORI LAUB: 100,000 people? 

ARNOLD ROTH: At least. 

LIONEL ROTH: At least. There was a lot of peo-- they were-- we'd be-- we were sl-- they were slapped-- they pushed them together. 

DORI LAUB: This is not one transport? Transport-- 

LIONEL ROTH: No. 

ARNOLD ROTH: No, we're talking about the ghetto where they took all-- like for instance, our community was sent to a ghetto that was a brick factory. It was gigantic. It was a couple of 100, uh, acres of land they had over there. 

DORI LAUB: Yeah. 

ARNOLD ROTH: The factories were not producing anything at that time. So-- and they had like huts. 

LIONEL ROTH: Where they were storing-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Where they would find the bricks. 

LIONEL ROTH: The sheds where they were storing the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Bricks. 

LIONEL ROTH: --bricks. That's where our quarters were. 

ARNOLD ROTH: This is where they took us in, for instance, our community went there and the community next to us went over there. And they must have had hundreds of communities from around the area. 

LIONEL ROTH: Because our cousins, which, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: And they all brought 'em into the brick factory and they made a ghetto. They put fences around it. And that was-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Guards. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --the ghetto. 

LIONEL ROTH: And guards. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And that's where we stayed for a month. And then one morning, we woke up and there was the cattle cars lined up. And just take take-- take nothing. 

LIONEL ROTH: Just to give you an example of how bad it was, the sanitation was so bad that people got lice. It was pathetic. It was sickening. 

ARNOLD ROTH: There was no baths. There was no place to sleep. 

LIONEL ROTH: No water. There w-- they had-- they had-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: They were sleeping on the floor. 

DORI LAUB: Now, the cattle cars, when they came, was it for the whole comp-- ghetto was evacuated? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Not at one shot. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, no, not at one shot. Uh, they were evacuated. But one day, one transport. The next day, another transport. 

DORI LAUB: Were you in the first transport? 

LIONEL ROTH: No. 

ARNOLD ROTH: No. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, we were not. 

DORI LAUB: So you knew that transports were-- 

LIONEL ROTH: We didn't know where they were going. They were-- they were going to be re-- we were being relocated. That's what they told us. 

ARNOLD ROTH: That's where the rumor started that they are being relocated to Hungary, to the Hungarian mountains or somewheres. 

DORI LAUB: Tell me about the morning that you were-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So one morning, they just, uh, the cattle cars were lined up. You know, they were-- we were told that the first transport is going and that's it. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But then we'd seen the second time or the third time, whatever it was, it was lined up, we knew that everybody is going. So we just, uh, one day, when the cattle car, when the time came for us, apparently, for our hut over there. So we just walked in like cattle. 

LIONEL ROTH: That's it. Nobody knew-- nobody-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: 100 people into one-- into one car. There was barely room to stand, never mind sitting or sleeping. And we had, uh, our father's mother was still alive at that time. She was a really, old, old lady. She could barely walk. She was walking like this. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, this is-- this is how she looked. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, when she was still strong. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, but she was amazing how she was then. I have a picture. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And they shoved us in into that cattle car with windows were all sealed up with barbed wire. 

LIONEL ROTH: I'll look for those pictures. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And still, we had no idea where we were going until we came to Auschwitz and they separated us. 

DORI LAUB: Can you describe it more slowly how-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Uh, well, we arrived, I think it was like dawn, early in the morning. 

DORI LAUB: This was a night train? 

ARNOLD ROTH: It was foggy and smoky and it was, uh, we've seen all kinds of things going on there, but we had no idea. 

DORI LAUB: Before that, people were, in the morning, looking out the window and guessing. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, people might have been guessing, but we had no idea because-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Which one? On the transport? The older people, like our father. Remember, were there. We had people, different age, older one, they were like-- we called them the elders. They were-- Over there, we respect them differently than we respect here, the elder people. And they-- all they kept looking at the sun and they say we're going east. And we traveled at night. We didn't see anything, so the first time we made a stop was in-- in, actually in Poland. I think it was Kr-- Krak-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: In Kra... we made a stop and we changed-- uh, we changed uh-- trains. 

LIONEL ROTH: You know, we stopped in Krakow. Krakow? Yeah, I think it was Krakow, I think, before. So we stopped in a Polish, uh, city, we knew then, we knew we were going to Poland. That's all we knew. But we did not know what was happening. 

DORI LAUB: Did-- didn't peop-- people speculate about the name Auschwitz? 

LIONEL ROTH: No. 

ARNOLD ROTH: No. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, we-- to my knowledge, we never heard of it. We never knew anything. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And we couldn't see out because we were too little to reach. And then there's the ones who reached out. 

DORI LAUB: You have some photographs? 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, this is, the middle one, is our grandmother, my father's grandmother. The middle one, then this is the-- yeah, this is the sis-- the daughter, my father's sister. She lived with him at that time. So, but in the ghetto, she stayed with us. Because, uh, the daughter had small children. 

So they had no room. So she stayed with us. Because we are already bigger. We had three, I think she had five or six children. So they were crowded. So she stayed with us and she, in turn, came with us together, stayed with us together. And my mother took care of her. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LIONEL ROTH: Uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Our mother took care of her. She even took her in into the crematorium. 

LIONEL ROTH: And, uh, when we got there, she wouldn't let her go. She went with her. So she went right in. 

DORI LAUB: So whenever they took you in the train that morning, it's foggy-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, right, so at first, we didn't know anything where we were. Because we just had no idea. But when we got out, uh, we saw a lot of flames-- 

DORI LAUB: Yeah. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --shooting out from different directions. And, uh, as we were, you know, we had to drop everything that we had, just our clothes on us. And we started to march. They were pushing us like dogs, go there, go there, go there. 

DORI LAUB: Was it fast? 

LIONEL ROTH: Fast, they went on with-- the train pulled in, they opened the doors. And they were uh, Ger-- Germans and I think you call them those, uh, what do you call them? 

DORI LAUB: Kommando-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Kapos. 

LIONEL ROTH: K-- Kapos. Kapos open the door and say "Raus! Raus!" and everybody, only thing we grabbed, all we can think of, they said not to touch anything, leave everything, just grab. So the first thing our parents grabbed is a piece of bread that was-- that-- that is saved. And I think some jelly and some chicken fat or something. Chicken fat or goose fat, something, so that was, uh, what you used to put on-- that we used to eat it for bread, for cooking, and so on. We grabbed this. 

And then, while we were marching, then there was a man. They say it was Mengele. I wouldn't know because it was-- we came in, it was early in the morning. It was, uh, foggy, very, very dreary, very dreary morning and chilly. And all they had to-- all they said is, this way, this way, this way. That's all. You, here. You, here. You, there. And that's it. We didn't have time to say goodbye to our mother. That's the last time we saw her. And, uh, so the three of us, he asked how old we were. So our father says, say you are older. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We lied because we were both very short. 

LIONEL ROTH: So he says, well, I said we are-- say we are carpenters. He was a cabinet maker. Says you're c-- say you are carpenters. 

DORI LAUB: Your father said? 

LIONEL ROTH: My father said, tell us, so we should tell them that we are carpenters. So we went together. And that was, we stayed together from there on. 

DORI LAUB: Do you remember the moment of, eh, selection ? that mother and the ch-- children-- and the sister and the children and the old, when they were-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Separate. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, the first-- first the women and the men were separated right away. And then they had another separation for the men that they wanted them to go to work and what not-- they didn't want them to go to work. And the same thing they had for the women. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, but the-- the healthy ones-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So the women didn't know, our mother, we didn't know that she's not alive until when we were liberated. But our sister was working in Auschwitz. But, us, they s-- they took us three together. But I think we were also separated a couple of times. 

LIONEL ROTH: Times, right. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Because we were both very young and s-- 

[VIDEO OUT] 

Our mother went. She had no idea where she was walking. So she walked her right into the gas chamber. But with us, we went to a ca-- we went to a different camp which was fenced off from the women. And we sat in Auschwitz, also, for about 10 days. 

DORI LAUB: Could you signal to each other when you-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: No. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, we didn't see them. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We didn't see them. 

LIONEL ROTH: See, the only-- we saw our-- our sister. After we went through, when we took, they took all our clothes off, they gave us the striped clothes. And they cut our hair and they made the-- the-- the-- cut in-- cut in-- cut in the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: They washed us and cut it-- 

LIONEL ROTH: In the-- in the mid-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: --completely. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, but they also-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: It was only in the camp. 

LIONEL ROTH: In the camp, they cut our hair off and they gave us the clothes with the wooden shoes with everything else. So then they took us back into a, uh, big, uh, big barracks. And half of them, that's when we saw our sister for half a minute. We said goodbye to her. 

ARNOLD ROTH: I remember standing in line there. We were standing in line, I think for the showers at that time. We were completely naked. And, uh, I saw, like, maybe a block away, I saw the people were-- I-- I-- I knew, as a child, I know it was bodies. I had no idea-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Because the odor was terrible. The stench was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: At that time we were still, either we-- too naive. I mean, we seeing bodies all over. And I seen a block away, there was a fire going, I seen two men just, you know, take a body and throw it in there. And I'm looking and looking, and I said to my father, gee, that look to me like they were throwing these bodies into the fire or something. So pop says, no, that was probably a tree limb or something. You know, he didn't want us to either-- either he didn't know himself-- 

LIONEL ROTH: He didn't know either. He didn't know either. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --or he didn't want us to know what's going on. Because you seen bodies all over. Everybody was carrying bodies here, back and forth. Something is going on over here. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, the stench was awful. It was as, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So then, finally, they gave us showers and they gave us clothes and they shoved us into barracks that was raining in. It was worse inside than it was outside. And we sat there for about 10 days, I think. And then they-- 

DORI LAUB: All three of you? 

ARNOLD ROTH: All three of us, yeah. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah. 

ARNOLD ROTH: There was no work for us in Auschwitz, right? No, what did we-- 

LIONEL ROTH: No, Ausch-- Au-- Auschwitz was the-- that place where we were was strictly the camp that, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Camp's transporting. 

LIONEL ROTH: --transport, coming in and going out and the separation, the gas chambers, and that's all there was. Birkenau was the camp next to us which they worked in there. But, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So then we-- we, uh, they took us-- 

MIRIAM FORMAN: You said you remember seeing your sister there? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, he did. I don't remember seeing her. 

LIONEL ROTH: We were in the-- when we were-- after we came through with the-- with the clothes. We were all dressed up, she had her-- her-- her dress on, her hair cut off. So we saw a, uh-- one of the girls from, uh-- from the-- from the area. She said, that was our daughter Esther. She says, she's right-- so they called her. She came up-- up front. That's when we s-- that's when I remember seeing her the last time. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And we, uh, know this, we asked about our mother and nobody seen her. Nobody seen her. 

DORI LAUB: Did you suspect they-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, we s-- we didn't really know-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Believe it or not, we didn't know. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --what was going on. 

LIONEL ROTH: If-- if I would tell you that we didn't know what went on in Auschwitz, 'til after when, uh, well, they evacuated, after the front, the Russians came closer, they evacuated the people and some of the people we met at a dif-- we were evacuated from our camp, we were in Austria, to another camp in Austria. And they came there saying we met there, they told us then what was happening in Auschwitz. 

ARNOLD ROTH: See, what happened, what happened-- 

LIONEL ROTH: That's the-- that's the secret that it was, that nobody knew about it. People who are working there. The one that-- that-- those Kapos, some of them were Jewish, some of them were Polish, some of them were German. And they had special uniforms, different hats. They-- they had-- they had the same uniform, but they were clean, always pressed and, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: 'Cause, at least, they were there already. Like, they took us in '44. They took us away. When we came to Auschwitz, some of the people from Poland were already there since '39. They were-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Like hardened criminals by that time. They were- they were, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: I mean, you know, they were there already for, uh, since '39 is what, five years? They were already hardened. They knew that they're not going anywheres. They were so mean to us. They were, uh, shaving our hair and everything else. Everything we said, they used to tell us, you stupid idiot, you're going to go into the fire anyway. But it didn't penetrate. 

DORI LAUB: You didn't know. 

ARNOLD ROTH: It didn't penetrate. 

LIONEL ROTH: It didn't mean anything. It just, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: I didn't mean anything. 

LIONEL ROTH: It just, uh-- we saw the fires burning. Ah, there was the flames, the smoke up there. There's so much-- so much, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: And it wasn't-- 

LIONEL ROTH: And we thought it was foggy. Actually, it wasn't foggy, it was all the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: The smog. 

LIONEL ROTH: --the smog, we'll say it was. Well, we're surrounded by woods. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LIONEL ROTH: So it's, uh-- it was just, everything was just settling down. And that's probably why the odor was so bad. And the fog, it was constant mis-- mist. The weather was just like the atmosphere in the-- in the camp. Very depressing, very sad, and very quiet. And it's-- it's, uh-- but we didn't know what went on there. 

DORI LAUB: Quiet? 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, in a sense. Nobody talked between each other because we didn't know-- you couldn't talk to any-- if we said somebody, they would-- they would-- they would hit you. 

ARNOLD ROTH: People really experienced were afraid to talk. 

LIONEL ROTH: Nobody tell us anything. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They didn't talk to us. 

LIONEL ROTH: I mean, for example, when they-- we went in, when they took us into a, uh, barracks to take our clothes off. They take everything off. They gave us-- we walked in the barn, it was-- I don't know how big it was with the clothes-- clothes piled to the sky high. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They locked the doors in the back and walked out through other end. 

LIONEL ROTH: We did-- We didn't-- so much clothes, you know. So we were so either naive, blind, or stupid. We didn't know. We saw all the clothes and every-- we didn't-- we-- well, we couldn't question. There's nobody to ask a question. We can only talk to ourself. What is it? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Those people who took hair on us, didn't even-- they didn't say nothing. They did say, you're stupid. Why do you need it? You're going to go to the fire anyway. That's-- that's the only thing you were-- you were not allowed-- you didn't have time to question it because one, two, three-- 

LIONEL ROTH: See, everything was push, push, push, move, move, move, move, move. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: Did you talk to each other? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Oh-- 

LIONEL ROTH: We held onto ea-- we held onto each other. We hold onto to our li-- for our life. That's about what-- what-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: We were 14, 15 years old. We just came out of-- not even finish school. What can we talk? I mean, we were hungry. We were cold. In the 10 days, I don't think they gave us a decent meal. All we had is-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Decent meal, all we had is soup. Potato peel, potato peel, so-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Potato peels, you were lucky if you found a potato peel. 

LIONEL ROTH: You couldn't eat it. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Also the line, most of time when you got to the line there was nothing left and we were young kids. You know, if-- if you didn't know how to fight for it, you didn't eat. In 10 days, I don't think we ate one decent meal. A decent meal? Forget it. A soup. 

LIONEL ROTH: No decent meal, no we had nothing but soup, soup-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: We were cold. 

LIONEL ROTH: --soup, and a slice of bread. 

ARNOLD ROTH: There was no, uh, sanitary facilities. 

DORI LAUB: All right, so and you fell into Ausch-- those 10 days in Auschwitz was something of, basically, confusion. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, to us-- to us it was probably the worst-- 

LIONEL ROTH: The shock, the shock, confusions of-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: --part of the whole-- of the whole year, believe it or not, even though we worked in the concentration camp. But that-- the 10 days in Mauthausen we were-- they took us to Mauthausen. It was also-- we-- we were just totally-- 

DORI LAUB: In Auschwitz, what is the-- what was so terrible in Auschwitz. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, first of all, the atmosphere. 

LIONEL ROTH: But you have to remember, let me just say, let me say something. 

DORI LAUB: One of you at a time. 

LIONEL ROTH: You have to remember one thing, that we came from my home. I said before, we were sheltered. We never travelled any place. We haven't been further than our town, which is about 10, 12 kilometers away. Here, they took us into a ghetto that was... But we were still together with family. Mother used to cook. I used to get food. It was cooked-- the food was cooked by our people with the same type of food, whatever it was in there. 

We were able to get something. Over there, they took us into Auschwitz. They separated. We lost our mother. We lost our sister. We lost our girl. We lost all, the whole family. We didn't know. Now, we didn't lose them in the sense that they were killed. We lost them. We didn't know where they were. We haven't seen them. All we were left is three of us. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And we sensed something-- 

LIONEL ROTH: We were young. We were-- we were, for our age, for at 17, I consider myself, I wasn't older than 15. That's how immature we were at that time. And here we were separated. They took-- they-- the-- while we went through, the way they handled us, sc-- we were scared to breathe. 

We were really scared with obviously what went on there, we couldn't-- every-- every time they were hitting you, pushing you. If you-- if you didn't move fast, then you got hit with a bat or they had sticks. No matter what, you got hit. And many people were bleeding. You didn't know. So then they threw us into barracks. Uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Mud. 

LIONEL ROTH: Iron with-- on a bed of make triple decker, I think. One, two, three or four decker bunks made out of wood. They're about the width for-- for maybe two people can lay on the side. We were laying there five or six. Head-- some head this way-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: You had to sleep four or five-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Head this way, head this way, somebodies feet in your face. Now, you picture yourself, young-- young kids go through this, clean, we were not. OK, everybody was, after going through the-- the ghetto, traveling for how many days in the cattle cars. Here, they throw you in with people and-- and a-- and a bunk on just some hay. No cov-- forget about m-- uh, blankets. Forget about sheets. 

And there, head to toe, head to feet. And this is how we stayed for a-- for a-- for a few hours, if you lay down there. They c-- they constantly came and picking people out for some reason. Pick, no, you don't know who you-- who they're going to pick at night to get out. And we don't know where-- where they went, what happened to them. And then every morning you have to go outside on the, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: Zahlappel. 

LIONEL ROTH: Zahlappel to be counted. The weather was miserable. It was cold. We were freezing. And we were-- we were literally animals, scared animals. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Just imagine, here we were, he was 17, I was, what, not even 15. We never saw a dead body before. There were funerals in our town. But just as kids, we never saw a dead body. Here we come in, we go to bed with four or five people. And in the morning you wake up with two people. You never saw a dead body before. And this was the atmosphere itself. There was something-- we sensed something. But we just were afraid to talk about it because we were hoping it's gonna go away. Because we're here. There's dead people all over you. And, you know, it's curious, we were always go looking for them. 

LIONEL ROTH: And we was-- we was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: A dead person, and there were so many of them. You didn't have to go look far. 

LIONEL ROTH: We were starving. They gave us the soup. Main-- mainly it was potato soup with, uh, peels with a little bread. 

DORI LAUB: Eh, you were frightened, but what you said before, death was not something really that penetrated. 

LIONEL ROTH: No, we didn't know-- 

DORI LAUB: Is that correct? 

ARNOLD ROTH: How is that? 

DORI LAUB: Death was-- death was not something that penetrated. 

ARNOLD ROTH: No, it was not penetrated. Some-- we sensed something was going on. People are dying. But then we seen what they are feeding us day after day, no food, no clothes. The shelter that we had, itself, a person could lay down and just die during the night because it got very, very cold. We had no covers. And if we had a cover, they were such saturated from the rain. 

DORI LAUB: But you were-- so if I want to understand you, but were you afraid to be killed or not? 

ARNOLD ROTH: We had no brain. We had no sense for that. We-- we were young and we were hoping that we, wherever it is, we gonna start working soon and we gonna be OK. That's the only thing we could think of. Nobody-- our father, certainly, is not going to tell us, like, I think we gonna die. He wasn't gonna tell it to us. 

All he said is we have to fight. In fact, he kept on encouraging people that you have to encourage. Wherever it is, wherever they're gonna take us, eventually you're gonna start working. If you got a trade, you're healthy, you're gonna-- they're gonna give you food. Working people always have to eat. That was his philosophy. 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hmm. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And this is what went through our mind when we look around on ourselves, there is too many dead people, you know, too many fires. And regardless of what pop told me, I knew that it was a person that they were throwing into the fire. So it-- something started to be suspicious, I would call it this way. Then in Mauthausen, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: Oh, wait a minute, you are still in Auschwitz 10 days, what happened? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well-- 

DORI LAUB: You call them the worst days. And I still want to understand, was it the dread, the fear of the unknown? 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, just-- just, all we have to do is look at each other and look at the people that came with us to see what happened to them from the time that we got off the train. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Some of them went away and never came back. 

LIONEL ROTH: Until the time that we got back together as a-- after we went through the clothing change, the shaving of the heads, the-- they suppo-- supposedly showers, which were in and out, one second, you're in. And that was-- and out you go. And then they sprayed us with, uh, the powder, or the delicing-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Delousing. 

LIONEL ROTH: They used to call it, delousing. Sprayed with powder, that's it, you were out. The t-- the transformation from-- from-- in a such a short period of time, to us as youngsters, was the shock. It was-- what we saw, we were imagining things. We really didn't know, we couldn't imagine. Because we were-- I mean, we never saw it. We didn't-- we were not familiar with politics. The only politics we knew is that we were occupied by Hungary in Czechoslo-- that's all-- that's the politics we were-- we were interested in. Everything else didn't concerned us. 

DORI LAUB: All right, so what happened? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, then they took us away. They-- they didn't tell us where they were taking us. But they, uh-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Another transport. 

ARNOLD ROTH: That's when we went to Mauthausen. I don't remember how long it took us but, uh, I know we were also in cattle cars. We were going-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Slow train, on the-- on the choo-choo train. We got to Mauthausen, same thing, out and-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So the first thing, we walked in and, uh, we walked from the train to Mauthausen to the camp. We walked through the camp. They had a gate, a big iron gate. "Arbeit macht das Leben Suess" was written on it. 

LIONEL ROTH: See, actually my problem-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Then you walk in, there we walk in and we saw about 10 people hanging. Remember that? 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah. 

ARNOLD ROTH: On the side-- on the left side as we were walking in, there were about 10 people hanging from the gallows. Every time they hung people, they left them there so for other people, for an example. They did the same thing to the German soldiers who, one, uh, ran away, you know, defected. They shot him on the spot and left with a sign there, "a lesson for another German soldier." This is the way we found Mauthausen. 

LIONEL ROTH: But Mauthausen was basic a, uh-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Tran-- transfer point. 

LIONEL ROTH: --uh, a transfer point. But they, from there, they're s-- they're sending people in there. And then they did more selektion. And they send them to different labor camps assigned to actually to labor camps where they were working. So we were lucky with it. We went through. There we had a real fight, now, because they wouldn't believe us there that we were carpenters, cabinet makers. They actually tried to take us away from our father. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They did. We were separated. 

LIONEL ROTH: Separated, separated. So they-- finally, we were lucky and they got us back together. And we were sent to a, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: How did you get together? 

ARNOLD ROTH: I don't remember exactly how it was. It seems to me like-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Uh, our dad-- now, dad pleaded with a-- with an officer, with a German. 

ARNOLD ROTH: That was one time. And he got-- he got beaten up for that. But another time I wound up in another, uh, barrack. Which, that barrack was full of children. See? And, uh, each time a truck came and took these children away, but I had no idea where they're going, right? Then in with him and my father, there was another boy that had a brother where I was. 

And I think it was once during an air raid. It's like a vague, you know, I can remember something. And he picked up the wire and I crawled over to their side and he crawled over to hi-- to his brother's side. And after that, they didn't question us any more once they gave us-- after this, soon, the air raid was over, they gave us numbers. 

LIONEL ROTH: Numbers, so we didn't-- so we didn't have the numbers here. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Once we had the number, they didn't question us no more. In Mauthausen, they didn't question us no more. I don't know what happened to that boy or to his brother from the pe-- the kids from that barrack. But what I heard afterwards, that what they call, they had black trucks. The way they were explaining to me about the black trucks, that they took the kids 15, 20, whatever, on the truck and they started to take 'em straight through the perimeter. 

They were enclosed trucks. And, uh, by the time they got to the perimeter, they were dead. It was some kind of a gas that they used from the exhaust or something. And this was the last time we were separated. Because after that, we got the numbers. They assigned us, uh-- even the numbers, we were th-- three numbers apart. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, they were the same as-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: I had 68720. 

LIONEL ROTH: That's my number. 

ARNOLD ROTH: I had 68720, pop had 23 and you had 24. 

LIONEL ROTH: 724, That's the numbers we had in-- 

DORI LAUB: So one and two is-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, about right. Somehow, I squeezed in, you know, in the line ahead of them. Somebody was between us and they got the numbers two numbers ahead and later-- 

DORI LAUB: So from-- 

LIONEL ROTH: So this is the sister that, uh, 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

LIONEL ROTH: That one here. 

DORI LAUB: Mauthausen-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Was a transfer camp and I think there we also spent like about 10 days. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, so at least-- at least 10, maybe two weeks. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But there was already, uh, the weather was nice. And we spent most of the time, uh-- 

LIONEL ROTH: But Mauthausen was in Austria. The weather was nicer. But it was also very miserable. Every-- they were selecting people, we didn't know what was happening that we didn't rest, constant, out, back into the barracks, another barracks, back out to the field. Selecting, back and forth, we didn't even know what. It was constant, constant confusion. And the same, the sleeping quarters were the same, barracks with hay and had-- had two feet, the sleeping, finally, until we-- 'til they shipped us out. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We did have an advantage during the day, the weather was much nicer. And we were able to warm our bodies up a little bit uh, during the day. But as far as the food goes, it was next to nothing. 

DORI LAUB: What happened next? 

ARNOLD ROTH: From Mauthausen? 

LIONEL ROTH: We went-- we were shipped to-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Once we leave Mauthausen, they shipped us to, uh-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Melk. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Melk, a working camp. 

LIONEL ROTH: That's what you call, li-- like in the army, you would go to basic-- to a, uh-- spa-- uh, station to a camp and there they assign you to a basic training. From basic training, you are assigned to a-- 

DORI LAUB: Tell me about yourself. 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, that's-- that's why they-- that's how it worked. Auschwitz to Mathhausen, Mauthausen to Melk. 

DORI LAUB: The system we know. We want to know you. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We wen-- we went to Melk and, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: But your own experience. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We went to-- they took us to Melk. In Melk they-- 

DORI LAUB: Train, car? 

LIONEL ROTH: No, by train, all by t-- always by train, always by cattle car. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: And your father was with you? 

LIONEL ROTH: We were lucky. That's where we were separate, we finally got together. And from then on, we were together because we were assigned as cabinet makers. So what they-- they sent us to Melk. And then-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: But we worked-- then before we-- before we got to work as cabinet makers, we worked in Schactbau Remember Schacttbau? They were building, uh, tunnels in the mountains. 

LIONEL ROTH: That was-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Remember Schachtbau? 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, that's right. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We worked in Schactbau and, uh, for about-- 

LIONEL ROTH: I remember the name. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah. 

LIONEL ROTH: They'd bring us under the tunnels. 

ARNOLD ROTH: I'm surprised myself because I haven't talked about these things, believe it or not, for at least 30 years. I never talk about it. 

DORI LAUB: And you were-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: But it comes back, you know. 

LIONEL ROTH: We were together. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We were together. 

DORI LAUB: You haven't talked about the mine? 

LIONEL ROTH: No, no. 

DORI LAUB: It's very interesting that the memories from age 17 are completely gone. 

LIONEL ROTH: They are. They're-- 

DORI LAUB: They are completely gone. 

LIONEL ROTH: They are so fuzz-- as when I spoke, they are so fuzzy. I can sit down and-- and try to restructure the life when we were younger. I can tell you a story about when we were younger. How-- what we used to do as children. But, uh-- but the last few days, everything was so-- the shock that we were-- that was caused by the whole transformation, uh, I would just say how naive we were. 

We were so, as I said before, my father took me, I go back to the-- to back home for a second. Then, uh, back in-- back to go to back home before they took us to the-- to the ghetto, he took me, I wanted to be a cabinet maker. I wanted to be a better-- make better furniture that he was making, like the more modern. So he took me to Budapest. 

Because by myself I wouldn't go to Bu-- yeah, he set me, find me a job in a plant which would be a-- an apprentice. Find me a place to live. All the arrangements for food and everything else and the man, how much he's going to pay me. So when I stayed, he left me, everything was fine. Set up, I stayed there for one week. I got on a train and I came home. 

ARNOLD ROTH: With the mumps. 

LIONEL ROTH: I was-- I couldn't stay away from him. I was just not used to it. It just-- it was all of a sudden here I'm alone, no family, no parents in a big city, coming from a little village to Budapest. It's like-- like a different world. So I was there for one week and I came right back home. 

Now, imagine what this did to us, what we-- all of a sudden, from home, took us to the ghetto, from the ghetto to Auschwitz. In Auschwitz, and then all of a sudden, here we are in a camp responsible for ourself, for our own survival, actually. It wa-- It was very hard to cope. 

DORI LAUB: You were working in Schaftbau 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We were working-- they were building, uh, I don't know the place. I know we were going from-- 

DORI LAUB: Your experience. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Yeah, well, we were all together. So anyway, in the morning we used leave very early, uh, in a cattle car. 

LIONEL ROTH: Well, they had-- they had-- no, they had like at the stations, they had like-- like it-- like the regular-- like the regular stations here have platform, there we used to wait for a train to co-- our train to come, the work train, which was called ? INAUDIBLE ? That used to take us into the station by the factory. It was under-- it was under-- they used to build underground factory under mountains. That's where we worked for a little while. And that was at how long? 

ARNOLD ROTH: I think for about a month, we worked there. Because I remember we used to have like blisters. We never had shovels and picks in our hands, you know? And here you couldn't stop for a minute because the Kapo was there on top of you all the time. 

LIONEL ROTH: The Germans, they were-- the guards. 

ARNOLD ROTH: The first day, I used-- I came home, I had blisters here. The next day they all opened up. right? But, you know, pop's hands were worked hard, he didn't care what he worked with. He might-- I-- he didn't do so good either, but we were crying. We were children, you know, let's face it. But, somehow, when they came-- one night, they came to the camp. They finally started to select Tischlers, cabinet makers. 

LIONEL ROTH: Cabinet makers. 

ARNOLD ROTH: So pop was the first one and come on, you are a cabinet maker. We had problems. The guy was selecting, you were a Tischler? He tells me, he says, you couldn't be a Tischler? How can you be a Tischler? I am a Tischler. How old are you? So I used to tell them I'm 19. But he didn't believe me because I wa-- I was puny. We happened to be small. We are not big now either. But, so, we-- we got rapped a few times over our head and my father and him. By the time we got ourselves in the group-- 

LIONEL ROTH: No, we tried to push ourselves, you know, together to get into it, into the group. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Because there's 5,000 people in one camp. You can imagine that they must have at least 5,000 cabinet makers, everybody wants to be working inside. It so happened we were lucky. We were selected. And the next day-- the next day, lo and behold, they put us into a-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Passenger car. 

ARNOLD ROTH: --passenger car and they take us out to, uh, I think we traveled like about an hour, an hour and 50 minutes to a factory which they were making prefabricated homes, you know with homes-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Barracks, barracks for when they bombed out the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: So we set up a-- a two bedroom house in a matter of an hour. And we made the parts that everything was engineered to a "t." 

LIONEL ROTH: So that was our salvation. That, actually, that saved us for the time, maybe, because we worked in there the morning that we were travelled. But the trains were-- we had like-- we had, uh, one or two cars, we had. It was a regular passenger train. 

ARNOLD ROTH: For the half of the... 

LIONEL ROTH: And we had one or two cars that were for us with cars separated from the civilian passengers. But the train was heated. So we used to, as we were the youngest, practically, in the group there. We used to always find a place under the seat, close to the floor where the heaters were. 

So we used to lay there 'til we got to the job. We were-- we were resting asleep. And, of course, at night you couldn't sleep in the bed. So we slept there. We rested. And we got there. Your worked there all day. We got-- And we also had a little bit better food. And they want-- because the-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: The lunches, they served us in the factory. 

LIONEL ROTH: Because the factory was supplying us with lunch. So it was a-- it was better food than the people were getting in the camps or Au-- in different-- under the-- in Au-- we were-- so, we were treated as professionals, more as professional, as tradespeople. And same, when coming home, they didn't bother us in the camp as much if they needed something for some work at night, they never bothered us. For some reason, we were left as special. And they let us go. The whole group, there were about, uh, 50 of us, 100? Something. Well, they was in two cars. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And there was another group called Haufwerk Remember Haufwerk was in there? 

LIONEL ROTH: Yeah, well, that's our company, too. That was our company. We worked in the same place. Haufwerk Amsterdam That was the name of the company. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Another group of 50 that they worked there but they were outside. 

LIONEL ROTH: Outside, the lumber, they were in the yard, the lumber yard. We were in the-- in the factory. 

MIRIAM FORMAN: You said when you had trouble with the work, you'd help each other? 

LIONEL ROTH: Right. Well, what happened, this toe, I hit it with a hammer. We had-- well, we had to do it, but they--- we had piles of lumber, each precut. It was more of a, uh, like an assembly line. Preset, precut, and all we had to do, inside we had benches and put the stuff together, and nail it together. Put in the piece-- the long piece of the short boards and then nail each one. 

We-- we were trained. We had to produce a certain amount of work in order for us to stay there, otherwise you were no good. So we used to take the nails in our hands and put a nail down. With one shot, the nail had to go in. And one day-- and the one day, we were, with the hammer, we were used with tools because we grew up and, uh, my fa-- our father was a cabinet maker. But we still, we would never work the tools. So one day I hit this nail, this finger. And it swell up like this. I had to hide it. But if had to-- I went in the sick hall, that would be the end of me. Once-- once I-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Let me tell a story about this-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Once they left me, they think I'm finished. 

ARNOLD ROTH: They had two or three people working on a bench. 

DORI LAUB: It was like, uh, production work. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Assembly line. 

LIONEL ROTH: In sections. Assembly line. Assembly line. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Each bench was producing something else. Our father was, uh, put on with-- with another guy and one bench that they were making, uh, parts for the roof which was the heaviest part, section of the whole job there. And my f-- our father, he was a cabinet maker. He was not one of those guys that takes a nail and kaboom, right in. 

He took the hammer and hammered, you know, so slowly that it doesn't slip off the nail and doesn't damage the wood because he was a professional. So naturally, he couldn't produce because he was a little bit older. And probably, by then, a little too weak already. So he couldn't produce. So we went over ourselves to one of the, uh, I don't remember if it was the Gestapo from the factory or our own. 

LIONEL ROTH: The-- no, the-- no, there was a German-- a German foreman, foreman it was. 

ARNOLD ROTH: Me and him were working on small parts, you know, that was really very light. And we felt that it's easy for us. So we talked to him and we told him that we were afraid that pop is going to get shoved out of the group. So we talked to him and we told him, we want to change. Because this is the lighter work, we didn't tell him that. But pop is more professional. And he will do this job better. And we will do this job better. 

So they took Pop off from this heavy work and they put him on the easy work. And me and him started, they trained us and it worked out. It went Very nice, you know? Pop stayed in the group. And he was able to do his professional work better. And we were more like roughnecks, you know, and one, two, three, produce. We had to make like 15 parts a day. But if we made 16 or 17, the-- the next day we took it easy. 

Because they were overproduced and he wouldn't give them in, even though they were already in the warehouse. But they didn't know until we gave them the count. But if we gave them one extra piece, they used to give us bon-- an extra coupon for cigarettes. Because cigarettes, on the black market, you were able to buy shoes. Uh, you know, we didn't smoke. Pop used to save the cigarettes. We were able to buy bread for it. Because there was always somebody who was selling his last piece of bread, unfortunately. 

LIONEL ROTH: They were-- they were dying. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But this is the way-- this was the way of life. By then, we were already, more or less, seasoned. And it-- So anyway, one day, he smacks his fingers up. It was very cold and he missed the nail. And the factory was cold when we came in most of the time. So he had to bandage his finger in order for us to do the quota. 

I had to run around three times and they should miss him. Even though he did work, he helped me pick up. He put in one nail with the fingers like this just so that he should do something. But I ran around three times to get him off the hook. He shouldn't have to go to the hospital. Because if he goes to the hospital, he would never come out. 

LIONEL ROTH: So once they take you out the group, for one thing-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Forget it. Forget it. You'll never go back in that group. 

DORI LAUB: How did you manage to do double quota? 

ARNOLD ROTH: Well, we didn't do a double quota. We just made like-- well, we were young and that time, I felt, you know, a little better than we were in Auschwitz and Mauthausen because we had decent food. 

LIONEL ROTH: We were getting better food there. 

ARNOLD ROTH: We were-- we had clean clothes and, uh, Sunday we were off. Uh, I wouldn't call it exactly a hotel. But it was better living, already, comparing to Auschwitz and Mauthausen. So I managed for as long as it took him to heal, the finger. And, uh, I managed to do-- you know, the table was long, like from here to the other end of the wall, about, uh, three feet wide, right? 

DORI LAUB: Mm-hm. 

ARNOLD ROTH: But they were heavy. They were miserably heavy. And we had to-- when we picked them up, we had to-- 

LIONEL ROTH: Swing them up. 

ARNOLD ROTH: You know, start swinging, one at each end and up into the air to put them on top of the pile. 

DORI LAUB: To pile them up. 

ARNOLD ROTH: And we managed to keep the quota. 

DORI LAUB: But-- 

