INTERVIEWER 1: It's very, uh, good that you add not only what you see, but what goes on inside you. 

SUBJECT: The feeling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The thought, feeling, yes. Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I remember [INAUDIBLE] once said that the difference between this effort, our effort, and other efforts, uh, to-- 

CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: Uh, there was a-- a lot, a lot of crying and mothers calling their children and children calling their mothers. And, uh, I heard, uh, a child crying. And then I heard a shot, and there was no more crying. 

Uh, the people were taken away gradually, uh, on wagons and by walking to a train, which was a few miles away. And, uh, it was a terrible thing to-- to hear a whole town cry. And it was very, uh, loud and-- and frightening. And little by little, uh, we heard it quiet down and finally fade away completely. And there was complete silence. Not-- not-- no noise or anything in town. 

The first day, uh, a house was raided and the Germans came-- came around and were searching for m-- for leftover Jews. And I remember, uh, that they were pushing the cot away to-- to look for Jews, I guess, underneath the bed. And we were terribly frightened. Uh, that evening, there were about-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I'm sorry. How many people were in this hiding place? 

SUBJECT: There were two. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And was there any food any way to relieve yourself? What was-- what were the circumstances? 

SUBJECT: Uh, the-- the-- the houses in-- in our town were-- they didn't have, uh, modern plumbing. There was an outhouse outside, but you had to go outside. There was, uh, no running water. Uh, there were 27 of us in, uh, the August heat in that small place, uh, under the roof. And it must have been about 90 degrees there. Um, No water, no food. 

The first night, um, my mother went downstairs, risked her life and went downstairs into the cellar and brought up some food where-- where some of the food was stored. Also that first night, uh, some, uh, one family tried its luck. We-- we all knew that there was no way we could-- could survive for very long in that hiding place. 

Um, so this one family of four tried to-- five of them tried to try their luck. So they walked downstairs and tried to get out, uh, and all of a sudden, we heard them saying, halt. And the Germans stopped them. They-- we heard some scuffles and-- and yelling and screaming. 

And, uh, one of the sons, uh, started arguing with, uh, the soldier and said, you couldn't-- can't do that to us. You're not going to get away with it. And he said something to him like you're a-- you are a dog or you're a-- you're a pig, and we heard a shot. And he was killed on the spot. 

Uh, the rest of them were taken away. We also heard the mother pleading to be able to take the body with them. And, uh, we heard them all going away, and no more noise. 

On the second day, people in the hiding place were getting desperate, and, uh, were thirsty, and they were, uh, becoming wild because of no food and no-- and heat. And some of them started drinking urine and, uh, were getting sick and-- and throwing up and all that. 

Um, so, um, we decided still to wait. Nobody quite knew what to do. And on the third day when things were really bad, my parents decided that my brother and I, the older brother and I, had to try our luck. 

And, uh, they talked to us very quietly. Uh, especially my mother had turned out to be the more heroic one. And, uh, said, you've got to try to find-- see if you can survive. And they literally pushed us out and gave-- my mother gave me instructions that told me where to, to go to Swiniarow, to this village. She said-- she tried to convince me that, uh, they-- that she and-- and Dad had friends there, and gave me specific names who to go to. 

Um, she t-- told us two things. They told us, number one, to try and get shelter. And two, to see if we can find people to come and help them, to get them out from the hiding place and give them shelter. Uh, we-- I started crying, because I didn't want to go. Uh, I wanted to-- I said, no matter what happened, I wanted to be with-- together with them. 

But they-- my mother literally pushed me out through the door and she said, go. And my older brother too. So I held his hand, and we walked out. And it was a bright, sunny day. We walked down on the street. 

Uh, and it was like a ghost town. There was nobody there. Uh, except for the very end of the town, there was a guard. And somehow, he either disregarded us or thought we were Polish. We were both-- uh, when we were young, we were both very blond and probably taken as little Polish kids, and were not touched. 

We passed through the guard all right and went to the town. To the village, to a small village. Uh, I knew those people. I knocked on the door, and they recognized-- recognized us. And, uh, they-- the woman said, no. You can't come in here. No, we don't want you here. Get away. Get away. 

Uh, I pleaded with her. I said, all right. Never mind. I said, we'll-- we'll lie down in the field and we'll just sleep over there until Mommy and Daddy come. And, uh, so then she said, no. You can't do that. 

And she-- I-- so I disregarded her. The two of us lay down anyway. And she came running after us and chased us away. We tried in another, uh, uh, place to lie down and rest overnight. And, uh, they-- the people sent the dogs after us, so we had to start walking again. 

So I started crying and I told my brother I wanted to go back to the hiding place. And I told him, no matter what happens, I want to be with them. My brother didn't think it was a good idea, but he finally relented and said, OK, we'll go back. 

We started going behind the buildings very quietly so nobody would catch us, and it was already late at night. Uh, and we walked very close to one building to another and-- so nobody would see us. 

And, uh, as we approached about a couple blocks away from the house, uh, we heard voices. Look, the little Polish kids running after us. And again yelling, Zyd, zydowka, zyd, zydowka which meant little Jewish boy and little Jewish girl. And then we heard a new voice saying, stop or I'll shoot, in Polish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember the words? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, um-- um, [SPEAKING POLISH]-- something like that. Strzele, strzele, you know. Uh, so yeah. He said, hands up. And I remember, you know, putting my hands up, and my brother putting-- putting my-- that was an automatic reflex. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember what hands up in Polish-- do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Um, I don't even know whether he said-- no, I don't remember. I don't remember. I don't even remember wh-- whether he said, hands up. But it was sort of-- but I remember having my hands up. 

Yeah. Uh, yeah. I think he did. I think he did. I-- I put my hands up, and then we stood next to the wall, you know, like this. And he came over and, uh, he started asking us, where-- where are you from? Where are your parents? And, uh, we said, they went away. They went with everybody else. 

Um, so he took us to the-- to the post, to the police post. And, uh, I remember, uh, the, uh-- I remember him calling the, uh, German office, asking him what to do with us, to shoot-- whether to shoot us on the spot or to-- to throw us into jail. And, uh, we kept asking him, what are you going to do with us then? He wouldn't tell us. He wouldn't give us any answer. 

Then he said, let's go. Again, we didn't know he-- where he was taking us. And at gunpoint, he started marching us. And, uh, on the way, uh, my-- I talked to my brother and, uh, I said, I remember telling him, uh, perhaps one of us could live by-- by starting to run. 

I said-- I told him, you run right and I'll-- I'll run left, and, uh, one of us may be able to have a chance to survive. And, uh, he said-- he thought about it. He said, no. It won't do any good. He'd probably shoot both of us. 

So we continued walking, and before we knew it, we were in a jail cell up On the third floor in the town jail. We just sat there, and we just knew that, uh, at night, somebody would come and take us out and shoot us. Uh, so we-- any-- the slightest noise we heard, we would just be ready at the door so that they would take us. 

And the only thing we were afraid of was-- was, uh, getting a whipping or trying, uh, for the Germans-- the Germans trying to use torture, uh, to try and find out where our parents were. And, uh, we made up that no matter what, we will not squeal or tell where the-- the rest of them are hiding out. 

I remember my brother also, uh, decided that, uh, he wanted-- that the parents or at least the people, if there were any survivors left to know what happened to us. So he-- he cut his finger and got out some blood and wrote on the wall that he and I were in jail at-- at such and such a date. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old was your brother? 

SUBJECT: Uh, he was-- he's two years older than I, so he must have been about 13 at the time. Uh, he, uh-- at night, the, uh-- that same night, uh, we finally heard them coming. What-- we was expecting them all night, but we finally heard the Germans coming. And we were sure they're coming for us. 

Uh, we heard the dogs barking and, uh, we heard them yelling and screaming, Jews, and Jews, and dirty Jews. Schwein, schwein. That's a word I heard all the time, uh, which meant pig. 

And, uh, we heard them coming, and, uh, we were standing ready at a door. And we-- we waited there, and I held my brother's hand. And, uh, we heard them come up, and then we heard voices on the second floor. Uh, two Polish children yelling, it-- we are not Jews. We are not Jews. They're upstairs. They are upstairs. 

And, uh, the Germans were probably drunk, and we heard the dogs barking and a lot of noise, and-- and they probably maybe didn't understand Polish. And they took those children out instead of us. And, uh, about 15 minutes later, we-- we heard two shots, and that was it. We tried to go back to sleep-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Those children were in jail for what? 

SUBJECT: Those children, uh, a lot of, uh, children, a lot of Poles were jailed because they were looting the, uh, goo-- the leftover goods from the Jewish homes. Um, we tried to go back to sleep that night, and then we passed another night there. 

And then the third day, uh, the doors opened, and some more Jews were thrown in into the same cell. Uh, we tried to get information from them, and, uh, they started telling us all kinds of stories. The-- some of them have run away from the road, uh, from some of-- shooting that was going on on the way to the trains. 

And they were telling us some of the horrible things that were happening on the way to the train. Some of the Jews were shot. Some of the elder people who couldn't walk were shot. Uh, some of the children who were thirsty, how the Germans, uh, just, uh, uh, sadistically poured water at them in hoses and choked them to death right into their mouths. 

And so these were runaways, and, uh, were caught. They were trying to get back and find some shelter, and were caught on the way back and were thrown into jail. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I wanted to ask you about the man that brought you and your brother to jail. He was Polish? 

SUBJECT: He was Polish, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: A policeman? 

SUBJECT: The policeman-- the Germans couldn't have possibly accomplished the evacuation without Polish help. Uh, these were Polish policemen that were, uh, guarding the town and that were helping the-- the Germans to evacuate the-- the town. And I was caught by a Ger-- Polish policeman. It was a Polish policeman who threw me into jail. 

Um, as I said, on the third day, the-- I think we were about, um, nine or 10 of us in the cell. And, uh, they also mentioned something that, uh, created sort of a-- a flicker of hope of possible life. They said that they heard that the Germans no longer killed all the leftovers in town, which was a policy at first. But they were now gathering them to help clean out the town, to help put the-- the leftover Jews to work. And, uh, they would take them to the homes and pack the clothes and-- and ship it to Germany. 

But we didn't-- we didn't quite believe it until, uh, that morning, the doors opened, and, uh, again, a Jew-- a Polish policeman came and, uh, at gunpoint told us all to line up and start walking. My brother and I being the youngest were-- were the first ones in the row, and we walked through the town, and the whole town stared and watched. 

And, uh, I remember my teacher looking at me. Um, and as we passed, uh, The street going to the cemetery, uh, I turned left, because I was sure that-- that they were going to shoot us. So I made a left turn to go on to the cemetery. And the policeman started yelling, uh, no, no, straight. Straight. And I looked at my brother, and I-- I think I-- must have been the first time that I started to grin, implying maybe the story is true. Maybe we're not going to be shot. 

So we walked straight, and then he said, walk into that block on the right. And when we got in there, there was some more Jews there. And-- and there was a small ghetto left over. And there must have been about 100 people by then. And they were telling us all kinds of stories about what was going on. Uh, they also told me that my parents did get out from the hiding place, and that was a great joy. Uh, they didn't know where they were, but they knew that-- that they did get out. 

They also told me that, uh, uh, three of my family members who did not manage to get out from the hiding place, uh, one of them was a rabbi and his wife, and another aunt who were in their late 60s and, uh, couldn't do a lot of walking, so they would stay there-- they would stay there until they got extra help. That they were caught by the Germans, and they were shot right in the house, right there. 

Uh, we were taken to work, my brother and I. And all the little children wanted to go to work, thinking that the more we work, the more chance we had to survive. We knew that we eventually-- we would all get shot, so really, all we bargained for was a-- an extra day, an extra hour. 

Uh, one day I was so proud that I was finally taken to-- to work, because I was one of the youngest, uh, in-- as a matter of fact, at that time, I was the youngest in this small ghetto. And I was so proud that-- that they selected me for work. And I tried to do a very good job. And the German told me what to do. He said, pick up the clothes and-- and fold it and make a nice, neat package. And, uh, so I did. 

But at one point, I bent down and, uh-- because I found a picture of my family. So I must have stopped to look at it. And all of the sudden, I heard a big whip over my legs. And, uh, I just remember the sting of it. 

And I just froze for a minute, and got up and stood straight. And I don't think I cried, or I don't think there was a tear in my eye. Uh, I was probably, by that time, completely bereft of-- of emotion. Uh, it was probably the sort of-- I was-- I was sort of half dead. Not here and not there. 

And I just stared the German into the face. I remember a big red face. I would probably recognize him today. And, uh, I just stand-- stood there. I looked at him, and he looked at me. And I just-- as he picked up-- he was about to pick up that whip again, and I started working fast. 

I came back, uh, that day to-- to the small ghetto and, uh, talked to my brother, and we-- we tried to plan some sort of strategy how to find out where my parents were so we could join them. But there was no way. We had no contact or no-- no-- no news from them. 

Uh, the next morning came, and he was taken away to work, and they didn't pick me that day. So I was standing around, uh, looking out of-- of the little ghetto. I could probably even have walked out if I wanted to. Uh, but where would I go? Uh, nobody wanted me out there. They would only chase me away. Uh, nobody would hide me or give me life. 

So I just stood there. And all of a sudden, uh, a-- a guy on a-- on a bicycle came by and said, come on. I'm taking you to your father. Well, I didn't quite know what he was talking about. Uh, he said-- he started mentioning my father's name, so I-- I knew that he meant it. And he said, your father's alive. He wants to take you to his hiding place. 

And I said, no, I won't go, because I won't go without my brother. Uh, he said, but I'll-- I'll come for you brother next day, the following day. And that's the only way I agreed to go with him. 

So I left a note for my brother, and I-- that he-- we're going to come and get him the next day, and I hopped on the bike, and this messenger took me, sure enough, to my father who was hiding out in a village in a stable. 

I came there and, uh, my father uh, was-- my mother said that he had-- by that time, he had lost his mind, because he thought that the two of us were dead. He didn't know that-- that we were in this little ghetto. It was just by chance that-- that he sent this messenger. 

But when we walked out that-- that afternoon, they said that they heard two shots, and they were sure that it was us who-- who were shot. So when he saw me, uh, he just, you know, started crying, and-- and he was very happy to see us, to see me and know that my other brother was alive. 

But again, where do we go from here? What's the next step? Rumors had it that there is some other town called Constantinof, much closer to the Bug River, that there were still Jews there. Uh, that, uh, there was still a ghetto there, and-- a functioning ghetto, and Jews were there and leading a normal life. So we decided to go there. 

Uh, we went there. And sure enough, Jews were still there, and-- and working and, uh, eating and sleeping normally. Uh, we stayed there for, uh, about a week, I believe. And, uh-- but still with the hopes of going back to the small ghetto to join up with-- with my other brother, because our policy has always been to stay-- try and stay together as much as possible, whatever happened to us. 

Uh, but we didn't. The decision was made for us, uh, one evening in that ghetto. Uh, the word came that all Jews are being-- going to be gathered. It was quite-- a little bit different from from our other-- other evacuation. 

And here, they-- there was again a proclamation. All Jews are going to be deported again. Uh, all kinds of-- sometimes these-- these, uh, proclamations said that they-- you're being deported to another town. Sometimes to a beautiful colony, uh, in, uh, a specific place, a Jewish colony. Uh, at this point, we already knew what those colonies meant, because we heard rumors. 

INTERVIEWER 1: were the rumors? 

SUBJECT: Well, my cousin Oscar, the one that, uh, wrote a book, The House of Ashes, he was one of the few skeptics and one of the-- the few believers in-- in the horrible things that-- that came through, the horrible stories. Uh, and he's the only one that-- that heard about such a place as Treblinka. 

Uh, nobody else wanted to believe it, but he did believe it. So these stories had, uh, uh, permeated so-- some of the communities. But again, most people did not want to believe. I didn't know anything about it. I didn't know anything about it till that-- I personally-- till the small ghetto, uh, in, in the fall of '42. 

Uh, so when this proclamation came to Constantinof, that-- which was the second round for us, uh, we said, we already know what-- what that means. So we, uh, some of the family from that town had a very good friend, a-- a Polish friend, a farmer, who risked his life and decided to take us out, uh, back to the small ghetto where my brother was in Wojcieszow. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember his name? 

SUBJECT: Uh, all I remember is that he was [? Vatzik. ?] You know, that's all. Well, who by the way, uh, was shot after the war by Polish Underground, because he was helping Jews. OK, not by the Germans, but by-- by the Polish Underground. 

INTERVIEWER 1: which Underground? 

SUBJECT: The AK, Armia Krajowa. And, uh-- but he was a wonderful guy. All the way through he helped us for no money at all. He walked us back, which was about 30 miles, from Constantinof-- or maybe 30 kilometers. My distance maybe a little bit off. From-- from Constantinof to Wojcieszow, uh, my-- my-- my parents, my two brothers, and, uh, my cousin and his family back to Wojcieszow at night. And he knew that we had to make it at night, before-- before dawn so you're not get-- we won't get caught. 

And I remember walking and walking and walking as a kid, and my legs were giving away, but I kept walking through the fields. And sometimes the fields were cut, the wheat was cut, and it was rough. And some of us were walking barefoot. But we kept walking. 

Finally, I remember my little brother just laid down on the ground. He said, Mommy, I can't walk. He said, I remember he-- he said, you go. You save yourself. You go, but leave me here. He, um, but the Pole, this-- this Polish, uh, farmer picked him up-- picked him up on his back and carried him all the way, uh, so we would make it before dawn. And we arrived to this small town, to-- to Wojcieszow, to the small ghetto. And, uh, of course, everybody was happy to be together again, but not for very long, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your brother was there. 

SUBJECT: My brother was still there working. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many of you were together at that point? 

SUBJECT: Uh, in the family or the small ghetto? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, the family. 

SUBJECT: The family? All five of us now at this point. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you had seven brothers, so-- 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. I have two brothers and myself and my parents. My father, my dad, came from a seven-brother family. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sorry. 

SUBJECT: Yes. And they were all taken away, except for one who emigrated to the United States in 1939 just before the war. He's the only surviving brother. 

Uh, by this time in the small ghetto, uh, rumors have come through about what was really happening to all the deportations. There were some people who jumped a train and came back to this ghetto. There was one who, uh, somehow miraculously, um, escaped from Treblinka and told us exactly what the score was, that the gas-- gas chambers there, and that people are not being taken to a Jewish colony for work, that people were being burned and-- and gassed. 

Uh, as a matter of fact, he said, you don't even have to worry about your relatives being gassed. He said, first of all, not too many of them arrived alive there. He-- uh, we found out later that perhaps only about 500 out of 8,000 have actually arrived to Treblinka for gassing, that most of them were either shot on the way or died on the way in the trains from being packed into cattle trains and no air and no food. 

Uh, we-- I remember this-- the-- every morning, the, uh, linings up, supposedly-- well, most of the time for work in the morning. And every morning, we would just stand there and shiver. Is this it? Is this it? Is this the final day? Is this the final day? 

And when we saw that just some of us were taken away, we-- we knew that it was probably just for work. So we knew it was just a matter of days, a matter of hours. And there were little children running around and begging their parents to-- to please, uh, find a place for them to hide. I remember my little brother and my cousin, you know, running-- I want to live. I want to live. Daddy, Mommy. 

Finally, um, my dad was becoming really desperate, and, uh, decided-- uh, one of the policemen-- as a matter of fact, the policeman that had caught me, throw-- thrown me into jail had guilt feelings, and came and volunteered to my dad. He said that he would hide me out for no money at all, and took me into his house, to his apartment to hide out. At first, I was a little bit apprehensive. But then I was in no bargaining position, and I was so happy that I-- I could live, even for a month or two. 

So I was hiding out in his apartment in the bedroom, and when I heard anybody coming, I would run into-- open up the closet. It was like a wardrobe built in the room. Not a built-in closet, but a wardrobe. I would open the door and go inside. And sometimes I'd have to stay there for a day or two if the family had company. 

My, uh-- I found out later that my younger brother-- my dad found a-- a place for my younger brother in the countryside also. A peasant took him in. And, uh, the biggest news came was when my dad came and told me that, not to worry, that he also found a place for the three of them, also for my cousin's family, uh, in a stable underground, not far from the Bug River. 

Uh, a pit about 5' by 8', uh, dug underneath the stable, underneath the manure, uh, for them to hide out. And I thought that was fantastic. I was so happy that, uh, they found a place too, because I told them I didn't want to stay there unless they were safe as well. 

Uh, they got out, uh, just in time. As a matter of fact, when all of the sudden I heard shooting again of the-- this was of the small ghetto evacuation. Uh, I again-- I stood at the windows. The-- the-- the policemen's department was not very far from, uh, the small ghetto. The, um-- the big tall fence I could see from my window. 

So when I heard the shooting, again, I run to the-- I ran to the window, and I saw people climbing over the-- the fence and trying to run away. I saw a woman trying to hold on to the fence and jump down, and then I heard a shot, and I saw the German almost under my window shooting her, and she fell to the ground. I saw him chasing at a child, uh, running after him and-- and shooting him. 

Um, I was still a little bit worried as to what was-- was happening, uh, to my father, because I knew my father sent his fam-- the rest of the family away, but I knew he was still in the ghetto. And I found out later that he-- it's just so by chance, he happened to be outside of the ghetto when the, uh, evacuation started. And he, uh, that night, uh, ran away and-- and joined the rest of the family in the stable. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I-- I wanted to ask you about this policeman who hid you in his house. Did you ever speak with him or his family about why they were doing this to Jews? Did you speak at all with them? 

SUBJECT: I-- he-- he didn't-- he didn't quite know. He didn't quite know. Uh, all he knew is later on, he had some sort of remorse, uh, and feeling, uh, as to what was going on and what was happening, and he was willing to repent for it, and, uh, take me in. 

Uh, why he worked for the Germans, I don't know. Uh, all I know is, uh, they fed me well. And, uh, he actually risked his life. If he were caught, he probably would have been shot together with me. 

Um, I heard him also one night, um, talking to his wife and mentioning that he's probably going to be transferred. And, uh, the problem was, uh, myself again. What are they going to do with me? 

And so they discussed the matter, and they-- I heard them talking, and I heard his wife and himself discussing it. And then he finally said, there's only one solution, and that is to shoot her. Take her out and shoot her. 

Uh, the next morning, uh, I spent-- that time I started crying. They didn't know why, but I-- I, uh, started crying. And I-- I foolishly-- I remember that morning, like a foolish little child, I started, uh, undoing my sweater and taking out a couple of the gold pieces that my mother, uh, had sewn into my sweater for security. Uh, I remember when she thought we might get separated, each one of the children was sewn in a couple of gold pieces, saying, in case you ever need any money, uh, or to bribe somebody, use those. 

So I took them out and I laid it on the table and I said, here. Uh, you might be able to use it. I didn't want to tell them that I overheard a conversation at night. And, uh, he didn't quite know what to make of it. And he said, no, he didn't want it. He gave it back to me. Which meant to me that that's sure death. I can't even bribe him. 

Uh, I was with him for about four months, and somehow, uh, my dad and I always claimed some sort of, uh, uh, feelings or some sort of, uh, extra sensory perception. And, uh, he claims that on that same night that, uh, I was hearing that conversation and that I would spend my night crying that he knew exactly what was going on, and he sent a messenger, uh, to try and find out what was going on, what my status was. 

And the same guy, [? Vatzik, ?] who helped us previously came out and I said-- knocked on the window outside. And I saw him and I yelled out, take me away. And he took me away on his court-- on his cart with a horse-- horse-drawn cart. I remember him bringing me clothes that looked like peasant's clothes and-- and a scarf. And he put me on the-- on the cart and took me to my-- my dad's hiding place. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, I want to dwell on this Polish policeman a little bit. You-- what was the family like that you were living with four months? Were there children? Did you speak with the children? What was the-- what were the circumstances? 

SUBJECT: I-- I-- I was part of the family. They treated me very well. Um, they had a-- a small child, about one or two years old. Uh, and I was fed well. And most of the time, uh, we didn't spend time discussing, uh, philosophy or why or what. I was just grateful of-- for being alive. Uh, and, uh, I never really asked questions even. Uh, I would sometimes sit and read. 

Uh, I knew they were frightened. Sometimes when, uh, somebody would come in, um, they would purposely open the door to the bedroom to show that there was nobody there, uh, that-- that nobody was hiding, because they were afraid that somebody might have peeked in through the window or my-- somebody might have spotted me. As a matter of fact, one time, uh, another policeman opened the door and saw me there, and they had to make up a story that some cousin from Siedlce, from another town, uh, came to visit. 

Uh, so they were scared. They were scared, uh, as well as I was scared. Uh, but I remember at Christmas time, there was a big festivity, and their-- her parents came to visit, and, uh, I was part of, uh, the big meal, and was sitting and, um, having-- you know, having supposedly a lot of fun. 

Uh, when I-- I-- when I joined my family, naturally, I was very happy. And I thought it was just the greatest thing to be together, and, uh, to be underground. And I thought it was so clever the way the-- the pit was built. It was about 5' by 8' with the boards propping up the-- the ceiling and some of the sides-- side walls. 

And, uh, there were two long ben-- benches on the side and one bench in the middle. The bench in the middle served as a, uh, table in the daytime. It was raised up. 

And at night, that middle bench was, uh, was leveled with the other two benches so that we were able to sleep sideways, eight of us. My parents, my older brother and I, my cousin Oscar and his sister Belle, and his parents, and their parents. Uh, and my younger brother was not too far away from us. 

And we stayed there for about, um-- well, for them, it was almost two years. For me, it was about 15-- 15 months. Uh, the meal-- the-- the food consisted of, uh, morning coffee made from burned grain, um, and a loaf of bread for eight people every other day. 

Uh, lunch consisted of soup and occasionally some potatoes in it. And supper was, again, uh, coffee, that coffee pot from the burned grain. They used to burn the wheat to make the coffee. 

And, uh, if we wanted to take a bath or wash our hair, we had to use our share of-- of coffee. uh, or even wash our clothes, we have to-- had to use that. We had all kinds of problems, sanitary problems. 

Uh, if we, uh-- we used the upstairs, the, uh, level of the animals, uh, for, uh, sanitary facilities. And, uh, also for the big treat of being, uh, out and getting-- getting fresh air. We only could go out one at a time, because in case of danger, we had to get in very quickly and close the opening. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You have some pictures of the farm. 

SUBJECT: Yes. There-- this is a picture of the stable where we were hiding out. Uh, this is the farmer and his two young daughters. They had three young daughters. One of them is not pictured. Uh, it had a thatched roof and, um, very, um, kind of old-fashioned stable. And inside-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who took that picture and when? 

SUBJECT: Uh, this, he-- this, the farmer sent us. Where? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When-- when did he take that picture? 

SUBJECT: When did he take this? This was taken after we were-- uh, it must have been taken in 1945. This must have been taken in 1945. And this is, uh, inside the stable. Uh, and it was just about this corner under the manure where the opening was to get inside, uh, underneath the ground. Uh, the way-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just hold it a little longer. 

SUBJECT: OK. Uh, the way we could get in was, uh, the-- the door, the little-- the little door, which was about the size of a-- a small chair was propped up with a pole, with a perpendicular pole, uh, for-- for air. And the minute we heard any noise, that pole came down, the door would close, and, uh, we were sealed in, uh, almost without air. A couple of times, people were passing out because there was no air at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let-- let me understand, if you will, the-- the-- the pit. Who dug the pit? Describe the pit. Was the pit always there? 

SUBJECT: No, the pit was not always there. This farmer was a very poor farmer. Uh, and, uh, when the idea of-- came about of possibly hiding out eight Jews, this, uh, good farmer, [? Vatzik, ?] negotiated with him for money, that ev-- we would pay him so much a month to hide out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know what amount? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember what amount, but I know at that time, uh, Polish zlotys weren't worth anything, but anybody who-- they were usually-- people were-- had. uh, some sort of, uh, currency in Polish ruble in Ger-- Russian rubles. So there were so many rubles per month that-- and it was a very complex sort of organization. 

There were actually three units of, uh, hiding places, hiding out. Two in-- in stables and one in a forest of about maybe 30 Jews all together who had contact with each other. And our particular one, uh, with eight people underground was negotiated by this good Pole that we were talking about before, the farmer. 

Uh, he agreed, the-- the farmer agreed to do that, um, for money and dug out-- he and some help, I think, with my cousin and some others, dug out the-- the earth from underground and, um, propped up with the boards. And, uh, the manure was laid on top so that it looked-- it was the same level as the whole stable, the ground, uh, where the animals were running right over us. So nobody could tell that there was anything going on under-- underneath. 

And the farmer usually brought in the food for the animals anyway, so the neighbors thought that, uh, the food was for animals. Not for-- for anybody that he was hiding out. He was very much afraid of anybody finding out, Poles particularly, because they would, uh, usually squeal or tell that, uh, there are Jews there, and everybody would be killed, including the farmer himself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: His family? They didn't know? 

SUBJECT: Yes, the wife knew. As a matter of fact, uh, uh, he told us he-- that, um, before he even took us in, he told us that he went home. And, uh, he was rather crude and uneducated, uh, but at times, quite amusing. He's told us that he went home and beat his wife and children so that they would never ever tell anybody that they're hiding out Jews. 

So the whole family did know, and any time if there was any danger-- and very many times there were raids, uh, specifically for our barn-- because sometimes he would get drunk and talk about Jews, uh, that he's hiding out Jews, but they didn't really know where. 

Uh, so anytime there was danger, uh, we heard a knock on the door, and we knew we had to get down. Even the little one, the little five-year-old girl would knock and, uh, we-- we would hide. We know that it was a sign to get down underground. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your brother-- your little brother wasn't with you. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was where? 

SUBJECT: He was a few miles away with another farmer who-- who hid him for, again, for-- for no money at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This pit, what were the walls lined with, or how were you protected from the cold or the heat? Or what light did you have down there? Water-- not even water, what? 

SUBJECT: OK. Uh, it was about 5' by eight feet. Uh, if, uh, I-- I was lucky that I'm short and still am, but when I stood up, I-- I could stand like this with my-- my head bent. So it must have been about maybe four-- at that time, maybe four or five feet high. 

Um, we had some straw to put down on the-- on the benches for the night to sleep. Uh, we slept sideways. So if one person had to-- to turn over, everybody else had to turn over. Um, the air we got through that hole, that-- that-- the entranceway. Uh, the insulation consisted mostly of straw and, uh, and, uh, boards, wooden boards. The temperature was more or less even all year round because, uh, being underground, and also the insulation from-- from the straw and manure on top. 

We did get water occasionally, so we'd stand there and mop up with a-- or pick it up with-- with a cup or something and pour it back out. Sometimes that was a full occupation for a daily occupation. The manure did seep through sometimes, and we'd have to find ways of plugging it up. 

Uh, I also remember getting sick one time, and I got a urine infection-- a bladder infection. Uh, I remember running a high temperature, and, uh, I was in danger of, uh, losing my life. And my mother made all kinds of plans, uh, try to bribe the peasant to take me to a doctor for money. And I remember her negotiating, and he didn't want to do it. And, uh, finally one day, I woke up and I said, Mom, I'm not sick anymore. And I was fine. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The benches. The benches. Were they wood? I mean-- 

SUBJECT: They were wood. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you slept-- I don't understand the sleeping arrangement. 

SUBJECT: Well, there were three long benches that at night became all one level. During the day, there were two benches on the side and-- and that one middle one was raised, uh, to be-- to make a table. And four of us sat on one side. Four of us sat on the other side, you know, with our knees bent. 

Uh, During the night, that-- that bench went down to-- that table went down to the level of the sitting benches and made-- joined together and made, uh, a, a-- sleeping arrangements. So we had to turn sideways in order to make, uh, room for all eight of us. 

But, uh, I remember there was also one part that was a little bit raised, uh, where, uh, one person could sleep, uh, or get up there during the day. Uh, but they were hard. That's where-- where we slept for almost two years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No light? 

SUBJECT: Light? Yes, there was a lantern. A, uh-- a, uh-- what was called, nafta, I guess it's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Kerosene. 

SUBJECT: Kerosene. And, uh, one day, uh, when-- when we heard any noise or anything, we would-- we would turn it off. And, uh, one day the-- somebody knocked the kerosene lamp over and a fire started. And then everybody ran out. I remember my cousin and I were the first ones out. And, uh, three people stayed inside and somehow, uh, put it out. But if they hadn't, they probably would have been burned. And 

Uh, we had raids, actual raids by Germans that came around. They were poking in the straw and in the manure, and didn't find anything. And one time, uh, we, uh, ran short of oxygen, and, uh, we were almost dying from lack of it. But we started, uh-- because we couldn't get it open. The Germans stayed there for almost a whole day. And, uh, we managed to pull out some stones from the-- from the foundation to get some air. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now in daylight-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have daylight? 

SUBJECT: Uh, not daylight. No, not in the-- only-- only when-- the big treat was for somebody to go upstairs to the level of the animals. Uh, so one or two at a time would be allowed to go up there, and then we would take turns. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you used the kerosene lamp in day-- daylight? 

SUBJECT: Daylight, yes. During the day. Yes. During the day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- you know, you spent there 16-- 

SUBJECT: Activities? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. What did you do? How did you get along? 

SUBJECT: Well, we, uh, created our own humor. Uh, we told each other stories. Uh, my brother, uh, had a famous activity of, uh, uh, having fly contests or fly races. You know, put a straw under the wing and see which fly moves faster. 

My cousin, uh, my-- the two female cousins, uh, bribed my-- my-- bribed Oscar, the one who kept a diary of, uh, of the war in hiding, the author of The House of Ashes, which was published in 1964, we talked him into teaching us, uh, language and-- and-- and, uh, math. And he bargained for paper. He said, if you can get me paper, I will give you lessons in those things. 

So it meant that we had to bargain with the peasant. So I bargained with the peasant. We used our wits, that the war was going to finish very soon, that he was going to become very rich, and-- and the Americans are going to come down and-- and make movies, and so forth. And I, uh, took off my gold earrings and gave them to get him paper. So he, uh, uh, brought some paper for him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What made you think the Americans were going to come and make movies? 

SUBJECT: Oh, we-- we-- we dreamed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I know, but why that? 

SUBJECT: Why that? Uh, because, uh, naturally, we thought that once we survive, the whole world will-- will-- will welcome us and-- and-- and, uh, try to amend for-- for the sins that-- that took place, that, uh, that were allowed to take place. And that we would be whipped off, uh, on a golden plane of-- to someplace, and-- and live happily after. And-- and there will be no more-- no more war ever. Uh, we dreamed. We dreamed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your cousin really was conducting classes? 

SUBJECT: Yes. From his head mostly, because we didn't have books. He was, uh, a good eight years older than we were perhaps, and, uh, smarter and, uh, more experienced. He had been one of the lucky ones who went to a Polish gymnasium, which was, uh, unusual for a-- a little town like ours. So, uh, I remember going to him even during the war when we had to have, uh, tutors. Uh, I ran out of things to learn. And I remember the last thing I asked him to teach me was English, because he had known some. 

Uh, as a matter of fact, uh, some of the-- he himself and his father were going crazy for lack of, uh, activities. And he one night risked his life and went to one of the ghettos that was still existing. Uh, it was a good 40 miles away or so. Uh, or maybe kilometers. And, uh, went to that town and-- to get books. And he came back with a sack full of-- of books. So naturally, we read the-- read-- read these books over and over and over again. Another, uh, treat for-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember what book you read? What [INAUDIBLE] class and what you learned in the pit? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I-- I learned plain arithmetic, I believe. And perhaps, uh, we got into algebra. And, uh, he taught us the Polish language. and, uh, a little bit of English. Uh, we also, uh-- the books we read were mostly in Yiddish. I think it was Sholem Asch and so forth. 

Uh, one of the other treats for us was usually if we could get away to one of the other hiding places, the one-- the one either in the forest or the other one in-- in-- in another stable, and, uh, we had a system whereby-- well, since we were afraid that the-- of the Polish farmer, that he could possibly kill us and take our-- our-- our-- our money away, uh, he was told that the money was not with us, that the money was with another hiding place, and that, uh, one of the people from the other hiding place would come once a month and bring the money. 

And we did that. We had that system of rotation. Some of the younger men would do that for-- for security. But only about half of all the three hiding places survived because there were raids. One of them died-- one of the people died in another hiding place. But the people in the forest didn't fare very well, because besides the German, uh, raids, they also had the Polish Underground raids, and, uh, half of them were killed by the Polish Underground raids. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you aware of the passage of time? 

SUBJECT: Well, naturally, yes. We were, because, uh, the biggest treat was of when, uh, a newspaper came in. Uh, and every time that the farmer went to market, we put in our order-- our order. We would give him something extra to-- to bring a paper for us. And we would follow the war. 

And, uh, I remember the big heading of Stalingrad. And, um, so we were always-- and also, we had to feed him information to-- to encourage him that-- that there was an end to all this. Because several times, he came in and he said, no more. You're getting out tonight. I'm chasing you out. Uh, I'm not risking my life anymore. Besides, we ran out of money. 

And, uh, uh, I think the last three months or so, we didn't have any more money to give him. And he wanted to chase us out, and we kept on encouraging him that there will be money after we get out, and we'll pay him back, and this sort of thing. And that war was almost over, and we'd show him the headlines in-- in German, which he couldn't read anyway. 

And, uh, finally one day, he was a good mood. I think maybe some good news came through or some-- some other farmer told him that the Russians were coming close. And he came in and he said, well, maybe we're-- we're making it after all. 

He says, I'm not chasing you out anymore. He said, I now like you, he says. You're almost like-- you're almost as good as my cow and my-- my sheep and my-- and my-- my-- my pigs. He says, I've gotten used to you, he said. 

As a matter of fact, one day for my birthday, he-- 

[AUDIO OUT] 

