CREW: About a minute, 

CREW: What? 

CREW: About one minute. 

CREW: I'll go to 20. 

CREW: Minutes about 26. Why? You need a stopwatch? 

CREW: No, it's just a nice round number, 0 to 20. 

CREW: Well, this is about my normal voice level, but I'm-- 

CREW: John, whenever you're ready. 

CREW: We rolling? OK 

INTERVIEWER: OK. They've started, so you can say-- 

SUBJECT: I was born in Slovakia, in a small town called Kosiche When Hitler invaded Czechoslovakia, this part of the country was given to Hungary. And so really, we were affected by the war only the last year, last two years, because up to this point, the Hungarian government more or less protected the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you say a little bit about what it was like for you growing up in this town in Slovakia? 

SUBJECT: I was-- we were always very much aware that we are Jews and we are not part of the rest of the population. There were many times anti-Semitic outbursts at school, for example. After the religious lesson, those few Jewish students that happened to be in the class would be always scared to go back, because inevitably they would scream at us, you killed Jesus, et cetera, et cetera. And it was always-- I guess the priest was explaining them that we did kill Jesus. 

So we were not part of the rest of the world. We lived apart. And we had our own values, and they were quite different. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe your family somewhat, who was in it? 

SUBJECT: My family was very religious. And they brought us up with this idea that the people and the world is basically good and decent. And I always felt that no harm can come to me. I grew up sort of trusting people, because around me I saw very sincere and religious people that-- that meant no harm. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean within the Jewish community? 

SUBJECT: Within the Jewish community, yes. I mean, I don't remember ever having in Europe one non-Jewish friend, even though we went to school together. We didn't invite each other to our homes. They-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents made it clear to you to not get involved with any of the friends from-- any of the people from school who weren't Jewish. 

SUBJECT: It wasn't necessary. Somehow it never happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you had your whole-- 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: But you went to school with the non-Jewish children. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: And were there religious lessons in that school? 

SUBJECT: There were. But we, the Jews, went out when these religious lessons happened. We had our religious lessons elsewhere. We went afternoons to Beit Ya'akov And that's where we got our religious Jewish lessons. It was not part of the school program. They provided religious lessons only for the non-Jewish children. 

INTERVIEWER: And what business was your father in? 

SUBJECT: My father was the manager of a small oil company in this town where we lived. 

INTERVIEWER: And brothers or sisters? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I had-- we were six, and two adopted children, children of his brother were-- unfortunately, the mother committed suicide due to happenings, war happenings. And so then my father adopted them. And they lived with us, so we were eight. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Now from this childhood where you lived within your own community and felt some anti-Semitism as to religious lessons and around the school, when did you first begin to hear or see that things were changing from that point before the war? 

SUBJECT: When one night my father brought home from the shul a man. He was a Polish Jew, a refugee. And he was telling us what is happening in Poland and about the camps and about the ghettos. 

And it was so terrible. And my father wanted us children to be there and hear it. But somehow, we could hardly believe it's true. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- do you remember what you heard? 

SUBJECT: Well, he said that Jews are being sent to gas chambers and that the Germans are killing us indiscriminately and that-- it's the first time that I heard about Mein Kampf and the program that Hitler set out for himself to eliminate the Jews. 

And it was so terrible that I remember I was a young child. I could not believe it. It thought, it's impossible. And my father's reaction was, but the Germans, their nature, they're a country with culture. It's impossible. That was our reaction. 

And somehow afterwards my father and the rest of the Jews felt that maybe this man exaggerated. It was so terrible that we could hardly believe it. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you then? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I could have been 13. 

INTERVIEWER: So you're just becoming an adolescent, a teenager. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: And your father wanted the children to be there with you-- to be there with him to hear this. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know why? 

SUBJECT: I guess he wanted us-- he wanted us to know and be aware what is happening around us in the world. 

INTERVIEWER: And he couldn't believe it then afterwards either. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he say to you, the children? 

SUBJECT: Well, afterwards his reaction, even though he could hardly believe, I asked permission to go to the movies afterwards. And his reaction towards me was, how can you? How can you even think of going to the movies when you heard what's happening to our people? 

So I said, but is it really true? So he said, the biggest part of it must be true. But you know, really, you have to realize, it was too terrible to believe at this moment. 

INTERVIEWER: So your feeling was that-- you felt that it was not-- 

SUBJECT: I thought that people cannot act like that. I felt, you know, it's practically impossible. And later, when I was caught by the gestapo, once more my reaction was a little bit similar. I still felt that they cannot really harm me, because-- because I just could not imagine that people could act this way. I was very naive. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, it sounds like your father also did not want or couldn't believe the whole of it. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- and your mother's reaction? 

SUBJECT: My mother was very sad. And she did not talk too much in front of us. She was very sad and very upset. 

INTERVIEWER: You could feel her sadness? 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think that sadness was about? 

SUBJECT: Well, I guess she was scared for all of us, as mothers always are. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. This brings up pain or sadness now when you think about it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened then? What-- 

SUBJECT: Well, afterwards, we still lived for some years relatively peacefully. More and more rumors, of course, emerged. And we had to realize that these things are actually happening. 

And then at one point, the Germans forced the government to resign. They set up a new government. And this one was tremendously anti-Jewish. And they consented to deportations. 

And this is when we started being affected. The first thing was that Judenrat, which was set up in every city, told my father that they will set up their headquarters in our apartment and through that we will be protected. 

And the same night, someone came over from Slovakia, my father's friend and business associate, illegally. And then my father told him, he said, you are crazy to believe it. 

He said, you will go one day after the rest of the Jews go to the ghetto. He said, your house is full of children. What did you do all these years? Did you not realize that-- what is going on and so on? Why didn't you do something? 

And my father could never allow any of us to leave and to be parted from the rest of the family. And this friend said, oh, don't you know what's happening to the Jewish girls when they are fairly pretty? They send them to the border. It was for their soldiers. 

Well, this was to terrible for my father. And he actually-- well, he was very desperate and then he said, well, what am I to do? And this man said, at least for the three older girls, I could arrange something. 

They should-- if they managed to get out of the city, then someone will wait for them at the foot of the hills. And we'll conduct them to a peasant. We will hide them for a day or two. And then I will bring them to my hometown and I will provide them with false papers and they have a chance, at least. 

And he wanted my older brother to come along too. But he refused. He didn't want to leave the family. He was two years older than me, but he felt that his place is with the family. 

And my feelings were-- I remember I felt I am selfish, but I wanted so much to live and I wanted to go. So this is what happened. My two sisters were disguised as peasant girls. And this friend of ours said that I should just go dressed as I am, as a student, because he felt I am too young and I might get into trouble as it was. 

And so the whole city was sort of surrounded by soldiers. And in order to get out, you had to show some papers. We didn't have them. We had only our original Jewish papers. 

And somehow, we got through, each woman separately. When I came to these two soldiers that were guarding the bridge or whatever and I had to go through it, they asked me, where are you going? I said, yes, but I would like to go beyond the bridge where there are soldiers stationed. And one of them is my boyfriend. I'm going visiting him. 

And so they started laughing, both of them. And they said, does your mother know that you have a boyfriend? And I said, no. So they said, you cannot go. You are too young. You are too young to have a boyfriend. Go back. 

And so I started pleading, but please let me go. I'll come back, et cetera. And, well, they thought it's a joke. And so they said, OK, if you promise to be back within an hour, you can go. And so this is how I got out. 

INTERVIEWER: Had you prepared this in any way or did you make it up entirely on the spot? 

SUBJECT: Now, I didn't prepare anything. I didn't know what to expect. 

INTERVIEWER: You just made up like that. 

SUBJECT: It was just at the spur of the moment. I didn't know what I'm going to say. And it just happened. 

And then someone was waiting for us, for me and my sister. My other sister went on a different road altogether. She was met by someone else. 

And we were brought to this peasant's peasant home, where we were hidden. And I should say one of our distant relatives also came with us. He was a man, young man with two or three children. And his wife was already in Slovakia. 

And before we left, my father begged him to take care of us. And he promised that he will. And this was my first encounter what people will do when they are in danger. 

The same night as we were hidden at this peasant's home, someone came and said that the peasant was denounced that he's hiding Jews and his soldiers are coming to look for us. And of course, he got just as scared as us. And he pushed us up to the-- in these peasant homes, underneath the roof there was always hay. That was the storage room for hay. 

So he said we should go up there and hide in the hay and not utter one word, even if they come with forks and so on. So we went up there. And he covered us well with hay. And this relative of ours said to us, you stay in the front. You are younger and you don't have children, so if the soldiers hit you, please do not say that I am behind. 

And for me, it was somehow so shocking that just some hours ago he promised my father to take care of us. And then just five hours later, because his life was just as much in danger as ours, he was ready to have us as a shield and he should survive. But actually, what happened when the soldiers arrived, the peasant started drinking with them. And by the time they came up, they were tremendously drunk. 

And he said, I don't hide Jews. You can see it. And so they did a few-- they tried to put their forks into the hay, but nothing hit us and they went away. 

INTERVIEWER: And when you could hear them come in, do you remember what it was like for you? 

SUBJECT: I was very, very frightened. I was terribly frightened. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this your first encounter with that kind of fear-- 

SUBJECT: Right 

INTERVIEWER: --more than you felt with the guards. 

SUBJECT: That's right. And I did not feel anything, really, because somehow I felt the worst thing that can happen, that they'll send me back, because there was always this feeling in me that it's not right that I should be saved. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you say more about that? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's just you realize-- you hope that nothing will happen to the family, but you realize that they are in great danger. And it's a feeling of guilt, you know, that you feel they should go through whatever and you should not be part of it. So in a sense, you always feel it. 

INTERVIEWER: You feel-- 

SUBJECT: Even though I argued in my head that every Jew that can be saved should be saved, because I thought, is it our lot to be killed or should we march without protest to be slaughtered? You know, this was my argument for myself. But I also realized that I wanted to live very much. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were very torn in a certain way? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: One way you said you felt guilt, and one way you said you wanted to survive. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: And this was going on during the time, or did you think of this after? 

SUBJECT: No. It was going on during the time, because I remember it very well when I was finally caught and I was very upset that I was caught. Nevertheless, there was a feeling of relief too in me. I told myself, well, now I am like the rest of my people. So there was fear, but also a relief. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. What then happened after the guards left? 

SUBJECT: Well, then the following day, this man sent a car for us. And we were driven into town and the guards were sort of paid off. And we had no papers. They did not check our papers. It was all arranged. 

And for about a week we were hidden in his home. And then afterwards, in between he had ways and means to get false papers for us, because there was a whole Jewish underground working on these things, trying to provide people like us with false papers. 

So once we got these papers, he placed my sister in the home of one of his non-Jewish friends, as a maid. They knew that she is Jewish. And I started working-- I wasn't trained for anything-- as a cashier in a store, non-Jewish store. But I think the owner also knew that I'm Jewish. That's why he consented to give me a job. 

And my living quarters were with a former Jewish maid, who was very, very devoted to her mistress. And she also knew I am Jewish. And actually, she was the one who warned me. Shortly-- it was a small town and every new face was very visible. 

So some months afterwards, she came one day to the store where I worked. And she said that one of the people, a tenant in the house, a young teacher, asked her, who is this young girl who lives with you? And she said, an orphan from the nearby villages. 

And he said, well, she's too young to work. And she said, well, she's an orphan. She has no one. She has to work. 

He said, yeah, she could be one of those Jewish girls that are hiding. And she said, what are you talking about? She doesn't look Jewish. And he said, many of them don't Jewish. I will denounce her and they can investigate. 

So that was in the morning. And she came right away to the store and said, do not come back, because I know that this man is going to denounce you. 

So I went straight to my sister and I told her. And she was five years older. 

INTERVIEWER: And how old were you then? 

SUBJECT: I was going to be 16. And so she said, you know, I will go with you. And so just the way we were, we-- we anyways didn't have much clothes, because we didn't bring anything. We took the next train and we went to the capital city, which was Bratislava. And we thought we will disappear easier in a big city. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Then before we go into that part of the history, I want to know how long were you working as the cashier and living in that way, about? Her. 

SUBJECT: I think-- I think about three, four months. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Now, this was the first time that you were away from your parents. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. Do you remember what it was like for you during that time, what your days and nights were like, what you thought about? 

SUBJECT: I-- I was-- I had my sister, right, so that was a great support. And she was-- she was starting-- trying to be very protective and sort of like a mother to me. 

We were both of us very unhappy. I mean, we didn't dare to show it really to the outside world, for fear that the will see that we are upset. So we just tried to carry on normally. And we would-- we would speak about our worry only between ourselves. 

INTERVIEWER: And do you remember at all some of the conversations you had, or some of the ways you gave each other strength? 

SUBJECT: We were always hoping that our family will survive. We thought, you know, that the war cannot last. It was already lasting for 4 years at that time, so we thought that our chance might be that Russians and Americans were pushing forward and that we will be liberated before the Germans have any time to harm our families. That's what we thought. 

INTERVIEWER: That's what you thought. And what year was this in? 

SUBJECT: 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: So you were hearing things all around you about-- 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. I mean, that was part of our life. I mean, to listen secretly to the London radio, this was the highlight of the day, because we were not allowed to. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. Did you hear things from the people who came into the store too? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I heard many times anti-Semitic comments, like finally the city is clean, and-- because there were always some Jews that had special privileges. They were important for the economy or whatever. But there came a point when no Jew stayed anymore in the city, only some, very few that went underground. 

The friend of my father also had to leave the city. I mean, he was warned by the police chief who was a friend of his. And he went underground. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you respond when you heard people saying that? 

SUBJECT: Well, we just tried not to react, not to show any emotion. And we tried to-- I tried to pretend as if I would not hear it. 

INTERVIEWER: It must have been hard. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was. It was, but I also felt-- I felt that this is my way to fight the Germans. You know, I always gave myself courage. I told myself, it's like being a soldier in any other situation. And I was happy that I could deceive them. I mean, it did give me joy that no one suspected. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, it seems that from your initial contact with the border guards, the guards around who you convinced you were going to see your boyfriend through now being a cashier, a lot depended on your ability to deceive-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --to fool the people around you. 

SUBJECT: That's right. But also, one discovers that it if one has to, it's not so difficult. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. Yes. When you need to. 

SUBJECT: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, during this time where you were putting up this front and listening with your sister to all the news, did you hear more talk about the things that were being done to the Jews? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Not any more, because we were totally cut off, right? 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't hear the people in the city talking about perhaps things they had heard about what was going on with the Jews. 

SUBJECT: No. I find that it did not interest them at all. And the only thing really that interested them, to get their hands on Jewish properties. The rest, not at all. 

I would say in a way similar than how much sleep did we lose over the boat people or other tragedies, even though we were upset? So you know, that reaction was the same. They did not give a damn what happens to the Jews. Plus, the Slovaks are notoriously anti-Semitic, which doesn't mean that some of them didn't help us. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. Well, you were at the point of trying to disappear or thinking about disappearing in the whole city. 

SUBJECT: Well, actually, my late husband, whom I met while living at-- on false papers, had a brilliant idea. He was a young man, though he was older than me. When we came to this capital city, he said, in order to be safe, you will have to live just in the middle where the Germans are living. 

And I said, I mean, you are crazy. I mean, how am I to do that? He said, well, first of all, you two cannot live together, because we look quite similar but our papers were from different regions and on different names. 

So he said, anyone who would come and ask for your papers would see right away that you are sisters. So my sister he placed with one of his family's friends who lived underground. I mean, she was from the city. She had false papers. But she could not go out and shop or show herself on the street, because people might recognize her. 

So she needed someone like my sister, who could function. And so my sister shared the apartment with her. She made the shopping and so on and so forth. 

And there was an ad in the papers. And it was-- I forget his name, but he was a Slovak writer, a great anti-Semite, because he wrote anti-Semitic books. And my husband said, you should go and try and apply for one of the rooms that he wants to rent. 

And so I went. And he was living with his brother and a sister, and was a huge, very beautiful apartment. 

INTERVIEWER: Ok Mrs. Bauer let me-- when he'd said to you, you should live with this-- go to the room they had, and he was a renowned anti-Semite, how did you feel? 

SUBJECT: Oh. I did not feel bad. I was curious, you know. By this time, I gained a lot of confidence, because like I said people, did not suspect that I am Jewish. 

So when I came to this place and I said I would like to rent one of his rooms, and he said, can I see your papers? And I said, certainly. But why do want to see them? 

Oh, so he was studying and studying it. And he said, well, you have to excuse me, but I have to be careful because some of the Jews are hiding and trying to get into our clean homes, et cetera. 

So I said, I understand, of course. And so he studied my papers. But I knew that someone who is not an expert can not see really whether my papers are false or not. I could answer his questions easily. And so he gave me back my papers. 

And I really was safe there, because by this time, the Russians were sort of moving closer and closer. And there wasn't a day when they didn't make searches in this district, that district. But never, where I was, because this was such a safe man. No one would suspect that he could hide any undesirable person in his house. 

INTERVIEWER: And how long were you there? 

SUBJECT: I can't remember. Was four, five months, and finally, what led to our downfall, this person with-- the person that shared the apartment with my sister became very frightened because the Russians were starting to bombard the city. And she could not go down to the shelter. She was afraid that anyone might recognize her. 

So we thought that the best thing would be if she would go to the mountains, where the nuns would rent rooms to city people who tried to escape the bombardments. And so we brought her up one evening to this nunnery, where she rented a room. And we would visit her every Sunday. 

So one Sunday my sister told me to-- because on Sunday I would come to her to her apartment-- I should stay at home and prepare lunch and she is going to visit our friend. And by noon she will be back, because you could take the train to the mountains and be back by noon. 

So I did it. And by noon she wasn't back. By 2 o'clock, I took the train and went up to the mountains myself to see what happened. And this friend, who was much older than us, she was already then, I don't know, 35, 40, she said for heaven's sake, don't go back to the apartment, because she surely is caught. 

I said, it's impossible. I mean, I just couldn't believe it. And she said, please, I beg you. Promise me, go home to your place, but don't go back to the apartment. 

Well, I was stubborn and I went back to the apartment. And as soon as I turned the key and opened the door, two men jumped at me and handcuffed me. And they were, oh, the Slovak gestapo. They were called Hlinka-Gardes. 

And later, I discovered that, yes, they caught my sister. And what they would do then, they would sit and wait in people's apartments to see who else would come. And this way, they might catch another Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: So it worked and they got you. So what happened? 

SUBJECT: So I still wasn't frightened. I said, I'm not Jewish and how do you dare to do that to me and so on and so forth. They said, well, you will explain it all at the headquarters. 

And when we came there, they brought me to a room. There were three or four young men there. And they told me that I should confess whether I am Jewish or not. 

And I said, I'm not Jewish. So they said they have ways and means to get it out from me. And I said, well, what ways? And they said they would beat me. 

And so I said, well, you wouldn't lay hands on a young girl, at which point, the whole room started laughing, as if I would have said the biggest joke in the world. And I looked at them. And I realized for the first time that, yes, they mean business. 

INTERVIEWER: What made you realize it when you looked at them? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: When they started laughing so very brutally, you feel, you realize that they are brutal people and they would not hesitate to do anything. And in between, they took away my coat. And in the hem of my coat, before we left my mother sewed in my real birth certificate, because she was so very unhappy that her children should go away and live on false papers and no one knows our real name, et cetera. We have to have something that would still show who we are. So this is what she did. 

And of course, they found it. And I thought that-- they told me that my sister is already dead. And I thought-- I thought they are going to send me somewhere to a concentration camp. 

But instead, they kept me for a week. And they wanted to know whom else I know who is Jewish. And I guess-- this was a very terrible week for me. 

So from this point on, every night I would-- I would be brought up for interrogation. And I-- I was petrified. But even more petrified that I will-- I was petrified that I will betray someone, because I didn't know if I-- if would be able to take it. 

And so after they brought me back, I would cry quite strongly in the cellar. And one night, as they brought me up, they brought down on the stair a young man. And he was so badly beaten that he could not walk. They had to carry him. 

And so when-- when they brought me back and he heard me cry, so he tapped on the board. And he said, don't despair. You know, take courage. It's not the end. 

And I kept on saying, I-- I don't want to be killed by them. I-- I don't mind anymore if I die, but not by German hands. So he would sort of tell me always cheering words. 

And for me, the most terrible thing was always the waiting. I couldn't sleep at night. During the day, I-- I was brought up to clean this commissar's office. 

And so I got no rest at all. I finally reached such a point of exhaustion that I hardly could function. And then one day, as I was cleaning his office, I went to the window. It was on the second floor. 

And I looked out. And I told myself, what if I jump? I may die, but I-- I may have a chance. And I looked around how the streets are going and which way I could jump. 

And at this point, the door opened and he came in. And he saw me at the window. And he said, oh, you would like to jump out. 

And he said, I can-- I can put you out of your misery. And he pulled out his gun and put it to my head. And he said, I can shoot you in a minute like we do it with all the Jews. 

And somehow, at this minute, I-- terrible fright came over me that, yes, my light can be-- life can be ended just in one second. And the idea was so terrible and unbearable, I thought myself, I didn't believe it. It's impossible that this man can kill me. 

And I-- I became so weak I thought I will faint. But some instinct in me said if I faint, he surely will kill me. So I just did not answer and I tried to say this moment will pass. This moment will pass. 

And finally, he took away the gun. And he said, I don't need to make a messy job here. You will be dead anyways, but not in my office. And well, he didn't shoot me. 

And then afterwards, I kept on asking what happened to my sister. And they always told me she's dead. So this made me terribly unhappy. 

One nice morning, I though, you know, I will never escape from there. I thought at this point my only worry was that I should not betray any Jew. 

One morning, they came for us, for me and this young man. We were the last prisoners at-- at this terrible place. And they handcuffed me to him. And they said we are going to be sent somewhere. They wouldn't tell us where. 

And so we got four soldiers as guards. And what we did not know is they were sending us to a concentration camp in Slovakia. And from there, eventually to Theresienstadt. We didn't know where we are going. 

But I remember one incident that was again quite comical, but also-- also terrible to me. We were changing trains. And all the train stations were already in German hands. 

And our guards left us in one corner. And they went to eat supper. The train was not in yet, the next one. 

And suddenly, this German commander of the train station came over to us. And he asked me, what did you do? You are so young. What crime did you commit that they-- that they lead you like that? 

And I said, I didn't do anything. I am Jewish. And he was very disturbed. I mean, he was a middle-aged man and I could speak to him German. 

And he came back and forth. He said, but you are too young. You are too young. And he started saying, where are your guards, did you eat and so on? Obviously he was agitated that he wanted to do something for me. 

So I said, well, they went with supper. Did you eat? I said no. So he was furious. He dragged the guards back and said, how do you take care of your prisoners? Why did you not provide them with supper? 

And still he was walking back and forth. And he says, I don't understand it. I don't understand it. He said, but if the Fuhrer does it, he must be right. 

And he said, you know, there is one consolation for you. If you have to die, you go straight to heaven, because you are-- you are too young to have done anything bad. And so I took courage. And I said, could you not free us? 

And so he sort of looked at me like that. He said, but that's the Fuhrer's wish. And so I realized that, you know, there is absolutely no point in-- in talking to him. I just saw that he was agitated, moved. But he never thought that he should free us, that it's in his power. 

INTERVIEWER: What was-- what were your thoughts about that? Did you-- did it make an impact on you that he could feel for you but if the Fuhrer said-- 

SUBJECT: Not-- not really. When-- when he told me that, you know, if I die, I go straight to heaven, in my heart I hated him just as much as if he-- as if-- as-- as all the gestapo, because I told myself he's no better. Even though he feels for me, but still is not-- he still claims the Fuhrer is right, must be right. 

INTERVIEWER: And you knew at that time that you hated him, just the same. 

SUBJECT: I hated him just as much as the rest of them. It just made an incredible impression on me that here is a man who is moved, agitated over the fact that they-- they take away young people like me, but would not do anything for us. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Bauer are you saying that during-- so far during everything that happened to you, you were very much aware how much you hated. 

SUBJECT: Very much aware. 

INTERVIEWER: Very much. 

SUBJECT: Very much aware. And at this point already, I had only one thought. I don't want to die from German hands, because I felt-- I felt in a way defeated that I was caught, and on the other hand relief also. And nevertheless, I made up my mind that I'm not going to die from German hands. 

So in-- at this camp, I was reunited with my sister. And then shortly afterwards, we were sent to Theresienstadt. those Jews that were concentrated in the Slovak camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that like when you-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, this was-- this was terrible, because we-- the name of the concentration camp in Slovakia was Sered. And it had a German commander, whose name was Brunner. He was hanged after the war. 

And he became crazy. The day when they tried to herd us into the trains, Sered was bombarded by the Russians. And he was standing on-- on his balcony. And he was screeching. 

We sort of went in first in front of him. And he took out his gun and he started shooting into the people and said, you will-- started screaming, you will all die. You will die like chickens. None of you will live. 

And I think now years later that, yes, he-- he lost his mind. He was like a madman. He realized that the German armies are collapsing. And he realized that his days are numbered too. And this is why he was screaming all this nastiness. 

INTERVIEWER: Were-- were you with your sister at this point? 

SUBJECT: I was with my sister. And it was terrible in these wagons, because we were herded one against the other like cattle. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: When did you first find your sister? 

SUBJECT: As soon as I came to this place, Sered, and I started asking people, is there no one by the name of such and such? And they said, yes, there is. And so then I discover that she is not dead, but living. 

But she was kept only one day at the Hlinka Garda. And unfortunately, I was kept much longer. I guess they felt that I am young and I will break down. But I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: But you still remember and feel a lot of that. 

SUBJECT: And so I think if my sister wouldn't have been with me, I would have certainly not survived, because by this time I was only obsessed with one idea. I'm not going to go to any gas chamber voluntarily. I am not going to die from German hands. 

And so one-- one night I wanted to jump out from the train. And my sister was fighting with me. And I somehow managed to get myself to the window. 

And by this time, the rest of the people started dragging me, not for my sake, but for their sake. They started shouting, you will jump out and then the rest of us will be shot. No way. And they started dragging me. 

And I-- I screamed back you are-- you are all old, and you have no-- you lived already, but I didn't. And this is my chance. And so that-- quite a fight broke out, me trying to get to the window and they pulling me back. 

And suddenly, one man came to me and said, you-- you lost your head totally, because you wouldn't leave. He said, look at me. And his one hand was totally sort of paralyzed. 

He said, I jumped out from a train. And he said, up there there are guards and everybody. He said, and if not, you would be jumping into the electrical wires. You would be dead. And if they get you, you will be tortured much more. Said there is no sense in jumping. 

And somehow, he calmed me down. And so then, I came to Theresienstadt. And I was still like a mad woman. 

And I remember the next for me terrible thing was that when we came there, there were all kinds of epidemics going on. And they shaved not our hair, but the rest of the hair on our body. And we were lying there naked, sort of exposed. 

And suddenly, these SS men came to the room. And sort of they were walking around and-- and looking at us. And I remember thinking that this is the most terrible moment, much worse-- I felt totally dehumanized. I hated them so much that they should-- they should see me naked. It was somehow terrible. 

And so I decided that-- that I don't want to live. So the reason why I'm saying that if not my sister I would have died, I-- I simply-- I read a book. And in this book, the author described that if someone wants to die strongly enough, they die. 

So what I did, I was lying on my bed. And I put the bread that my sister brought-- because I would not stand in line for my bread. I put it down near me. And someone would steal it inevitably. 

And I declared that I'm not getting up. I want to die. And my sister was pleading with me. And one day went by. And the next day went by. 

And she was crying and pleading, get up, get up, get up. And I wouldn't. And so in desperation, she went for this young man who was with me together at the gestapo prison. And she said, do something. She wouldn't get up. 

And he came and lifted me out of-- of the bed and put me on my feet and said, if you don't go and wash, I will wash you myself. And he said, you are filthy. You are disgusting. You-- you look terrible. 

And I don't know. Something moved in me. I don't know. I said, someone should call me filthy and disgusting? Am-- am I really? 

And somehow, I got up and moved. And yes, I went to wash. He shamed me into it. 

And from this moment, I started working, never giving up the idea of escaping and putting myself together with everyone who planned an escape. And once more, I got together with a young man who planned to escape. And one night, I told my sister, yes, that I am going with him. 

And once more a struggle and crying and pleading started. And once more she managed to drag me back. And eventually, we were liberated by the Russians. 

INTERVIEWER: This man appealed to your pride. 