INTERVIEWER 1: So can you tell us about what-- how you got to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: How I came to Auschwitz? I came to Auschwitz from Neuengamme at the end of October in 1949-- two, 1942, yes. I went to Auschwitz. I was very, very about one week in the main came in the Auschwitz one and then I came to Auschwitz two. It was Birkenau. It was awful. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know then what would happen to you if you came to Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: No. Looked at-- I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: By that time. 

SUBJECT: This I knew that the same can happen to me in Dachau. They could kill me at every moment they would kill me. They could kill me. There was no responsibility of gestapo. He could kill everyone in the block. There was no responsibility for him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you think you would make it through in some way? 

SUBJECT: No. Look, I-- so I got this way. So I never believed that I could-- I was in a good condition already. I-- all the typhus and all these diseases I had in all the camps. And when I had typhus in Neuengamme, so there was five from hand I cured. And I cured. And then I was immune against typhus in Birkenau in Auschwitz. 

So I could have my comrades, my friends. And when I saw this also, I didn't believe I could come out. These are the same like my friends. And therefore, we decided to observe all and we make notes and we organize the documents, we photograph, we radio, and so in the camp. And then we dig it in a tin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you get a radio and a camera? 

SUBJECT: We photographed them. It's all very astonishing. You cannot tell it in one sentence. So if you are interested, I will tell you. But I will ask you. And so we decided to document all this what in the camp is. And we have connection with civilian workers and we send it to Prague. We had connections with Prague. 

During I was in the camp, the correspondence with a friend of with my friend, his wife was non-Jewish and he lived in Prague. Kraus, which I wrote the book, he was in the same kommando. And we had three civil workers. We were working in Auschwitz. And through them, we connected with Czechoslovakia, with Bohemia, with Prague. This also a story which you hardly could believe and which somebody will very hard to tell you. 

But I must tell you, who was a short time in-- nobody could survive Auschwitz as a plain, as a normal prisoner. It was not possible. Only 3% or 5% of people who got some job that they were needed, they had a chance survive. And also this chance I had. I was on the list of day of the secret keeper. So call it secret keeper. 

I knew too much. I saw crematoria. It was a building this. And so and I was on the list to be annihilated at the end. But the SS man who was in charge of us, they needed us. It was not so that he was responsible that the whole thing is running. So they needed us. So they keep us alive till the end when the evacuation came and I escaped. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So they kept you alive because of your skills? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they wanted not only skills, we organized for him. And so he was accustomed. Look, it was not so an easy thing to take a new prisoner and to send him in this and this camp and so. And also this SS man would have some to organize for him some money and some valuables and so on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about your family? 

SUBJECT: Well, my family came. You mean my family? 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you see them again? 

SUBJECT: So my family was deported in '42 from to Theresienstadt, to the ghetto Theresienstadt. And that I was not in this ghetto. And from the ghetto, which was a very good ghetto. But they sent the people, the prisoners, to the east to be annihilated. But they told them they are sending to re-settle them to build their Jewish homes and settlements. 

Then in-- I remember it was in February came a transport from Czechoslovakia. And then we always there-- there on on guard if-- when some countrymen from us came, mainly Jews. And so in the evening, that was already spreading the camp from Czechoslovakia came and transport. 

So I found my brother, who is living now in Haifa. And two brothers came. And I asked them where from you came? From Theresienstadt. And who came with you? Mother and two sister. Where is the mother? 

Our mother was ill and they asked them she could go to the car on the truck. And the sister wouldn't let her alone. So the SS man told them, please go also. You can support your mother. 

And they were driving them directly the truck to the crematory and the gas chambers. I never saw them. And I asked them, my brother, what was his first impression when he came to Auschwitz? So he told me. So I heard by the entrance the music. So I told-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of music? Everyone talks-- 

SUBJECT: Music. It was a chipper, a couplet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: An orchestra. 

SUBJECT: An orchestra. Very nice orchestra. They are playing waltz and all kind of --headphones with a drawing. By the entrance of every camp there were a orchestra. Yes. And when the people were marching to their work, the orchestra played marches. And when they were going from the work, also with the dead people, they are playing marches, yes. The orchestra. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the song they played on the way? Was there any one special song that they played? 

SUBJECT: They played many from Lehar and very nice operas from Fledermaus and very, very classical things. And some marches, "Radetzsky March." They played very-- it was very, very qualified people, musicians, musicians in this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Prisoners? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Prisoners. Yes, they took them out. They asked their occupation, yes. So. So they asked me also for the occupation, what I was, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you married before you went? 

SUBJECT: I was married and I had a son who is here now, professor on the Haifa on the Hebrew university. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he come to the camp? 

SUBJECT: Yes, he came to the camp later. Then, but my brother survived. I will not tell you how. It was very-- only that I have some connections in the camp already, so I could have them to get a better job. And so they survived. Then my family in 1943, it was in September, in the sixth and seventh September, they came from Theresienstadt in the evening transport. 5,000 families from Theresienstadt. 

And we wouldn't believe how the SS men behaved very polite. They took the trunks, you know, from the people. Their baggages. They helped. They keep the small children, they help their old people and rabbis to go to the camp. So we didn't believe to our eyes what happened to the revolution or the change of politics. 

So already on the first evening, it was in another quite new camp, which was in the same area in Birkenau. And this camp was proclaimed as a so-called check family camp. Theresienstadt family camp. And the first evening it happened, I succeeded to go in and they-- I find there my wife, my son, which was at that time 10 years old, and my-- the mother of my wife. And so the mishpacha, all the mishpacha. There were many friends from Czechoslovakia. 

And they were told, you are here, the SS men told them, you are here to be exchanged for the prisoner-- German prisoners. You are under the protection of the International Red Cross. And they leave the people in this camp where they about 5,000. And they didn't cut their hairs, their belongings, they let them have their belongings, and so on. 

But it was forbidden that these people should be in contact with other camps. The camp was closed. Only their artisans, electricians, plumbers, and so on which were needed, they could come in. And so also I could come there. But they didn't know that there is my wife. If they would knew, the SS men, they would never let me in. And so under the some protection that there are some very urgent repairs, I could go in and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like to see your wife, to be reunited with your wife after all those years? 

SUBJECT: They didn't-- they-- if they would knew that there is my wife, they would never-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like for you? 

SUBJECT: Ah, no, for me it was-- it was you cannot believe what it means for me. I was very enjoyed, but I also was very afraid what it will happen, what will happen. But I knew that all people in that Birkenau, the Jews are annihilated later or sooner. But nevertheless, the scheme was... I came there very often. They also allowed to be a school. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you very thin? Did she recognize you right away? Did your wife know who you were? Had you changed a great deal? 

SUBJECT: I was looking quite well. I was-- I had enough food, yes, in, well, look, I didn't starve in Auschwitz, I must tell you. I, for instance, I-- we were so-called Kesselschlösser also. It's a cauldron locksmith. And we were repairing the cauldrons. In every camp there were about 40 cauldrons. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cauldrons? 

SUBJECT: Cauldrons. The soup was boiled in for the-- and these were very often destroyed. It was for the dump for the steam, yes. And this we also repaired. And when we repaired this, so we got more food, and we could organize more food. Yes. And so I could get help also to other people. I have food enough. It was not promoted. I could also help my wife and all of it with the clothes and with all. 

Yes, I could support them. I had-- I didn't, in Auschwitz for myself, I didn't know what it was, yes. And we supported many, 20, 30 people, the group of our friends. As I told you, if somebody got a job, for instance, we were also repairing these cauldrons in the kitchen for assessment. And so that there were a lot of-- whats that, 

INTERVIEWER 1: Meat? 

SUBJECT: Meat, yes. Of meat and so. And so we organized. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But what did you feel when you saw other people around you who were starving to death? 

SUBJECT: Look, this I will let you know. You couldn't have helped them all. You could have only two people to whom you have some connections. And then you must recognize advance who had a chance to survive or not. There were such about six weeks at that period of six weeks. In this six week, you nearly, if you were-- was an experienced prisoner, so you could knew if this man didn't break mentally, you know, so he had a chance to survive longer. And later he also acquired maybe a job. 

But the most people when they are working every the whole day, such a work, as I told you in Neuengamme and so and there were many terrains, these people couldn't survive long time. And then I will let you know this. I was so accustomed to see people dying, yes, and starving, and this, all these atrocities didn't touch me already. It was-- I was-- 

I had only one thought. We must observe all what had happened here and we must sign it, we must send it abroad, and we must try to document. And we had every day some-- it was very dangerous, this thing. If you would be catched by the SS man when we send letters or when we organize this and so, the radio we organized or the photo apparat. It was a very dangerous enterprise, you see, very complicated in the camp. 

So all our nerves were concentrated for these tasks, you know. I'd organize some food for-- or some clothes to help to this and to make collect from one camp to another. And this we had always in our mind. And so maybe this helped us survive. As when you work, then you came to the camp. 

So you were checked on the entrance. Before the every camp entrance was a guard room of SS men. And when you would go in, so you must tell them the number, which you have tattooed on this on that. Every man has a tattooed number. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You still have your number? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I have very-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you show? 

SUBJECT: Yes. This is my number. And there are five people, five my friends which have the number in this kommando, which we came from Dachau, we still are alive, all five, which we were in this maintenance squad. Yes. 

And so I will tell you one story about this. This number is very low, 73,000. There were already numbers of 400,000. There were the number of people that all together were about 400,000 which has this series. The other people, the three millions which were sent directly to the gas chambers, they have no numbers. Yes. 

And according to this number, you could always know how long-- how long is somebody in the camp. And so when I in '44 when I was going to one camp to repair something and I told my to the SS man, he asked me, I told him prisoner number 73,043. 

So he told me, repeat your number. So I repeat that once more. And then he sprung up and told me, what? You have such a number and you are still living? How it's possible? Yes, the SS man. 

So I told him, look, I have the oberstuhlfirm. I have passierschein, a certificate and I should go to the camps. I have the certificate, passierschein. And he told me, look, you must not be not be not enjoyed when the Russian-- you will meet the Russians here. Five minutes before the end, we have time to finish you, and you will be finished. Off. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like between the guards? What was the relationship between one SS man and another? Did you observe that? 

SUBJECT: The SS man, they were all trained to hate the prisoners. They were trained to hate the prisoners. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do they also hate each other? 

SUBJECT: Yes also, but not in a manner that you should-- they maybe they hate. They compete. They organized with the prisoners. But when they was-- when they came to the point, so they would kill the prisoner. In this they were unite. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they ever talk to you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever ask them any questions? 

SUBJECT: No. The questions, only if they wanted something. For instance, they came to our shop and he asked, could you repair my bicycle? Could you repair this kinderwagen, the carriage. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Baby carriage. 

SUBJECT: Baby carriage. And there, the electric lamp. They wanted-- you know, it was black work. They sold it and they left two, three cigarettes. And so they were sometime nice. But if we-- when we organized, you see, we had the access to organize in the kitchens, maybe some margarine, some meat or some salami. 

And we took it to the camp to help we were not hungry. We were fed up good well. But we would bring in the camp also for our friends to some food. And when they checked us and they found the food, they give you some kicks. 

When they found gold or dollars or something or money, so they took it in their pocket. And then if they would make you a meldung, it's, they would make you a charge. So they must go up and give up this valuable. 

But if they found at you a letter, maybe only a letter from a camp from the husband to her-- to her-- to his wife. So this he gave it to the political department. And so you were, as a spy, is a very peculiar, very dangerous element. And you-- then you came to the political gestapo, and you were questioned, you were beaten, and you came not out. And for such occasions, we had cyankali capsule in our teeth and then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cyanide? 

SUBJECT: Cyanide, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you get the cyanide? 

SUBJECT: They came so many medicines, doctors, to Auschwitz with all that equipment, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: As Jews they were deported to be killed, to be annihilated. And apotecas and so on. And there were so many medicines. And in this canada camp, in this camp, there were separate barracks of stores that all the belongings there selected, very exactly selected, all these, you know, some people give the diamonds and the banknotes in their clothes. 

This all was checked. And there were valuables of millions of banknotes of every currency and diamonds and so on. This was only in one camp. And this we could organize. This was possible to organize and to corrupt some SS men by this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you get that map? 

SUBJECT: This map? Look, this is an exactly map of the Auschwitz camp of the Birkenau camp. We had friends. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you show it to us? 

SUBJECT: Yes. You asked me how I? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How you got it. 

SUBJECT: So first. As I told you, we had an organization, a conspiracy organization. And there that also some friends who were architects, prisoners. And these prisoner architects, they were working in that upper building office bureau, SS bauleitung office. And they were drawing some all this-- this was a huge office, yes. They were drawing all these up building of the camps. 

And they brought us some of these plans. They draft and so he brought it to me and I sent it abroad to Prague through the civilian. And here you have an original plan of the Birkenau annihilation camp. But it was plans planned as a camp of the war prisoners. Prisoners of war. So it was-- but it's the exact-- if you see, every this quadrant is a block. There were 600 to 1,000 people in one block. 

The block was of the size of 9, 40 meters. Nine long 40 meters and nine meters wide. And there were three-- three stages of beds. In every bed, six people, about six people. So there are 18, 15, 18 people on one stretch. You have all the folk. And here you have a crematoria. All you have here. But this was never completely built up. This is the section one, section two, section seven. The section seven was never built up, only the part. 

But this you can see in the book that that factory that our friends drawed for us the plan according-- was built up. So there is every barrack. So in January, there are only a few barracks which were for the guards. And here are the guards, the SS guards here, the barracks for the SS guards. 

And here you have the crematoria. Here is this Canada. These were the belongings, the barracks of the belongings that are sorted. Where the belongings of these prisoners, which were put the gas chambers, were sorted out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We heard that all of the SS men had dogs. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Not all of them, some. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Some had dogs. What was the behavior of the dogs and were you ever hurt by a dog? 

SUBJECT: I was not hurt, but look, I was never going in the kommando. You know, every morning. 