INTERVIEWER 1: So you were reliving it now. Just-- 

SUBJECT: I see them now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, OK. Then look at them and try and tell us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even the expression on your father's face. 

SPEAKER 1: No, wait for it. 

SPEAKER 2: Tell me when you're about to start. 

SPEAKER 1: I'm starting now. 

SPEAKER 2: OK, thank you. 

SPEAKER 1: OK. Any time you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yesterday when we talked, you mentioned that you walked 900 kilometers-- 

SUBJECT: Yes 

INTERVIEWER 1: --to the Russian front? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We-- well, when they-- we called Partisan, the underground. And it was mostly Jews. Very-- fewer Russian personnel, Russian people with the rifles. And they had the-- with the rifle, you could get food and things. 

We used to come into villages, I told you. And that's how we kept walking, to cross-- our aim was to cross the front. But it was very difficult to cross the front, because the Germans were shooting people . And a lot of people couldn't keep up with, in the march. And that was at night through the woods with no shoes on, and no clothing. It was winter already. 

And people became like animals. They left people behind. If you couldn't keep up, they just left you. People left the children, elderly. And everybody kept telling my father to leave me with a family, with the farmer. Maybe I'll survive, because it was impossible for me to cross the front. I was nine at that time. 

And my father said, no, she must survive. And he carried me on his shoulders through lakes and rivers and swamp. And I always see that picture. Whenever I give up or I get depressed, I says, my father carried me on his shoulders, and he said, I must survive. And I think that, that keeps me going. 

Um, I see people screaming. Uh-- they-- they couldn't believe that that was happening. I mean, it was like-- I don't know how to tell you. 

Well, my mother-- when-- you know, in our town, my mother got killed that day when they had the schritte. They collected all the dead people, corpse to put them on-- on a wagon, manure wagon. And they buried them all in one grave. I mean, that's the people that I met after told me what hap-- how they buried them. 

So we don't have a-- I don't have a grave for-- for them. And I always wonder, you know, whatever happened, when people ask me if I ever want to go back, there's nothing there except the one grave where everybody's buried. Um-- oh, when we were crossing the-- the front, it was impossible for people to cross. 

And after a long time-- you know, people-- they kept telling my father to leave me behind, and he said, no way. And finally, we met a group of young Russian people who were crossing the front. And they had the white sheets on them, because it was wintertime. And they were on skis. And we had no sheets. And we had no skis. 

So they-- they put me-- I was-- they put me between them somehow, so they wouldn't see the clothing, whatever I had. And before my father carried me his shoulders, and the people helping would cross the front. That was 1943. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened then? 

SUBJECT: Uh, what happened then-- it was '43. We were sick. I had lice in my-- you know, go like this, and you have lice. And I had boils in my head. And my father had the lice and boils and kidney problems. And they put us-- we were already in the Russian zone. 

Oh-- we couldn't-- the only place we could go then was to Siberia because the Germans were up to Stalingrad. So they put us in freight cars. And if you saw Doctor Zhivago, you know, that's-- that scene, that's Hollywood. They threw us all like cattle in the freight cars and took like six months to get where we were going, because they needed the trains for the front. 

The Russians were being defeated. They-- they forgot about us. And people died in the freight cars, and they'd just throw them out. And we were hungry. 

Finally, we got to where we were-- Siberia. And they took my father to the hospital. And they sent me to the orphanage. They shaved my hair off, the lice. And they gave me clean-- gave me a bath and clean clothing. And I thought that was heaven. 

And then when my father got better, he came out. He took me out of the orphanage. And we got a little room. And we started normal life. We thought it was normal. But it didn't last too long. It was a couple of weeks. They took him to the army. And I went back to the orphanage. 

And that was another hell, because there were 700 Russian kids. They didn't know I was Jewish, because my name is Poliskin. And in Russian, it's Poliskina. But it's-- they thought it's Polish. And I wasn't gonna fight them, because you know, anything was better than being Jewish at that time. So they thought I was Polish. I said, OK. 

And we worked in the fields, because in Russia at that time, all the men were on the front. And they all had the women and children to take care of our needs. So we worked in summer-- in the spring, summer, fall, in the fields. We did the planting, the harvesting. And I had malaria. 

Every day, 12:00, I would get my chills. And I would fall between the bushes there and have my attack and get-- and be shaking until I fell asleep. After I fall asleep, I wake up, I'd be OK. But they knew 12 o'clock-- they knew every day, 12 o'clock, that-- you know, when I had it, they knew it's 12 o'clock because, you know, I had the attack. And I was there for a couple of years. We were hungry. 

We had no notebooks, no paper, no pencils. We were just-- two kids would share one pair of shoes. The shoes never-- didn't fit us. Just to put the toes in the shoes. And blankets for our coats because we had no, you know-- we'd get two sets of clothing. 

Once it was November 7-- that's the Russian holiday, that was Independence Day-- and May 1. There's another Russian holiday. So they had it backwards. In the summertime, they would give us the winter clothes. In the winter, they'd give us the summer clothes. 

And we had the cotton mattresses. So we took out the cotton and we made our yarn out of the cotton. We put a piece of wood and take a spool and make our own yarn. And we made stockings out of it. And we put hay in the cotton-- and the mattresses, to sleep. And after the stockings were worn out, we had no-- that was it. And I was there for a couple of years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What part of Siberia was it? 

SUBJECT: The Sievra Kostanski Oblast. It's way up. And I had my feet were frostbitten. I still have marks. And my tongue had boils, so I guess I couldn't eat and I couldn't walk. They didn't think I'll ever be able to walk again. And I was a special case because they gave me milk once, once a day, because I was very, very, sick. They didn't think I was-- I would make it. 

And my father knew where I was. So he-- somehow, he found a lady that was sent to Siberia in 1939. And she was not far from where I was staying. And she sent-- he sent her my address. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was a lady from your original-- 

SUBJECT: My shtetl. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --town, yeah? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And her daughter came to visit me. And I wouldn't let her go without me. I said, I'm going with you. So she took me with her. But you know, everything is relative. For I came they were already well-off, but they lived also with another family in one room. And the lady wouldn't feed me, give me any food. So there were some Jews who were from Poland who were sent to Siberia that time. And they, you know, just always take care of their own. 

So they arranged laid days. Not day. One house. Just-- they had somebody else's house. That was just one meal a day at supper time. And I would go to school, whatever schooling there was. A hungry. So as an old man, who used to take his cow to get some water. He would meet me on the way to school and give me whatever he had, which he didn't have much. 

And I hated it. I cried. Because that was very demoralizing. When I was in orphanage and all 700 kids were hungry, that's one thing. But here already, even I had to go to these people and wave-- and they didn't have it. So whatever leftovers they had, they would share with me. And they would have dogs. And I used to envy the dog under the table that he was better off than I was. I felt worse than the dog at that time. 

So I stayed there for a while. Everything was like a lifetime. And one day, a lady came looking for me. And she told me she's from my shtetl. She came to take me home. And I thought it was-- she was crazy. I didn't know what was happening. And she said yes, you're going home. 

And she said well, aren't you going to say goodbye to anybody? 

I says, no. We're just going. And I never said goodbye this lady I stayed with. My friend-- her son is in Israel right now and I visited him. 

And we came back to my shtetl. A matter of fact, it was just when the war ended. 1945. Because it 3,000 miles from Siberia to my shtetl, Kreviech. As a matter of fact, there's a family in a haven. Charlie Gelman Macedonia. And he was working for the Russian government at the time. And my uncle came and told him that there's a young child in Siberia, we have to save her. And he made false papers that I was related to him. And he sent his friend, and she went all away. She's the one that got me out of there. 

And now he happened to end up in the haven. And we're very close. It's like my brother, my mother, my sister, because he's the only one that really knows me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he knew your family or your father at least? 

SUBJECT: He didn't know them because he's from another town, but he knew of them. How much time do I have? 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when you arrived back at Kreviech who did you find there? 

SUBJECT: I found my mother's sister and an uncle. And I stayed with them for a while, but that was under the Russian occupation. And in Russia, you know, nobody is safe. At that time, they're sending everybody to prison. You know-- five years, 10 years, prison-- it was like a status. I mean, no one got away with that-- go to prison. 

So the Jews knew that that's not a place for them. So my uncle, he made false papers, and we escaped from there. We went to another town, another town. And then we end up in Lodz, in Poland. And from Lodz, there are a lot of the displaced people-- Jews. They came from Germany, from the concentration camps. And they were going to Germany for some reason. I don't know why. 

And my uncle send me with a man, a relative of his to go to Berlin. And we were sitting, and went to transport with the Germans for Poland, for some reason. We're going back to Berlin. And they-- we were on the train with the Germans, and we stopped the Russian front, the [NON-ENGLISH] the front. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The border. 

SUBJECT: The border. Excuse me. The Russian border. And they saw me that I'm not German, because I had my one outfit that came from Russia. They look at me, and they said in Russian to me, you know, Russki? 

And I knew what that meant, you know, are you Russian? 

So I-- they took me off the train and they put me in jail there. At the station they had a room with bars. And somehow I just got out of there. I can't-- I don't know how. And I jumped from the second or third floor. And I ended up in Berlin. And I found my uncle, because he came with a different transport. So we got separated. I found my uncle. And they were on the-- in the Russian zone at that time. There were all the Jews in the big house. And we were just living, sleeping, together on the floors. We had no clothing, no food. 

And somebody told me on the American zone, they gave clothing and food. So I just said, fine, I'll go. I'll get some. And I took the address to get the Americans zone. And there was a man, and he took the subway in Berlin. And there's a man in civilian clothes. So I showed him the address, how to get where I was going. And he was Russian, but he's getting closer. He grabbed me by his hand and he says, you know, 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're Russian-- 

SUBJECT: You're Russian-- where are you going? And I got away from him. I just kicked him or whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were a real fighter, then. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, you know, it was a matter of survival. And we just fought. Going back to speaking of survival-- you know, it's hard to remember everything. When we were in the Russian underground, we were walking. We were putting mines beneath the trains that were going-- the German trains were going to the front. We were putting mines underneath the trains to destroy the-- and they send the kids to do this. And they taught us how to handle a hand grenade, handle a rifle. 

I had to jump off a moving train. You know, the train goes. You just jump with the train. People jump the other way, they get under the train-- their legs get cut off and they get killed. So we had all that. And-- where are we? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you place a mine under a train? 

SUBJECT: I, no. But my friends did. My father did. My cousins, they did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you do anything war-like at the time? Did you-- 

SUBJECT: At the time? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --shoot? 

SUBJECT: No. And so I was always scared to. You couldn't breathe. I was afraid I was to breathe, because to make noise, they would hear you. Also then, now, where did we end up? When I was in Germany? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, yeah, you-- 

SUBJECT: I was in Germany. And I got away from him. So I got to the American zone and I found the owner that hires them. And they gave me some clothing, because the clothing didn't fit me. It was very sophisticated clothing. I was a little girl. And I came back to my aunt and uncle. And that we, from there, we had to get away from the Russian zone. We had to get to the English zone. 

So my uncle somehow got a Red Cross, a Holland Red Cross. And we were supposed to be Holland, Hollandershere From Holland, people going back. We're supposed to be-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, Holland Red Cross document. 

SUBJECT: Document. And we were supposed to be from Holland and we're supposed to be going wherever we were going. And we crossed the border again. And the Russians-- of course, I got carsick, luckily. And I was very, very sick at that time. So the Russians opened up the doors and I was sick. And they were talking in Russian and I knew what they were saying. But I was sick from fright, sick from the car, from the fumes. So they said, yeah, they're sick, and they closed the doors and they let us go. 

And we were in Germany and then we got to Eschwege It's by Kassel, it's near Kassel. It's near Frankfurt. And that was the American DP camp. And we stayed there. I stayed with my aunt and uncle and their son. And we stayed there. 

And then Ben-Gurion came to talk to us. And he wanted us to go to Palestine. And I was all hyped up to go to Palestine. So I was in the truck already. I said goodbye to everybody. And I'm going to Palestine. Well, it wasn't Palestine. We had to go to Italy and wait for a ship or boat, whatever. 

So I kissed everybody goodbye and I was going. So then my cousin came, he says, where are you going to go by yourself? You know, why don't you stay here? Whatever is going to happen to us will happen to you. What's the rush? Yeah, you go. 

So I jumped off the truck and I stayed. And we were in that camp and they were giving-- the Americans were giving rations-- the dried milk and food. And for the children, they would use the Hershey bar or a bubble-- chewing gum. And my aunt would take this stuff and sell it to buy bread. 

But I would eat it before I'd come home because I like Hershey. They'd yell at me that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: --you know, why did I eat the candy? You know, I should probably-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure, before she could sell it. 

SUBJECT: --for further, because her studies would bring stuff home, and she would take it away and sell it in exchange for other things. And then my uncle shot-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't mention your father again. 

SUBJECT: OK. My father was in the Russian army. He wrote to me when I was in the orphanage, but the Russian mail was very-- he was wounded a couple of times-- and the Russian mail was very bad. So I didn't hear from him at that time. When I was living with that lady. But he wrote to my shtetl, and he found my aunt and uncle who are Mihnovich. The name is Minch right now. They're-- he's in Colchester. She died since. 

And I never heard from him again. And I wrote to the Russian government. I looked for him, and I always look for him. To this day I always have images of him, that he is someplace in the hospital sick and old. And it's been bothering me all the years because I don't know whether he's dead or he's alive. 

And his main concern was for me to survive. And how happy he would have been if he knew that I survived and I'm in America. And I have my own family and a home with relatives. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you give us a bit about the home? 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. Can we stop? I got to change tape recorders. 

SUBJECT: Which home? 