INTERVIEWER: --ever. OK, OK. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: OK, great. Goodbye, sweetheart. I want to begin, OK? They're not coming-- 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, they're not coming up? 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. Only if they want to come up and see the setup for a minute. They, they don't have to interfere. 

CREW: All right. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: They could come up and see the setup. 

CREW: All right. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: I won't forget to take them. 624-4995, OK. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: All right? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] about 6. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. No, not necessarily. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] Could be later. 

CREW: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Cool it. 

CREW: [LAUGHS] Wow. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. He's been very patient, because my life has become just this. 

CREW: That's unbelievable. The last time I saw you, you were emotionally completely devastated, because there was this man before. 

CREW: I am rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

FRANK SCHOLL: OK? 

INTERVIEWER: OK, let's take it right from there. You were born and where and everything. 

FRANK SCHOLL: I, uh, was born in 1921. In Breslau-- 

INTERVIEWER: I'm sorry. No, I want you to start with your name and then-- I'm sorry. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Oh, my name? OK, my name is Frank Scholl, and I was born in 1921 in a town called Breslau, Germany, which is now called Wroclaw. It is now Polish. Uh, it became Polish after the Second World War. Well, when I was there, it was German. 

So in 1921, I was born in Breslau, and I grew up in Breslau, and I stayed there until I was-- uh, with some interruptions, until I was 17 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: And anything special in your background or your family or? 

FRANK SCHOLL: In my family, my parents had a restaurant, um, which was, uh, a very good restaurant. And, uh, uh, the early, my early childhood, apart from school, of course, but, uh, my early childhood, uh, revolved about that restaurant, around that restaurant. I, uh, I was there lunchtime, and my parents were both active in it. And, uh, I played on the, uh, in the backyard and in the streets. And, uh, I had a very happy childhood. 

My brother was two years older. I have a brother. Um, he was two years older, and, uh, uh, we had a very happy childhood. 

INTERVIEWER: Did, did you have friends who were, uh, both Jewish and non-Jewish-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --types? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. I had, uh, a friend in, in the same apartment house where I lived. And, um, uh, we had both, of course, the friends of my parents, which were mostly Jewish. But also other people, uh, non-Jewish people. And, uh, we had friends in the house, and also some non-Jewish people. And we got along very famously with everybody. 

INTERVIEWER: When was it that you first started feeling, uh, as though things were different? You said your father wore the iron cross. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, this was much later. Um, we moved. My, uh, uh, my parents then, uh, as it came closer to, uh, 1933, had to, uh, sell the restaurant. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Uh, because, uh, it was becoming increasingly difficult with the boycott of Jewish businesses that had taken place, um, it was, uh, increasingly difficult for a Jewish person to have, to be the owner of a business, which stopped altogether at the time of the Kristallnacht in 1938. But, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back a little bit. In 1933, Jews could not own businesses. What led up to that? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. In 1933, Jews could still own businesses until 1938. But, um, there were-- uh, it was increasingly difficult after the Nazis came to power. I'm still before that. 

Uh, we moved. Uh, for various reasons, we had to move. We moved to a street which was, at that time, still called Kaiser Wilhelm Strasse, street, the street of Kaiser Wilhelm. It was one of the main street, a very wide street, uh, which led, which was between a, uh, uh, an open rounds-- a, a, a square in the middle of the city and led out to one of the most beautiful parks. So it was a connection for a few miles. 

And this wide street became a very famous street later on. It was the Kaiser Wilhelm Strasse. And on that street, um, I watched, uh, all the parades. Now, you must understand that in, in Germany, Germany was a very militaristic country. And, um, uh, everybody wore uniforms. Uh, even we wore uniforms. A-, as soon as you had a club or a, an organization, you had to have a uniform. 

So there were a v-, variety of uniforms. And the whole country marched. It was a militaristic kind of a thing. In school, when we went out anywhere, we had to march. That was the most important thing-- left, right, left, right. And so we went. Even the school children, everybody, the whole country, marched. I can remember even when my, uh, mother and father went for a walk with us, uh, my father used to remind us, fall into step. We marched, uh, we marched on the streets. 

So every, every organization had uniforms. And I still remember all of the various parties. The, uh, Nazi party, before 1933, had, of course, the brown shirts, which was the SA, the Stormtroopers. The black uniform was the, uh, what was called Schutzstaffel in German, which means the defensive part of the, uh, of the Nazis, the, the Stormtroopers being the offensive part, and the, uh, the, the, the SS, the Schutzstaffel, uh, having incorporated the Gestapo as part of it, uh, took care of the defensive uh, uh, uh, protection, of the protection of the country from internal enemies, and so on and so forth. 

This was a-- so they marched in their black uniform. Then we had the, uh, Sozialdemokrat, the Social Democrats. Uh, they had a, uh, green uniform. Then we had the communists. They had a blue uniform with the, with the, with the red ties. Uh, and, uh, so it went, every, every little organization. Then there was the Catholic party, which had the light blue uniforms with dark blue ties. Everybody had a uniform. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your uniform? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I was in a Jewish group, in a Jewish club, called the Black Flag for some reason. It was a national German-oriented organization. Um, and we had, uh, uh, blue, dark blue, Navy-like jackets. And we had, uh, light blue kerchiefs and, uh, a blue uniform. And we had our-- it was a big deal with the, with the scouts, for instance. Um, you had to do a good deed in order to deserve a kerchief. So the uniform played a very important part of, uh, growing up of any German youth. 

The small Nazis, the young people, called jungvolk, the young folk, the young people-- they had little black short shorts and brown shirts and black ties. They were the young ones. These were the ones I went to school with. They came to school in uniform after 1933. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't wear your uniforms to school? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Sometimes. Sometimes, we, uh, uh, before 1933, uniforms were not allowed, because it was still the Weimar Republic. 

INTERVIEWER: They weren't allowed where? In school-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: In school. 

INTERVIEWER: You wore them outside. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Outside of school, of course. Every time we had, uh, some kind of a meeting, and we went, uh, on, on hikes or something, everybody wore a uniform. And on this street, on which we lived, we lived on the fourth floor. We had a walk-up apartment there. We looked out of the window, and we saw everybody marching by. 

And before 1933, uh, in Germany, have these round columns. Uh, it's called Litfasssaeule. It's a, um, a, a round poster, uh, column. And all the posters are being pasted onto this, and all the parties, uh, you know, were, were, uh, doing their election campaign on these places. They weren't, you know, plastered on the houses or anything. They were very, uh, you know, there's a great Ordnung in, uh, you know, in Germany. So it, it all, there was a place. This was the place for it. And I remember we were reading all these colorful placards, you know, and, uh, we didn't know much about anti-Semitism, because in the early years, when I went to elementary school, uh, we got along very famously with everybody. Uh, there were Jews and non-Jews all together. The teacher was wonderful. And, uh, we went on, on outings, and uh, uh, we had a, a very, a, a teacher who, who loved us personally. Uh, he was a wonderful man. And a few years ago, he was still alive. I had a letter from him. I was, uh, I, s-, I, I was told that he asked for me. I didn't have a letter myself. 

INTERVIEWER: From Germany? 

FRANK SCHOLL: From Germany, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

FRANK SCHOLL: He was still alive. He was an old man. He was still alive. So this was fine. 

Uh, when was, uh, 10, I came-- uh, I went four years to elementary school. Then we came to high school, which was called gymnasium in, in, in Germany. And this was around the time of 1933. Um, I remember the day when Hitler came to power. Uh, nobody believed him. Everybody laughed, because the Nazis, uh, the word was that the Social Democratic slogan, the platform against the Nazis was, abwirtschaften. If you can translate that, uh, they will, um, work themselves, uh, to ruin. With the, with the silly, uh, and, and ridiculous kind of ideology that they put forward, what they want to do with Germany is ridiculous and, uh, is absolutely stupid. Nobody could even dream in their wildest dreams that someday, uh, Hitler would come to power. The whole country sort of laughed about him. 

Um, the only thing we would, we would notice of the coming violence was, um, the election campaigns were fought very brutally. I had a friend of mine, a, a friend of the family. I don't remember him too much-- a teenager who wore the, uh, uh, uniform of the Social Democrats, the, uh, and, uh, there was always a, a pin, you know, that you wore. These had three arrows. That was, uh, whatever that was supposed to mean. This was for the Social Democrat. 

While he was on that street on which I lived, he was, uh, stabbed to death in an election campaign, uh, by Nazis. And the Nazis ran. They were never arrested. And, uh, uh, things were sort of hushed up. And this is how we got into the violence and the blackmail that people were intimidated, intimidated to vote for the Nazis. 

And in 1933, we were sitting on the supper table-- at the supper table. And, um, uh, I don't know whether it came, the news. We had no radio at that time. Uh, the radio was just coming up. And, uh, we heard. We read in the paper, I believe, that, uh, Hitler had won the election. And I remember like today, my mother said, "Oh, my God. This is terrible. That means war." She says, "Hitler means war, and, uh, the, uh, the British will come over, and they will send their airplanes and will bomb us." That's what I remember my mother said at that time, which was, uh, quite prophetic. 

And, um, uh, I, I remember the, the campaign that Hitler put up, uh, how he got the people riled up. Um, he was talking about the Pac de Versailles, the, the Peace Treaty of Versailles, which he called a Schandvertrag, the, uh, the, uh, shameful, uh, thing, and, uh, treaty in which Germany was put behind. And, uh, the, the Reichswehr, which was only allowed 100,000 men at that time by the Treaty of Versailles. And they all marched in front of my window, you know? This was the parade street. And I, we watched the, uh, the Reichswehr. And we were very proud of the Reichswehr, because after all, we felt very German. 

And, uh, in 1933, we came into high school, and this is when really uh, my trouble started. This is when I began to, uh, to feel the pressure of, uh, Nazism. But we ourselves and our family, uh, like everybody else, said, we're Germans. My father fought in the First World War. Uh, we were several generations in, in the country. Uh, we were part of, uh, the country and part of the nation, the same as, uh, any American is part of America. 

INTERVIEWER: But there were divisions. There were different kinds of uniforms for those divisions. Did your parents wear uniforms, too? 

FRANK SCHOLL: No, no, no, no. Not my parents. Just the organized, uh, the organizations, uh, uh, wore-- any organization had a uniform. Not my parents-- 

INTERVIEWER: You might have had two uniforms, one for a Jewish organization, and another for another type of organization? 

FRANK SCHOLL: No, no, no. This was, uh, all there was was one uniform. I was a member of a, uh, gymnastic group, you know, the, uh, Jewish, uh, group for gymnastics. And the first thing you had to do is get a blue, get a uniform, uh, uh, the, the outfit. And, uh, um, your, your, your gym trunks and your gym shirt had to be a certain uniform. This was, uh, all over Germany. Everything had a uniform. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were mainly in Jewish groups. You weren't in groups with non-Jewish people. 

FRANK SCHOLL: No. Not except for schools. The school, uh, was, uh, some schools had a uniform, too. They had, uh, they had their hats. They, uh, each school had a different, uh, kind of a hat so that you could recognize one school from another. Uh, I never wore one. 

So anyway, I came into the-- I came into the, the high school. And, uh, there, things became quite different. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I would think, uh, I was 6-- 21, 27-- '31, '32. '31, '32. '32. It could have been '33 already. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Um, what I remember is that I had a Latin teacher, a very nice man, little man with a bald head. And he came in every morning, and, uh, he would say, he would teach us, he would greet us with, uh, salvete discipuli, which means, uh, "Greetings, uh, students." And, uh, we would answer as salvete magister, which means, "Greetings, teacher." 

And, um, everything was quite nice the first year. Uh, and uniforms started to appear. There were two Jews in my class of 53. And I heard that a friend of mine who was in my same youth group at the time, the same Jewish little group that we had, um, he began to have fights. He was one class higher than I was. And he began to have fights. And people started picking on me. And, uh, it was already, you know, I, I began to feel a little bit of pressure right there and then. People wouldn't associate with us very much. But at the same time, I was a good athlete, and we were quite popular in the class. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk to your parents about these feelings of being uncomfortable? 

FRANK SCHOLL: It didn't particularly bother me, because, uh, it, it, uh, I wasn't that much aware of it. I knew that I was a minority, and that I had beha-, to behave myself. And my mother pounded into us, uh, the main, the most important thing is not to stand out. Be-- uh, never say a loud word. When you, when you, when you're on the trolley car, you, you go on the trolley car, always offer somebody your seat. Uh, don't speak loudly to one another so that somebody can turn around and say, "This is a Jew. Look how i-, ill-behaved he is." Uh, don't ever do anything on the street that other people notice. Don't be noticeable. Shrink into oblivion. This was the theme that my protective mother, um, was trying to, uh, to apply for our education. 

INTERVIEWER: Always, from, from earliest childhood? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Uh, no, no. After it became, you know, uh, uh, after 1933, I think these, uh, these kind of remarks came back to me. My mother, for instance-- my brother wrote a poem about it today, uh, remembering his childhood. He had a rather, uh, crooked, bent nose. And my, my, my mother tried to straighten it out in his early years. She tried to knead his nose so that his nose wouldn't be crooked, you know, that he wouldn't be recognizable as a Jew and be attacked by the Nazis, uh, because at that time already, the Stormtroopers, uh, were just at random picking on Jews as soon as they recognized them and started to hassle them. 

So, uh, in, in, in high school, I was still a very popular man. And we walked, I walked together with, uh, uh, a couple of my, uh, friends from, from high school, who were not Jewish. As a matter of fact, they were, they were members of the, uh, young people's, uh, the jungvolk, the, the young Nazis. And it was permitted then to come to school in uniform. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk about this with them at all? 

All other, All other, all other organizations were forbidden but the Nazi party after, after 1933. The communists, of course, and, and, and the, uh, the Social Democrats that were active were arrested. And, uh, there was no other organization but the Nazis. And the Nazis were coming in, uh, to school with the uniform. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you talk about the beating that your friend had gotten with these-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. Uh, I, I, uh, I said, "Well, uh, what do you have against the Jews," or something to the effect. And, "Oh, well," he says, "We have nothing against you. If they were all like you, it would be all right. But it's the other Jews that we don't like." This kind of talk, I got from my friends. 

So, uh, at that time, I, uh, uh, it was very distasteful for me. But I, I couldn't really help myself, because I was living with these people. And, uh, I answered them that all the others are like me. And what do they have to say to that? "Well," they said, "they're not like you, because," uh, at that time, they were reading the, uh, newspaper that Streicher has put out, the Der Sturmer, which was a, uh, a racist paper, uh, the worst, I think, the world has ever seen, with caricatures of, of Jews with long noses and black hair and, and whatever, ugly looking people. And this was the, uh, propaganda, uh, paper, uh, was published in Nuremberg. And, uh, I think he was one of the, uh, people in Nuremberg that, uh, stood trial, Streicher. 

Uh, anyway, they read this, and, and their, uh, their picture of a Jew was an ugly, miserable person. And this is what happened when my mother some, uh, came to pick me up from school. And I came the, uh, I came to school the next day, and, uh, they told me, who was that dirty Jew woman that picked you up from school. I said, that was my mother. Oh, my God, they said, you should be ashamed of yourself to have a mother like this. So I came home crying-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say to them? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I didn't say anything. I came home crying. I think I had a fight. I had a fight, I think-- 

INTERVIEWER: How long? 

FRANK SCHOLL: --because my mother was insulted. And I had a fight. And, uh, I came home, and I cried. And, uh, I said to my mother, please don't come and pick me up anymore, because the, uh, the boys, uh, uh, were, bothering me that, uh, and I told them what they said, that you're, the, you know, ugly Jew woman, and, uh, I'm having trouble in school. So she was very offended, and she cried bitterly. And, um, it was a, it was a terrible situation in our family, because I didn't realize what I was saying. I was only about 10, 11 years old. 

And then we had these assemblies in school, in high school. Oh, then all of a sudden, the teachers came in, and-- in uniform. Every teacher had to have a uniform. So my biology teacher had a Stormtrooper-- a, uh, a SS uniform, a Gestapo uniform with a, with a, with a skull and, you know, the bones, the crossbones and the skull. And he came in that uniform. 

My, my other teacher, the Latin teacher that always salvete discipuli um, or salvetes discipuli um, said, uh, that, um, uh, he came in, in a, in, in, in a Stormtrooper uniform, the brown uniform. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe-- they had on the hat a skull and crossbones? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. The, uh, the, the, uh, the Gestapo. They had a black uniform with, uh, epaulets, uh, red, I think it was. Or they had all different kinds, yellow and red and, uh, the different divisions or whatever it was. And they had a, a hat, a hat with a, with a shield, you know. And, um, they had the skull and crossbones. Somewhere, they had the skull and crossbones on, on their uniform. That was the SS. That was the, the, uh, the, uh, defensive organization of this, uh, of the German Reich. 

INTERVIEWER: Was anybody fearful of that symbol on the uniform? 

FRANK SCHOLL: It, uh, it was, uh, I wasn't. Uh, it was to me-- I grew up with this sort of thing, and I, you know, I got used to this sort of thing. It was, to me, uh, um, repulsive, but at the same time, I, uh, I was always aware that I had to protect myself and not to make a noisy remark, not to-- to behave in school, not to stand out, not to be separately punished. And, you know, I had to blend in like a chameleon. 

And, uh, this, this chameleon philosophy, uh, I think, uh, I kept through all my life. Uh, this is how I picked up speaking American with, uh, only a slight accent, because whatever country I went to, I tried to blend in. And this is something, I think, that derives from childhood, uh, that I was taught, blend in. All right, don't stick out. 

Well, anyway, this biology te-, my-- and the, the greetings were changed from, uh, salvete discipuli read and salvete magister. It was changed to, um, heil Hitler. We had to, uh, he came in, and he said, "Heil Hitler, uh, students." And we had to stand up and say, "Heil Hitler, teacher." OK, so we stood up, and we said, "Heil Hitler, teacher." 

Um, the biology t-, and, and then we had a different curriculum, because we had this, uh, Rassenkunde, which is, uh, raciology. That was a regular subject that we had. And we were supposed to learn what an Aryan is, the Aryan race and, uh, opposed to the Aryan race, we were the Jews. Uh, and the children were to-- the, the students were to learn what, uh, makes a difference between a blonde, blue-eyed, pure Aryan to a Jew. 

And I hated this biology teacher with a, with a passion. He, he always pulled me up on my sideburns, and he put me in front of the class, and he'd say, now, here's a Jew. And, uh, he started to describe my nose and my cheekbones and my hair and my features and, uh, how to recognize a Jew. And I was very humiliated, and I, I, I hated it. And I was, uh, uh, I felt terrible about the whole thing, uh, that I was in front of the class of, uh, 53, you know, as, uh, well, he didn't pick my, uh, my friend, the other Jewish one. He, he picked me for some reason. Maybe I had darker hair. I don't know. Maybe I looked more Jewish. But anyway, I was the living example of, uh, what a Jew looks like. 

And then there was another blond, blue-eyed kid that, uh, now, he was the real German, and he was the Aryan. So we learned what an Aryan was supposed to be. And the Aryan is strong, and the Jew is weak, and, you know, this kind of thing. 

And so this was bi-, it was part of a biology class. It was officially called raciology. OK, this was it. And, uh, things began-- then we began to have fights. People started to pick on me, "You dirty Jew," and all this kind of thing. And, uh, and we started to fight. Every, uh, in, in the break time, there was always one of us was always fighting. There was, uh, my friend and, uh, there was one class above me. Uh, he fought in every, every break. And, uh, people bothered me, and I let them bother me for a while, and then I had to-- I, I, I started a fight, too, because they insulted me too much, or they started a fight, whatever it was. We were very isolated. 

And, uh, one order came out after another, that, uh, the Jews-- uh, one order says all Jews must greet the, uh, the, the, uh, German greeting. German greeting was "Heil Hitler," and raising your hand. 

Then the next order came out, and it says, the Jews are not allowed to greet people with the "Heil Hitler" signal. OK, so in Germany, you had to greet every teacher. When you see a teacher on the street, you had to respect him, and you had to greet him. You had to bow down. This is the German kind of greeting, at least it was at that time. I don't know how it is today. 

Anyway, at that time, we greeted the teachers. And in school, whenever you saw a teacher, you said, "Good morning." "Good morning." You had to, you had to say that. Now, this "Good morning" was changed to a "Heil Hitler." 

Now, we were in a, an impossible situation, because we went up the stairs when we saw one teacher, and we said, "Heil Hitler. And he turned around, "Aren't you a Jew? You're not allowed to greet me with 'Heil Hitler.'" But if I didn't greet him at all, then the next teacher would say, "Aren't you supposed to greet, 'Heil Hitler'?" And this was always accompanied with, uh, with, uh, punishment, uh, by uh, blows in the face and no, you know, we were hit for that-- not all of them, but some of them. The, the teachers that knew me and pick on me, they would punish me, put me in a corner, or humiliate me in one way or another. 

And, uh, the kids got very aggressive, the Hitler Youth kids. But I still got along with them. I was still chummy with them, until, really, I, uh, I couldn't stand it anymore. After the second year, the harassment got, uh, too much, and I asked my parents, would they please take me out of there because I, I can't get along with these kids anymore. They don't allow me to live. 

We, were-- for instance, we were forced to go upstairs into an assembly. And, um, I think it was on the 1st of May. Was it, was it the 1st of May? No, it couldn't be the 1st of May. It was some holiday that the Nazis, uh, um, celebrated and, uh, the Horst-Wessel song was sung. Well, the Horst-Wessel song had this rhyme in it, um, "Und wenn das Judenblut vom Messer spritzt, dann gehts noch mal so gut," which means, "And when the Jewish blood splashes from the knife, then things will go twice as well," OK? And, uh, so we were supposed to sing that. And I did not sing that. And I did not raise my hand. And, uh, I did not greet the flag, because I, I just couldn't. 

And, um, then, of course, after the, after this assembly, my schoolmates, you know, started harassing me why I didn't raise my hand and why I didn't sing and, and all this kind of thing. And there was turmoil again. 

And while all this was going on in the school, we always had our place of our apartment in the, in our living room in the window. We looked out on our street, and we watched all the parades go by. 

And later on, at, uh, 1936, uh, Hitler came, and he opened the first, uh, Autobahn, which was the first highway, uh, which was, at that time, built for militaristic reasons. And my street became part of it. It was a wide street. It was a main road. And he came past our windows, and there was one Stormtrooper facing this way, another Stormtrooper facing that way, with loaded guns watching the houses, and we weren't allowed to look out of the window. Jews weren't allowed to look out of the window. We, we were, we looked from behind the curtain. 

And it, it would have been very easy had I-- would I have had a gun, you know, it would have been very easy to hit him, because he was very-- he was down right below my street. And, uh, of course, you don't do things like that, you know. 

Um, but it was a, a, a, a very frightful, very frightful sight. And all the Hitler Youth and all them, there was always a band with oompa, oompa, oompa, you know. And they came marching down the road, all the Nazis, the little ones and the big ones and the fat ones and the thin ones. And all the Nazi uniforms, they all came passing my street. 

INTERVIEWER: The Horst-Wessel song-- was that a traditional German song, or was it composed for the Nazis? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Horst-Wessel song was traditional for the Nazis. Horst-Wessel was one of the early associates of Adolf Hitler. And, um, he died. He was shot or something. And he became the hero. So the Horst-Wessel song, uh, you're familiar with the, uh, song-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you sing-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: "Die Strasse frei den braunen Bataillonen"-- uh, "Clear the streets for the brown battalion." And this was their fighting song. Uh, I don't know. I, I don't remember the other, uh, I only remember this, the, the second verse that they sang. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the tune? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How did it go? 

FRANK SCHOLL: The tune? [SINGING] da-da-da Die Strasse frei den braunen Bataillonen, SA marschiert da-da-da, Und wenn das Judenblut vom Messer spritzt, dann gehts noch mal so gut." something like that it went, you know? When, when, the Jewish-- but this is the second verse, and the other one was the first verse. So I don't know. It's a long time ago. I don't quite remember it, uh, the exact words. But, uh, I guess books can tell you the exact-- I, I remember the song. 

INTERVIEWER: What was happening within your family? I mean, all of this, uh-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, uh, my family, my father was a, um, salesman. He was, uh, uh, selling, um, advertising articles for advertising that companies were giving away. And he had his very good customers. But one after the other, uh, would not buy for him anymore. They always told him, look, we, we would like to buy from you, but we can't. We are not allowed to. 

And, um, so he got less and less customers, because people just were forced-- they weren't allowed to buy from Jews anymore. The pressure was tremendous on these people. And, uh, they all had to wear-- everybody had to wear the insignia of the Nazis, the swastika. Um, and if you didn't do that-- and then, um, it was, uh, um, uh, people started to wear the, uh, the little band that came from the Iron Cross that they had to show that they were in the war, because whoever wasn't in the war was a weakling and a coward. So my father wore this, this ribbon of the Iron Cross to show people that he was in the war. But, uh, that didn't do much good, anyway, because people knew that he was Jewish. And they didn't buy from him. And sooner or later, he, uh, had no more customers, and he had to stop working, because there was no possibility anymore for him to work. 

And my mother became the, uh, um, the breadwinner of the family. And she typed. She was a very good, excellent typist. And she typed the, um, uh, the, um, theses of, uh, uh, students, uh, of, uh, post-graduate students and, and, uh, PhDs and Master's. And she, she typed all these theses and books and whatever it was. And this is how she made a living. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were going to school. How did you manage to stay in school or to study? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, we were then, after, after things got real bad, um, we were then, uh, uh, taken out of the school and, uh, put into a Jewish school, where I stood for, for two years. 

But, uh, I sensed the, uh, the, um, uncertainty of the situation. I was very restless. I was good in school. And, uh, but I wanted to work. I wanted to do something. I didn't want just to sit. And I was very nervous and very restless, uh, because of what was going on outside. And people were beginning to leave Germany. 

And, um, I didn't know. We were still very German-oriented, because we said, we are Germans. Nobody can deny us the right to be Germans. We were born here. We are Germans. And no Hitler can tell us that we are, you know, not Germans. There was another Jewish, uh, group. There were a few of them. And they were Zionists, and they wanted to go to Israel. They wanted to build up Palestine at that time. 

And we said, you're crazy. Our place is here, and it's, it's ridiculous. And we weren't very friendly with one another, the Zionists and the non-Zionists. There was a, a, a battle going on between these two groups. 

Uh, but later on, uh, these groups were more or less dissolved also because no organization was allowed to be in existence-- no Jewish organization was, uh, it had to be-- everybody had to be abandoned, and we all became friends. And, you know, the only one, um, uh, purpose that we all had in common was to get out. And, uh, there were-- the only Jewish organizations that were allowed were the, uh, emigration organizations. They were allowed to exist for the single purpose of expediting Jews out of the country. And, uh, so one after the other was, uh, they tried to secure visas and entrance, uh, uh, affidavits and God knows what. And they expedited the, uh, the, the emigrants. 

So, um, it was-- all our lives were directed towards emigration. But it took me a while to realize that this is for keeps. Everybody was saying this can't go on this way. And with 15, I left school. And the only place where I was allowed to work was in a Jewish business, with, which at this time was still in existence. And my father told me there was no sense uh, to go to college any, anymore or to continue your education, because I can visualize that you might be alone in the world at a young age, and you must survive. The only way you can survive is when you have a trade. You must have a trade-- a carpenter or a plumber or an electrician or what have you. 

So we were looking around. And, uh, friends of my parents still had a business, a lamp store, that also had an electrical contracting branch. And there, I was, um, uh, secured as an apprentice. Now, an apprentice in Germany, a first-year apprentice in Germany is, uh, was, at that time, a, uh, just a little bit better than an animal. Uh, we didn't have trucks. We had these, uh, carts that you pulled on two, with two, uh, handles. And you pulled these carts through the street like a, like a coolie. And we loaded our material on the back, and we walked with a, with a, uh, rope around our shoulder like a, like a seat belt today. Uh, and I pulled the load of, uh, this thing from one job to another. 

INTERVIEWER: All apprentices, or just-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: All apprentices. No, the transportation-- there were very few trucks. And the common way of transporting materials to the job from the shop to the job was in one of these, uh, carts. It was, uh, it was a cart with two handles. And you walked in front of it and pulled it. Ladders and everything was loaded onto there. This was my job. 

And, uh, I brought this, um, worked very hard, because I had to bring the job, uh, bring the material very early, and I came home later than everybody else. I had to go back to the shop and load up, get the material ready for the next day. And it was a very taxing job. 

And I was, uh, um, we had to pick the screws from the floor, because nothing was wasted, which was all fine. But, um, we had a, um, a journeyman electrician. In Germany, you call that a geselle. A geselle was a journeyman electrician. 

And, uh, they gave me the worst guy that they had. He was a good mechanic. But he also was a Nazi. And he was a anti-Semite of first class. And he made sure that my life was very miserable. 

INTERVIEWER: But he was working for a Jewish firm? 

FRANK SCHOLL: He was working for a Jewish firm. And later on, after the Kristallnacht, he was the man of the Nazi organization. You call that an Abman, a, um, uh, he was the, the, the leader that made the Aryzation of the fa-, o-, of the, of the business when it was sold, he took over. He was the, uh, Nazi, uh, labor union, if you can call it-- it wasn't a union. It was a Nazi organization made for workers. So he was the, uh, the man in charge for this. 

But, uh, he always made sure that when I came into an apartment house that we had to wire, and there were other people there-- plumbers and electricians and-- not electricians, plumbers and carpenters and, uh, painters, whoever was there-- he says, this is my little Jew apprentice here, so that everybody knew immediately that I was a Jew. And, um, uh, surprisingly, the workers themselves, apart from a few, didn't really give me too much of a hard time. I can remember a few that tried to give me a hard time. Uh, yell at me, you know, not to go here, and not to go there, and get out of here, and made remarks. But only a very few. The workers in general were much more tolerant than my, my own journeymen. 

Now, I had to go-- at 7:00 in the morning, he came to work. I had to be there before him. I had to carry his tools to wherever we were, second floor, third floor, fourth floor, spread out his tools, and be responsible. And when he came, he could go on the ladder and say, pliers, hammer, chisel. And it all had to be there. And if one was lost, I was responsible. And I was getting, uh, I think, at that time, I started with two marks a week, which was, I guess it would be about $0.50 a week today, or something like this. And for that, I had to be responsible for my own tools, and I was responsible for him. 

And this man really-- um, he gave me an awful hard time. Um, I, I hated his, his guts. I, I, I must have murdered him 1,000 times over and over again in my mind. Uh, I couldn't do very much, uh, because I was only a 15-year-old kid. 

And if I did anything wrong, any, any journeyman had the right at the time, uh, to hit an apprentice. And any master had the right to discipline any apprentice by physical means. And they made ample use of it. They made ample use of it. If I, uh, was plastering a hole that, uh, we made, and it wasn't clean, and it wasn't neat, and it wasn't up to standards, I got physically abused by that, quite a bit. And, um, I could never hit back. And, you know, it, uh, it was really, uh, quite a terrible situation. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think when your father said to you, it's likely you are going to be alone in the world, and you'd better get a skill? What did that make you think? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I agreed. I wanted to have a skill. I was too restless to sit in school. 

INTERVIEWER: I meant the idea that you might be left alone. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, this idea I, uh, I was frightened, of course. I, uh, I couldn't imagine being alone in the world. And, um, uh, but I saw that other people did that, too. My brother left, uh, a year before me. Uh, he went to Israel. And I left after him. But, um, the, the youth and, and people in general realized that, uh, everybody, sooner or later, will get out. 

So, uh, we, we had to, whether we wanted or not. And there was a certain adventure involved in that, too. As a young fellow to go out to, to, to England or to America or to be alone and, uh, see the world-- there was a certain adventurism involved in that, too. So it wasn't too much. I was, I was scared, and I was looking forward to it. And I wanted to get out. 

But of course, I was worried about my parents. I didn't want to leave them alone. But at that time, I really had nothing that I could say I want to go. This, uh, I could go or where I would go, because you had to have a lot of, uh, things in order. You had to have somebody that would guarantee for you in some country. And, uh, they finally found an aunt of mine who was in England who finally got somebody to get me a job as a trainee. And with that, the, he would guarantee that I could live and not be a, uh, burden to, uh, to, to the land, uh, that I was going to. And then finally, after all these thousands of papers-- or, or many papers, not thousands-- were supplied, then I could go to England. But this was only in 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: You talked about a cleaning lady who told you after Kristallnacht-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --that you'd better-- Who was that cleaning lady? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, we had a cleaning woman, uh, because my, my parents were active in, in, uh, in, in the restaurant. So we had a, uh, a cleaning lady who was, uh, more or less that we grew up with. Um, uh, I still remember her name. Her name was Emma. 

So, uh, she, she looked after us, and she looked after the house, and she cooked for us. And later on, she got married, and she moved out. She was living in, in our place. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

FRANK SCHOLL: And, um, we, later on, when we moved to this, uh, Strasse of the SA, which it was called later on when Hitler came, out of Kaiser Wilhelm Street was Street of the SA, Street of the Stormtroopers. So she moved to an apartment on the same floor on the same level as we were. 

And, uh, the Kristallnacht, uh, I was completely unaware of what was happening. And, uh, there was a knock at, uh, 6:00 in the morning. And it was Emma. And she said that her husband just came home from the night shift. She says, don't go out. The synagogues are burning. All the Jewish stores are smashed. The people are looting all the stores. And don't be caught. They are arresting Jews. 

And, uh, so I stayed home. She came to warn me. Uh, I didn't go to work. So, um, I, uh, I stayed, and I watched what was going on, and I saw the, uh, the police car coming closer and closer. And they arrested my, uh, a relative of mine next door. And when they came closer to us, when the police was next door, uh, this Emma came over. She says, come quickly. Go out the back door, and run away. 

And, uh, I flew down the stairs, and I went through the back door. And I ran-- the side street, we had a corner house. And I ran away, and I ran around the block, and I ran a couple of blocks up, and I went to another boy whom I knew. And they had already been there and arrested his father, and I stayed with him for a couple of days until the coast clears. 

I didn't know what was happening to my parents, because I didn't dare to call home. Uh, but my father had not been taken, because he was over the age limit. I guess the age limit at that time in 1938 was 50 or something. He must have been 50. But we shared our apartment with another family, because at that time, uh, it was hard. They came from uh, uh, Silesia. They were upstate Silesia someplace. And they couldn't exist there anymore, so they moved to Breslau because they couldn't exist there as Jews anymore. And they asked us whether we could share our apartment with them. So we split our apartment in two. There was a, a, a family of three. And this gentleman, they took. My father, they left home. He was a little bit younger. So they took him to concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't your father run down the stairs with you, or why did-- just-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Uh, I, I don't know. I don't know. He, he, uh, must have said-- I don't think my father was there. My father wasn't even home, come to think of it. My father was not home. My father was not home. Only this man was home. My father was out for some reason. 

INTERVIEWER: At 6:00-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: I don't know what happened. I, I really don't remember whether he was home or not. But I know that they didn't ask for him, because he was older. He was, uh, he was, uh, a couple of years older than the other man. But they did take the other man. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't the other man go with you? Why didn't Emma warn everyone to go? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I don't know. We didn't know who they were arresting. You see, we didn't know what was going on. We didn't know who was-- you know, they probably figured that they are told that they wouldn't take him. They would only take the young ones, because we saw young people being loaded up, and we saw people on the street throwing stones at them. The people from the street stopped, and they were saying they're arresting Jews, and they were throwing stones, the Germans, the spectators. That, we saw from our window. We looked down and see what was going on. And then I took off, and I ran. 

And this took one day, just 24 hours. After 24 hours, they didn't arrest anymore. And we went home. I stayed two days with, uh, my friend. And then I went home. And after that, it was all right. They didn't bother us anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't you think about leaving? Didn't you talk with your friends and others about leaving Germany? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Of course. Of course. This was, uh, definite then. Now, while I was, um, uh, while I was preparing my, my emigration, this, of course, you know, uh, uh, was giving me the decision now, we all have to leave, because this, we can't have anymore. 

And, um, later on, I went to Berlin, because there was a college, a Jewish college-- engineering college, which my father, uh, sent me to. Uh, and I was able to go one, one semester. I was able to go for about two, two months to this engineering college. And then I came back to Breslau, and I left for London. 

INTERVIEWER: And your parents? 

FRANK SCHOLL: My parents stayed behind. They were, at that time, didn't know where they were going. But they insisted that I had to go. My brother had gone two years ahead of time, so I know what-- you know, I knew that I was next, and they were afterwards. And they were working on their emigration. And they got away, I think, in 1940 1 or '42. 

INTERVIEWER: And your parents were able to leave? 

FRANK SCHOLL: My parents were able to leave. They took a train, uh, from Germany through Poland, through the entire, uh, Soviet Union, to Manchuria to Shanghai, China, four weeks on the train. This is how they got out. They, they were during the war under China, in China, uh, under the Japanese. 

INTERVIEWER: And you? You were in London by yourself? I was in London. And after one year, when the war broke out, uh, I was interned by the British. Um, the history of the war-- um, the first years of the war-- the first year of the war was the stagnant phase of the war, where nothing happened. 

And after one year, the Germans overran the Maginot Line, and, um, they ran, overran Belgium and Holland. And there was the Battle of Dunkirk. And the Dunkirk was a great defeat of the British troops. And refugees came over from Europe in, in droves. Uh, some refugees were-- uh, they, they said they were refugees. Uh, but they were, in effect, Nazis, and they came, uh, with, uh, radio sets and transmitting sets, and say-- they set up spy or-, uh, organizations because Hitler intended to invade Britain. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know this? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I found that out later on. 

INTERVIEWER: But what were you experiencing? What were you-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, I was experiencing, I was working. And from the beginning of the war, uh, I was, um, registered as a, an enemy alien. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you living? 

FRANK SCHOLL: In, uh, Slough, England. I was in a-- which is, uh, now where Heathrow Airport is. It's approximately one hour from London. And I was working there. 

INTERVIEWER: With whom were you living? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Uh, well, uh, I was living, uh, with a, uh, strange family. They, uh, got me my, the man who gave me work organized, uh, uh, so-called digs, um, uh, board and lodgings, called digs in, in Britain. He organized that for me. And I was living with a family with a small child. I had one room and board. 

INTERVIEWER: You're 16 years old, approximately. 

FRANK SCHOLL: I was, uh, 16 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: 17, mm-hmm. 

FRANK SCHOLL: I was-- no, no. I was 17 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: 17. 

FRANK SCHOLL: I was 17, and I was alone. I was all alone. There was nobody with me. Uh, I had an aunt in London, whom I visited every month or two. And other than that, there was nobody. And I couldn't speak English very well, only what I learned in school. And uh, I learned how to speak English, and I worked on the night shift. 

And I was, a, an enemy alien. And as enemy aliens, when the war broke out, we were registered as enemy aliens. We were only allowed in a three-mile circumference of our home. We were not allowed to go beyond that without notifying the police. 

And this was very much like Germany all over again, because that happened to me in Germany, too. Whenever we left, we had to go to the police and tell them, may we go to Berlin. And OK, so we got permission to go to Berlin and register in Berlin. We have arrived in Berlin, and here is our paper. We, we are allowed to stay here for a while, and so on and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: When was this in Germany that you had to register every time you moved around? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Oh, this, uh, this was very early. This was about, uh, 1935, 1936. We had to register whenever we wanted to go into another town. We had to go to the police station and register in another town. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone take exception to that? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, of course, we, we all took exception to that. But you didn't take exception to what the Nazis told you to do. You know, we were not, uh, not at all in a position. We, we, we did as we were told. 

INTERVIEWER: But in 19-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: We never realized that we were going to be killed. We never realized that there was a danger of killing. We knew there was a certain amount of, uh, ruthless-- there were murders, and, uh, we, there were concentration camps. But we never knew just what was going on until I, I went to the, uh, railroad station. After about, uh, after a few months, these people were allowed, or some of the people were allowed to come back, under the condition that they are leaving the country within a week or so. 

So when these people came back, I went to the station at 4:00 in the morning. They arrived, and they came back, and they told us what was going on in the concentration camps. Prior to this, we really didn't realize. Uh, we knew that they, that they tortured people in jail. We had known that, that people died in jail. But we never knew that there was some kind of a mass murder in the, in the offing. We had no idea. We wouldn't think of, uh, this monstrous, uh, kind of regime that it turned out to be. This is something which is mind-boggling if you think of it now, in retrospect. You cannot grasp what was going on then, now. Before, we had no imagination that anybody could do a thing like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's, let me get the, go back a little bit. In Germany in 1933, '34, people, all people, just Jewish people, had to register before they went anywhere. Who had to register? 

FRANK SCHOLL: I don't really remember. I remember going to, uh, the police station when I wanted to go to college in Berlin. I went there, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: But then you-- 

FRANK SCHOLL: --I was told-- 

INTERVIEWER: That was '37. 

FRANK SCHOLL: Right. And they also called me to the police station in 1938, I think. In 1938, when I came back from Berlin from college, and I was getting ready, they called me and asked me whether I'm going to leave Germany and how soon. And they told me, you'd better leave soon. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think a concentration camp was before you went to the railroad station? What did people think those words meant? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, we knew, uh, that concentration camp was a brutal institution. We knew that, uh, people were tortured. We knew somehow through hearsay that, uh, um, that, that some people died. We knew that they, they arrested people and put them in jail. A friend of mine, uh, died in jail. 

INTERVIEWER: The German people were an or-, were an organized people, were a, um, ordered people. They gave reasons for things, you have said. What reason did they give for the existence of the concentration camp and for the treatment? 

FRANK SCHOLL: They didn't. They didn't. We, we didn't talk to, to non-Jewish people about concentration camps. I don't remember that we talked about them. We did talk to some people that were talking to us who were in the underground. There was an underground. The communists were in the underground. 

And the, uh, brother, I believe, of this, uh, Emma, um, he was a communist. And he worked in one of the factories. And he was talking about an underground movement, what they did. And he hated the Nazis with a passion. And in the shop where I worked, there was also a, uh, a communist, who was later on killed. 

And with those people, I talked in a negative way about the Nazis. We didn't dare to talk to anybody else negatively about the Nazis, because, uh, there were so many spies and so many provocations that tried to get you to say something derogative about the Nazis. That's all you had to do-- say something derogative about the Nazis or the state, uh, or anything like this, and you were caught immediately. You were arrested immediately. This, you could not. 

This is where my chameleon theory came in again. I was, uh, uh, don't stick out. Don't say anything derogative. Don't do anything. Uh, just don't be recognized. Save yourself so that you can get out as soon as possible. 

INTERVIEWER: And the concentration camps, you knew-- well, what did you know? 

FRANK SCHOLL: We knew that, um, the concentration camp was a, was a, was a brutal institution. Uh, immediately in 1933, there were mass arrests-- not of Jews so much, but of opponents of the state-- Social Democrats, uh, active Social Democrats, uh, leaders of the parliament, uh, communists-- all the people that could possibly do anything to oppose the Nazi state were arrested. 

Um, the Jews-- well, first, they eliminated all the enemies of the state that could, um, that could be any-- that posed, could pose any kind of danger to the Nazis. They were completely elimi-, uh, uh, uh, eliminated so that any organization, uh, was immediately infiltrated and dissolved. And God help those who were carrying on any kind of an organization, and they found out about it. You were immediately arrested and never heard from again. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the rest of the population take exception to this? 

FRANK SCHOLL: Well, the rest of the population was, uh, in, in, uh, in, in hysterics, uh, uh, over Hitler. Either they yelled, "Heil Hitler, heil Hitler" and "Fuhrer," uh, "Fuehrer befiehl, wir folgen," uh, uh, "Fuhrer, um, you order, and we follow." Either they were Nazis or Nazi followers, or the other ones didn't dare to say anything, because the moment somebody said anything, they were immediately, immediately, uh, brutalized or arrested or something. 

So it was not-- and, you know, it went so far that when a procession came along with the Nazi flag, you were supposed to stop. You were supposed to raise your arm, say, "Heil Hitler," and stand there greeting the flag. 