INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: All right, you can-- you can ask. All right, we'll-- we'll-- go ahead. 

EDITH PRAKINS: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You can begin. 

Well, my name is Edith Plakens nee Fischgrund I come from the eastern part of Czechoslovakia from a, uh-- a middle class Jewish family. My father was a high official, very religious man. We were six children-- four boys. My sister was the oldest. I was the youngest. 

Czechoslovakia, being a very democratic country-- we had a very good life there. As far as antisemitism, actually I never felt it really. I knew there was antisemitism in Czechoslovakia, but it never hit us, and if it did, we were always able to defend ourselves just like here. When I came to this country, democracy was nothing new to me, because I was used to it. 

I come from an upper class-- upper middle class family where there were two emphases-- education and love for the family. And I suppose when I was liberated by the Germans as a young girl these were the two principles that have, uh, guided me. I had four brothers. They all went to universities. 

My sister did not. She went to gymnasium. She got married when she was 20 years old. Lived in Slovakia in a town, Vranov nad Toplou. Married a rather intelligent person. He was a jeweler, quite a wealthy man, and that was a big success in the background that I come from. I was the youngest. I went to gymnasium, and, uh, by time I grew up, uh, parents have changed, and-- and, uh, times have changed. And, uh, times became hard because, um, Hitler became more powerful, and it disturbed our beautiful life. 

We didn't know from one day to the other what's going to happen. The family was very strong, and, uh, it was just unthinkable-- absolutely unthinkable that somebody or some power would be able to unroot us because this was the first law in our family-- the loyalty to the family. And so in 1938, when Czechoslovakia had to, um, give back the Sudetenland to the Germans, this was a tremendous blow to all of us, especially to the Jewish people. 

My youngest brother was in the army then-- in the Czech army at the, uh, German-Czech border. And I recall as a young girl when he called, was crying, and told my father that, uh, now he has to come home. All the soldiers have to come home because there won't be the fights. 

And my father said, don't come home. We don't know what the future will bring. Go to Bratislava-- which was the capital of Slovakia-- and make sure that you can go illegally to Israel, because this is where we are going to go. And we never heard of him for six, seven months. And one day we got a, uh, telegram from Cairo. My brother had sent us a telegram. It was more than seven months, maybe a year. 

And, uh, I still remember the context of the telegram-- said, I am working for Vysoke Myto Vysoke Myto is a-- a Czech small city in Bohemia. It's the Fort Dix of Bohemia. So we knew he was in the British army, and he said my address is box number 5414, and I still remember it. And so we knew that my brother is safe. After that-- I don't recall whether it was in 1940 or '41-- the part of Czechoslovakia that we lived in went back to Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember changes in the people-- the attitude of people around you? 

EDITH PRAKINS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The-- the policies, things that affected you that were - 

EDITH PRAKINS: Well, up until then-- up until, uh-- we still were Czechoslovakia. We lived a pretty sheltered life, being very much afraid, locking the doors every night, being every morning we got up we said thank God nothing has happened, but as soon as we were-- became Hungary-- because this part of Czechoslovakia that we lived before the first war belonged to Hungary-- at the-- at the Versailles, uh, um-- what do you call it? Uh, treat-- treaty. This has been given to Czechoslovakia. 

And so Hitler said, I want this back for Hungary. And there our troubles have started. The Hungarians never liked Jews. They always just tolerated them, and we had a tough time. It was so that young girls now didn't go out in the evening anymore because maybe there were some rapes, but it wasn't as bad as that until the Germans came in. I-- I think it was in 19-- I think in 1944, but before that, let me tell you an episode. 

My sister, who lived in Slovakia, at this point she lived in a different country. The Slovaks never liked Jews. Never. And they became quislings to the Germans, and the first thing that they have done was that they took Jewish children and deported them to Auschwitz or wherever. We never knew where. We were so innocent we never knew where. Where are these people going? 

We heard of concentration camps, but we could not imagine that there is such a thing that Germans have done. This is supposed to be a-- a cultured people. We have given Bach and Beethoven. How come? 

And one day, a, uh-- a peasant lady came to us with a letter, an illegal letter from my sister and said next week I'm going to send over my children. They are going to be dressed up as little peasant boys in a little horse and buggy. And I want my sister-- me-- to wait for them at the border town in Hungary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you then? 

EDITH PRAKINS: I was at that time maybe 21 years old-- and I did. I-- well, I went there the night before. I checked into a hotel. The next morning, at 9 o'clock, two peasants, two ladies with the babushkas coming in on Main Street with two boys, 12 and 10, dressed up as peasant boys. They saw me right away. They had been told not to make faces. 

She brought them into a store. I picked them up. They had been paid a great deal of money for that by my brother-in-law. I took the boys to a toilet, and I had already clothes for them. I dressed them up as nice little boys and, uh, took them home by train. 

The problem was that my nephew spoke only Slovak and not Hungarian, and my-- I was afraid. If they speak only Slovak, if somebody asks them a question and won't speak Hungarian, everybody will knew that these are foreigners. But anyhow, we were very lucky. We brought them home, and these boys lived with us for one whole year illegally in our house in the bathroom. 

Each time the, um-- somebody rang the bell we took them to the bathroom so that nobody knows. Otherwise my father would have been shot. I was their s-- school teacher. I taught them everything from geography to, uh, mathematics, grammar. I finished my gymnasium by that time and my matura. And I was-- I loved them as a mother. 

They have never been out for one year-- only in the courtyard. And by this time, the family couldn't take it after a year. We couldn't take it anymore. And, um, the Hungarian government knew that there were thousands of Jewish children like that in Hungary, and they, uh, came out with a very good-- I don't know whether it was a law. I don't remember. I was very young. 

But I had to take these two boys to Budapest, and, uh, they were arrested for a week. And we have paid thousands of dollars to get them out free. And this has happened. Then I brought them back free from Budapest. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They bribed people 

EDITH PRAKINS: The money-- it's not-- was not a bribe. It was legal. The gov-- the Hungarian government-- they made a lot of money this way. We did not have that much money. My father was a high official with six children-- was not a rich man. And, uh, I don't know where he got it from. By this time, money-- money never was a great, uh, problem in our family. So we brought home the boys, and two weeks later my sister came over illegally, and she said she is-- she can't take it anymore. Whatever will happen to us, she wants to be with the family. 

And so in 1944-- early 1944 my father was one of the Judenrat. There were 10 Jews who were-- it's like it was a Jewish council. Anything that the Germans wanted-- they said we want to have 100,000 nails by tomorrow 12:00. They ask these 10 Jews. Otherwise we are going to have hostages. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's go back a bit, Edith, and talk about in the earlier days before the boys came to you. What did you notice as different, as changing? Indications of that tragedy that was about to descend? 

EDITH PRAKINS: We did not hear much, because by this time the Hungarian press most likely was censored. We listened to the British-- the BBC, and we knew that there were concentration camps, but see, in some miraculous way we thought we-- we are-- we are never going to go there. It's-- it's impossible. 

We had refugees from Poland-- Polish Jews who told us, do something. Go. Go to the em-- go to America. Go to Israel. Go to Palestine. Do something. Escape, because that's what's going to happen to you. 

And we thought, that's impossible. I mean, my father was born here. His father was born here, and I-- my great grandfather's, uh, uh-- was born here. It-- it's impossible, but we didn't know enough. Had we known enough, I think we would have done more. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you notice-- did you talk to non-Jewish people? Did you get a sense of that their attitude was different, that-- anything? Uh, did things happen on the street? Were-- were there any signs that it was getting bad? 

EDITH PRAKINS: Of course. When the Germans came in, uh, we had to wear the, uh, the yellow sign. You know, the, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Star. 

EDITH PRAKINS: The Star of David. My father had a very elegant beard, which he had to shave. He had a non-Jewish, uh, barber. He wouldn't shave it. I can't say that all Gentiles were against us. I won't say that. They didn't help us. They were passive. Maybe they were scared. 

Our best neighbors-- the day that we had been deported-- came into our house-- our best neighbor. And I recall it's the first time in my life I got two pair of new shoes, because in Europe, you don't buy two pairs of shoes. Not in our family. You bought one pair of new shoes. But I don't know why I bought two pair of shoes, and she knew about it. Maybe I told her four weeks before. 

And just before we were just looking around what to take with us-- we were deported-- she came in. She said, where are your shoes? You don't need it anyhow. And it wasn't even painful at this point. Who cared? Who really cared? We were not defended by Gentile friends by no means. They didn't do any harm to us. I have to be honest about it. 

Maybe I didn't have too many Gentile friends. I was not exposed to too many Gentiles. In-- in my circle, we lived a very good Jewish life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you go to school with non-Jewish people? 

EDITH PRAKINS: I went to school in the gymnasium with non-Jewish children, of course. And the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did they treat you in the 1940-- early '40s and late '30s? 

EDITH PRAKINS: Some with tremendous regret, but none of them helpful, really. And I had always the feeling they are scared. There wasn't one person who stood up and said, I'm going to do something for you. Not one person. Maybe they were scared, too. Maybe it was something new to them, too. I do not know. It's just like for 35 years I'm searching my own soul, asking myself, what should be my-- my view or my attitude vis-a-vis the Germans? I never came to that conclusion-- never. 

I don't-- if I-- if I ignore them, I'm doing something wrong. If-- if-- if I hate them, I'm wasting my time. How should I feel toward these people who have-- the greatest tragedy that they have done to us is that they have unrooted us. We are a people without a past. And I have been one among the very lucky ones, because I have a beautiful family who understands me, but if we had been unrooted of our past, we had to bring up children without mothers, without grandmothers. 

When I came home with my first daughter from the hospital, there was nobody to wait for me. I didn't know how to bring up a child. I didn't know that a child has to be warm or cold, or has to cough, or has to cry. There was nobody there to tell me relax. There was nobody to share with me when the child smiled the first time or brought home a good, uh, report card. His mommy and daddy was the uncles, and the-- and the cousins, and the grandmother. 

They uprooted us. We have been exiled, and I, myself, never feel that I'm in exile because I became such an American in spirit. I understand the American spirit. I know what makes an American tick, because that's the way I tick now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's go back, Edith, though, into that milieu of your life in this town and what happened chronologically, and then-- 

EDITH PRAKINS: Well, as I told you, we had a marvelous life. We had a very close family life, lots of relations. One brother was, uh, uh, in Vienna studying for a PhD-- my oldest brother. My second brother was in other part of Czechoslovakia-- a high official, who is today in Israel the head of the social security. My third brother was a lawyer, and my youngest brother had his matura and-- and, uh, joined the Czech army. And I was the youngest. 

I, uh, finished school, got my matura, and, uh, in-- with my background and even those days women didn't go out to work. Had I told my mother I want to go out to work, she would have told me decent women don't work. Decent women are educated, dress well, are poised, and know how to treat men and get married. Exactly. This is my background, and, uh, have to be cultured. Had to-- had to know how to entertain a man. And, uh, that was nothing to be ashamed of. My father was a very religious Orthodox Jew. My mother was not, but she was very strict. So I had a very religious father and a very strict mother-- almost Victorian. 

My father was the most charitable person I have ever met with a marvelous sense of humor and understanding for his children. None of his children were religious, and he understood us. In a way, we were revolutionaries in his eyes, I'm sure. But he loved us dearly, and he knew that, in principle, we are with him. 

My mother didn't care that much for her religion, but being a dutiful person, a dutiful wife, she had to go to the temple, too, three or four times yearly. My father was very, um, respected in town. In fact, I, um-- I was very proud of being my-- the daughter of my father. That was an accomplishment. Women did not accomplish their own in my days. It was what family one comes from. And, uh, sometimes I miss it. 

Of course, little by little, as the Germans came in, our lives had deteriorated. We were scared. We didn't go out. My father was afraid to go out. So they always sent me, because I was the only one-- at-- at this point, I was the only one at home. And I remember at 6 o'clock in the morning going and standing in line for bread and for sugar. And I came home at 10 o'clock. 

And then we had the idea that maybe-- I had an uncle in New York, my father's youngest brother. Maybe we should ask for a visa, an affidavit my uncle had sent to us. And I used to stand at the American consulate sometimes like 8 to 10 hours. Had we gotten a visa, we would have all been saved and made good citizens in this country. 

And so the day came. We had, uh, terrible days of fear that each time a German soldier has gotten drunk he might knock on the door, and you have to open the door, but it didn't happen. They-- they broke windows. They broke doors, but from physical harm, we were spared. Um, one day my father came home and said, uh, we just had a, uh-- a, uh-- a conference with one of the German office-- SS officers. And he told us, and within three days we have to leave this town, and we have to go into a brick factory. And we are going to be leaving for Germany. 

And my father had still-- his mother was 89 years old or 90 years old. My father, being a very clever person, said to him, uh, I can understand that you are going to take us to work. I'm 62 years old. I still can work. My daughter can work. My wife can work, but what do you want from my mother? How can she work? She is a sick woman. Why do you tell me you are going to take her to Germany? 

He was-- the German was clever, too. He said, you know, from our experience, um, we know that families-- the young will work much better if the families are there. We know you Jews. You stick together, and if you know the grandmother or grandfather is there, you'll work much better and much harder. 

I don't think my father has ever believed it-- never-- but he never talked about it, and in three days we had to leave everything that my father worked for 36 years. And that's no tragedy. Trust me. That's no tragedy, because you can build up a new empire for yourself. It is that this was the last time that our family was together. And my sister had two children. My brother-in-law, my mother, my father, and I moved into the, um-- to that big factory, and we stayed there for two weeks-- lived like animals-- really like animals. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was the brick factory? 

EDITH PRAKIN: It was about five miles outside of our town. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe the living conditions. 

EDITH PRAKIN: Well, I will tell you that, in one room like this-- is it 15 by 15? Maybe 30 people lived. If one slept, one has to-- stood up, stand up. And how we took it, I don't know. I do not know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were the boys with you? 

EDITH PRAKIN: The two boys were with us. My brothers were not. They lived in different towns, so they had been picked up in different towns. We did not know. We could not correspond by this time. And, uh, we had no telephone by this time. 

They took every old-- uh, all the licenses from Jews. They were not able to work. All the businesses were closed. And, uh, I must say that the Greek Catholic church, which had-- the bishop of the Greek Catholic church, uh, lived in our town, and my father went to ask him for help because nobody worked, and yet you had to buy bread. And they supported us-- not us, personally, but the Jews. They did. I will have to say that. 

They gave money to the Jews. I don't know whether the Germans knew about it or not. And this was that Greek Catholic bishop-- Orthodox. You know the Orth-- and, um, so after three-- or two weeks, we have been deported. We have been taken to the station. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you work in the brick factory? 

EDITH PRAKIN: No. It was not-- it was-- nobody-- uh, the brick factory I think belonged to-- to a Jewish concern, so it-- we just lived there in little huts. And this was just a transition to get them out from their own homes, put them into the brick factory, which was near the railroad station. And then they took us from the brick factory to the railroad station. 90 people in each box. Nine-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year was this? 

EDITH PRAKIN: This was nine-- June, 1944. We didn't know where. We had-- each of us had just a little bundle with food. That's what they told us to take. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 90 people. Would you talk-- 

EDITH PRAKIN: 9, 0 children, old people, young ones. It was hot. There was no air. I still see my mother sitting there in the corner with my sister, they're going-- they say, I'm so warm. I'm so hot. I have no air. 

And today, I couldn't understand it. Maybe I wasn't that warm. But I-- today I understand what she went through, not only because there was no air, but the anguish-- what has happened to her six children. And maybe that's what made her choke. So there is a mother I can understand. And my father did not speak for three days. 

But my sister-- before we arrived to Auschwitz, I remember when my sister told him, father, we have always been a very God loving people. How come that God has forsake us? I remember that very vividly. And she, in her anguish. And my father said, you know, we have forsaked him before, and I'm so happy about that-- that I heard it-- because my father was such a devout religious man that he believed, really, that he left God before God has left him-- that he went and died not in the vain, maybe. I don't know. 

And before we arrived to Auschwitz-- maybe a few miles. We-- we were in Auschwitz. We didn't know where we were. I never heard of Auschwitz. We just saw people running around like mad-- mad people. No hair and so-- clothes with-- with striped-- and I said to my father, you know, maybe we are going to survive. Look, there are people running around. Maybe they are workers. 

And my father said to me, look, my family. He said, uh, I think we have arrived. And there's one thing I-- I want to tell you. Whoever survives, you've got to go and work right away. Sell your knowledge. Go to work. Keep your sanity. And keep the principles that you have been taught. That was his last words I heard. And we came off. We were so happy to have some fresh air. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long had the trip taken? 

EDITH PRAKIN: I don't know. Maybe an eternity. Maybe only two days, maybe only 24 hours, maybe just six hours-- I do not know, but it seemed an eternity. I have-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember-- do you remember the box car? Do you remember other people? Did you talk to people? 

EDITH PRAKIN: Nobody talked. Nobody talked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did people cry? 

EDITH PRAKIN: We-- we just looked at one another. I remember I was full of life, a young girl, and I said, what's going to happen to me? I'm just starting. I'm just starting to blossom? I understood that. What's going to happen to me? And I just looked around. I didn't cry. Never. 

And I-- I think that, um, that also has strengthened my-- my feeling toward the Jewish people, because I saw them as animals. When you are hungry, you are like an animal because that pains you terribly, and yet they were not animals. Never. So we arrived. Before we arrived-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I-- I want to know. In the box car, however many hours, there must have been humiliations. 

EDITH PRAKIN: Terrible. There was terrible humiliation, because if it was 6 hours, or 10 hours, or three days, I do not know. In some ways, one has to relieve oneself, and it happened. Nobody has ever said a word. 

I know it for sure that there was near me a young man, maybe 35-- I never saw him. And he must have been in tremendous distress maybe after 24 hours. He couldn't get up and go somewhere. He just had to do his business wherever-- near me. I never felt that he was repulsive or did something wrong. And I'm sure he didn't feel-- if I have done it, I don't recall. 

It was so natural that we just are together, and we are going to suffer it out together. Nobody hated anybody. We were just wondering, what has happened to us? How come? Why don't we do something about it? 

It was impossible. It was done with such precision and so fast that the computer is nothing. A computer is baby stuff. The way the Germans have done that-- it was so well done, with such precision-- trust me, a computer could never do it. It would make a mistake. They didn't. It was thought out, and with their precision and, uh-- their compulsiveness. They have done-- from their point of you, had done a good job. One thing they have not done-- they did not kill our spirit. The more they hate us, the more proud I was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened when you got to the place? To Auschwitz? 

EDITH PRAKIN: Well, we got off. I didn't even get a chance-- sometimes that bothers me. I didn't get a chance to say goodbye to my mother. I should have said something, but I didn't, because I thought we would be together. And there were about 10 officers-- German officers that said go left, go right, go left, go right. 

And all of a sudden I-- I found myself to the right with, uh, 5,000 other women. Everything happened so fast. I don't even know how I was walking, and I found myself in a big room. And they were already shaving off my-- my head, and they gave me some clothes. I remember I had a long black skirt with white stripe, which was at least, uh, three sizes too large and a shocking yellow blouse. No shoes. That's all. And then they told us to go-- to stand appell 

I think five women or four women stood-- or maybe 2,000 women. And they took us to a block, they called it. That was our housing. And I was in block 23. We were, I think, about 2,000, 3,000 women there. There were these, um-- how you call it? These beds, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bunks. 

EDITH PRAKIN: Bunks. And I think six of us were sleeping on a bunk. By this time, I suppose that nature takes care of it. You don't think. You don't ask yourself where you are. The only thing that you can think of is that you are hungry. And they don't give you anything to eat. You don't ask yourself where your mother is, where your sister is. You just want to take care of yourself at this point. 

I stayed in block 23 I think for about five, six days. Maybe I ate once. And don't ask me how we looked. And, uh, one day I was standing near the block. I think it was about five or six days after I arrived. And, uh, many a times I look at my dog, and I think, what is he thinking of? Is he happy? Is he content? Does he know who I am? Does he think at all? 

And I think this is the way I must have been. You don't think. I was-- one just-- everything is closed. Where am I? I never heard the name Auschwitz. I didn't even know I was in Auschwitz. I knew-- I didn't know what a concentration camp was, and I thought maybe this is it, or maybe in five days they will take us to work. 

It's-- and I remember I was standing there for about-- after five or six days that we arrived, and somebody pats me on the shoulder, and I look at her, and I burst into crying. It was my sister-in-law. There were one million women. There were about 35 blocks. There were one million women-- looked all alike. No hair, some of them naked-- and my sister-in-law says hello to me. 

She says I'm in block 16. We arrived three days ago, and I have my three sisters with me. You are going to come and live with us. Of course. Without question. And after three days, I heard that block 23 has been sent to the crematorium, and from that day on, I knew I'm a survivor. I knew it no matter what is going to happen to me, and no matter how much I'm going to start, or they will hit me, or whatever, I am going to survive and tell the story one day. 

And I did. In some miraculous way, I always survived. Sometimes I say to my children not by my intelligence, maybe by my healthy instinct, I do not know. And I was there with my sister-in-law in block 16. I don't remember how long-- maybe six months, maybe seven months. And this was the best part, because they, uh, really just keep you to die or to wait to go to the crematorium. 

And have to tell you an episode, which I told Eva last night. I had terrible dysentery after a few months naturally. I maybe were 80, 90 pounds. Food was terrible. And, uh, I had to go to the bathroom. And there was still some humanity in me. I was embarrassed in the block, so I said I'll go to the latrine. Who cares? 

But there was a Blocksperre as they said. Their camp was closed. It was like a curfew because two prisoners were missing. Who knows? Maybe they committed suicide. We don't know. So I went. I figured I'll take that chance. And I-- when I came out, a German Aufseherin, a very famous one-- and I'm not proud of it-- Irma Grese-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Her name? 

EDITH PRAKIN: Confront-- Irma Grese is her name. She was the devil, the bestial devil of Auschwitz. She was beautiful-- absolutely beautiful blonde woman, impeccably dressed with high, shiny boots. And she confronted me, and she says, you know that there is a curfew. What are you doing here? And I said, I'm sorry. I have dysentery. I just had to go. I have terrible cramps. 

She says, turn around. And I did. And she always had that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Riding crop. 

EDITH PRAKIN: You know, that Peitsche How you call it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Riding crop. 

EDITH PRAKIN: That. And she hit me about 10 times on my back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is a-- with a whip? 

EDITH PRAKIN: With a whip. And she said, now you go back. I didn't cry. I did not cry. The humiliation pained me terribly. Not the physical-- one can survive physical pain, but how does one survive emotional pain? And I went back to the block. And little did I realize I was bleeding. And my sister-in-law said, you are bleeding. What has happened to you? I said, uh, nothing. 

She said, now you tell the truth. I said, oh, I fell down. In the meantime, my back, of course, blew up. So I had to tell her the story. And of course, uh, she started to cry and so on. It healed after three or four days. I'm a young person. I was a young and healthy person, so it healed. But it never healed my soul that I have been hit, I have been humiliated this way. And humiliated in front of my family, too, that I have been whipped. 

And yet, I recall very vividly that, as I walked back, I said to myself, I'm innocent. I'm even more noble than she is. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you manage the dysentery after the beating? And how did you know this person's name? 

EDITH PRAKIN: I didn't. We didn't know her person-- when I was liberated, she came to trial, and then I realized that I had the honor to be whipped by Irma Grese. And we all knew her, because she was absolutely beautiful, but a psychopath. 

I think Germany has connected all the psychopaths, and, uh-- and the sadistic element of their people, because no human being in his right mind with healthy instinct could have done what they have done to us. I also want to say, don't ever believe that the Germans did not know about it. I'm witness of it. 

They took us from Auschwitz one day into town of Auschwitz-- about 5,000 women. There was an epidemic, so they took us to-- to take certain baths, because of course, if there is an epidemic, they might get it too. And I can tell you that men and women came out from their homes, and I can recognize that woman today who came out with her-- with her apron, and she was still drying her hands and had a smile on her face just to look at us, how silly how stupid, and how ugly we look. And she knew it that we were innocent prisoners. All of them knew it, and they never had the guts to do something about it. Never. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they talk to you? 

EDITH PRAKIN: Never. I had an opportunity to talk only when I have been taken away from Auschwitz. I was very lucky. One day the great Mengele physician came, and, uh, also left and right, left and right. And, uh, they took about 3,000 women to a town in northern Germany-- Salzwedel They gave us different clothes-- a dress. That's all-- a half a bread. And I have to de-- describe this because it's something very unusual-- half a bread and a piece of margarine. 

We did not know how long we are-- where we go, what they are going to do with us, but we figure out, if they give us bread and margarine, they take us somewhere where we are going to live. They don't take us to the crematorium, but how long we are going to be away we did not know. And it's very interesting how the human inventiveness works-- or the human survival. 

None of us ate the first two days-- or maybe the first 24 hours. We were terribly hungry-- terribly. And I will never be-- I wish I will be-- maybe one has to be poetic or whatever to describe what hunger is all about. It pains like nothing on earth, and we were very hungry, but we did not eat the bread maybe for 24 hours, maybe for 36 hours. I do not recall how long we were in-- in those box cars. 

Only the last day because we couldn't take it. We started to eat the bread. And it's interesting. We all made a big hole in that half bread-- just a big hole-- and we put the margarine in. Nobody told anybody what to do, but all of us had done the right thing-- the same thing. They gave us one piece of bread-- no paper-- just one piece of bread in one hand and a piece of marg-- small piece of pan margarine in the other, and go. 

And we went into this box car, and I said to myself, how am I going to hold it? So I made the big hole. I put the margarine in, and I covered the margarine with the bread-- the-- the piece of bread that I took out. And my friend did that, and my sister-in-law did that. She didn't ask me what to do. And the other-- we had about 15 to 20, maybe 30 cars. I do not know. We all have done the same thing. 

We all came to the same conclusion. Don't eat it right away, because you might be on-- on five days, and then you are going to starve four days. Keep it as long as you can, and this is what we have done. 

And there's one episode that I would like to tell you. I don't know how long we have been in those box cars, but it was dark. I still hear it-- the-- I still hear the, um-- the train-- tum, tum, tum, tum. Nobody said a word. We were just wondering, where are they going to take us? 

One morning-- I think it was morning or early afternoon. I don't know. We arrived, and that-- the train stopped there for an hour. Why? We don't know. 

And a friend of mine said, why don't you stand up. There was just a little window with bars-- and see. I said, I can't. I don't have enough energy to climb up. She says, I'm going to sit down, and now you stand on my shoulders. And I did. 

And I looked out, and I saw paradise. The sun was bright and vivid. There was cleanliness all over. It was a station somewhere in Germany. There were three or four people there-- one woman with a child nicely dressed up. A child was crying. People-- people were people, not animals. 

And I saw thought, paradise must look like this. I have-- I have forgot already how normal people look like, how they act, how they speak, how they dress. I saw the sun in Auschwitz. I saw the sun come up, because we have to get up 4:00 in the morning, but it never was beautiful to me. Never. I n-- I never saw it shine. 

It was just the beginning of a horrible day, and in the evening, the end of what. And-- but here there was life, and I-- and I had such yearning. I still feel it in my bones. I had such yearning to live, to run, to just run away and never come back. To run to the end, where there is no way back. 

And when I told the girls-- I said, girls, you have no idea how beautiful the sun is, and I saw a baby was crying, and a woman was kissing that baby. Is there such a thing as love? 

And my sister-in-law at this point lost two children. Her-- one was six years old, and one was one-year-old. The boy's name was Eli, and the little girl was named Dina. And she knew she lost them. And she started to cry terribly. I was sorry I have ever said it. 

And you have-- we left, and about next day a German officer came in and said, who can cook? So with-- nobody wants to volunteer. He said, I need two cooks. And my sister-in-law said, well, how about volunteering? At least we won't starve. 

And I said, I'm scared. I'm scared to volunteer. Maybe that's-- maybe they-- they're fooling us. He said, I am serious. I need two cooks. So we volunteered. And about three, four hours later, we arrived to a town-- Salzwedel-- which had a big munition factory and a sugar factory. 

And as soon as we arrived, they put me to the kitchen. That was very nice, because there was food there. And I cooked for-- I think it was for 60 SS men and women. Those were the so-called, uh, SS men who took care of us-- of the prisoners. 

And, uh, every morning at 3:30 they woke me up. At 4 o'clock I was in the kitchen already, had to make coffee, breakfast, because at 5 o'clock, the prisoners have left for the munition factory. I worked in the munition factory for three days-- the first three days, and then they took me up, and maybe I cook too well. I don't know. 

And, um, I stayed there until my liberation. I had two bosses-- one SS man from Braunschweig, and one SS woman from Salzwedel. The woman wasn't bad. At least she asked me who I am. They never asked us anything. Never communicated with us, and, um, uh, it's the first time-- I-- I spoke German. It's the first time that somebody has asked me, who are you? Why are you here? 

And I told her. I figured, what can they do to me? So she'll kill me. By this time, really, life was very cheap. 

And the man was very harsh-- very harsh. The first day I came there I was very hungry, and I saw some cabbage. He told me to peel potatoes. So I peel the potatoes while he was there. I was terribly hungry, so while I-- I was peeling the potatoes, I ate the peels. 

And he ripped me on my eye. He says, I don't want you to do that. You peel the potatoes, and the peels will be thrown away. 

So I thought, well, he's not always going to be in the kitchen. If he wants me to work-- I-- by this time, I started to be rational. I was figuring out things. If they wanted to work, they have to give me to eat, because that's the only-- that was the only way to survival. If you have something to eat, you're going to survive, unless they kill you. 

I started to gain weight. Of course, we did not menstruate at all. And I started to gain weight. I was up to maybe 85 pounds in Auschwitz, and, of course, I had more to eat here. And, uh, I gained-- who knows-- 20 pounds. And, uh, I wasn't heavy. I was puffed up. My face was puffed up. 

And in Salzwedel, I have, um-- became my self again. Myself, if I would like to explain that-- that I have remembered home. I remembered my father, my mother, my family, and I want to conduct myself so that they are proud of me. And, um, I became very religious in a sense that I communicated with God. 

Every morning, at 3:30, when I came into this kitchen, I had 10 minutes talk with God-- not from fear. I never talked to him as a second class citizen. I demanded it. I demanded-- what he has done to his people, and I demanded to be liberated, because I want to live. I wanted it so badly that I would turn on everything. 

And every time I finished talking, I knew he answered me. You are going to be liberated. But of course, hard times came always-- every day something new. 

And, uh, I don't recall really how long I was in Salzwedel, but life was better because it no longer was a Vernichtungslager or a, uh-- a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Extermination-- 

EDITH PRAKIN: Extermination camp. It was a working camp, so conditions were better. One day, two French prisoners arrived to the camp. They were POWs who worked in the mun-- sugar factory in Salzwedel. 

And we saw men-- beautiful-- two young man, and I said to my sister-in-law, you know, I think I'm alive. I haven't thought-- for a year, I haven't thought man, woman, sex, to be in love. It's the first time I saw a decent man. And I thought he-- believe me, he was not as handsome fellow. I'm sure he wasn't, but I thought he was an Adonis. You are the most beautiful person on earth. 

They came to ask the commandant whether they could give us some food that they have received from the Red Cross, and the commandant said no. But I must say that our commandant, who was not an SS man-- I know his name-- Schrader. He came from Braunschweig, he told us, and he was in the regular army. 

He was not-- he was a man with some compassion, and I will tell you that I know it personally-- from personal experience, more so than the other prisoners. One day he came into the kitchen and said I need a laundry lady. I need somebody to do my wife's laundry. Would you give me her? Sure. 

So I went to his house. They took me in the car, and they took me down to the cellar. And this is where Europeans do the laundry, and there were about 15 sheets. I don't know if-- in Europe, one washes laundry once in four weeks, so it accumulates. 

And, uh, he told me I have to wash. So, you know, you have to whatever you call it, and I washed. I did the laundry. I boiled it-- whatever. I knew that-- I had been taught at home-- we didn't do it at home, but I knew how it was done. 

And it took maybe from 8:00 in the morning till about 7:00 in the evening, and then they brought me up to the kitchen and gave me something to eat, just like my mother did with her laundry lady. And, uh, he said to me, where do you come from? Are you, sind sie eine Judin? Are you Jewish? Yes. Where do you come from? Czechoslovakia. 

He said to me, why did you have to be a, uh-- a paratrooper? Why? I said, I'm a paratrooper? I said, excuse me. Why do you say that? He said, well, you are here because you were a paratrooper. 

I said, I don't even know how somebody-- a paratrooper? I said, I'm here for one reason-- that I have been born Jewish. He said, what family do you come from? And I tell him. He said, I can't believe it that you are here just because you are-- I said, yes. You better believe it. 

And he-- he looked at his wife. And they were people of 60s. And so he gave me some wienerschnitzel there and whatever, you know. And he took me back. 