INTERVIEWER: Whenever you're ready, we're ready. I don't want the ask the question exactly. I'm going to just hold this up and hopefully that will remind you. I'll write it again so you can read it. 

SUBJECT 1: We have to come to it, because this was later. There was plenty of hell before. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. Don't get ahead of your story. I have time. For this, believe me, I have time. No matter what's happening out there. 

OK. I'm ready. Just close the door. OK. I don't know where we left off exactly when we stopped, but just continue talking. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: OK 

SUBJECT 2: In 1942, in May 1942, it happened, they established an office of the Kriminalpolizei in the ghetto. Kriminalpolizei means-- it was a Gestapo office. Gestapo were in the ghetto. In Kriminalpolizei, the agents of the policeman, or the agents in the Kriminalpolizei were born in Poland. Volksdeutsche, we called them. Volksdeutsche, they were Polish citizens. There were born in Poland. They spoke Jewish. Some of them spoke Jewish better than the Jewish people. They were raised among the Jewish people. They were the agents in the Criminal police. 

They had established an office there in a building of a church. And they called in every day 20 or 30 Jews, and beat them up. They should give them away their dollars or gold or silver or diamonds, whatever they have. They killed to death in their office one of my uncles. Then one day they called my father. Then they called all three brothers. We were three brothers in the ghetto. As I told you before, two brothers and a sister and a baby were at Warsaw ghetto, which they did not survive. 

So they called us the next day, and they kept us in the cellar. And upstairs were the offices. They called up upstairs. And we heard-- when they'd beat, the screaming of each other, we heard each other screaming, because it was in the same building. 

SUBJECT 1: With a stick. 

SUBJECT 2: Then my father-- we were 11, 12 days there. My father lived-- after we left-- 

SUBJECT 1: Left the building. 

SUBJECT 2: My father lived only a few months later, in November. This was May. In November, he died of the beating. He couldn't take it. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they beat him? 

SUBJECT 2: Now, I can tell you how they beat me. To first day I had to lay down on the floor with my back up. They called it Jewish is a tuchus. And with a stick like a bamboo stick, the stick had-- you know a bamboo stick? I had to count in German, ein, zwei, drei. I counted as they beat my on my back. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was doing the beating? 

SUBJECT 2: A German agent. A German-- a Volksdeutche. 

SUBJECT 1: They had them work. 

SUBJECT 2: I counted to 10. He said, you are lying. It's not 10, it's nine. You have to start again at one. He started again at one until 10. At one point, I raised my hand so the stick shouldn't fall on me. You know, like-- how to say it. 

INTERVIEWER: Deflect the stick? 

SUBJECT 2: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Push it away. 

SUBJECT 2: Push it away. So I got hurt my hand. And when I came down to the cellar after the beating, there was in the cellar a surgeon, a young Jewish surgeon, who was arrested also. And he examined my hand. And he said, I think you have a broken finger. Notify them, the Jewish guard, the Jewish guard. Tell the Jewish policemen. Maybe they will send you to the hospital. And then you will be safe. They will not beat you anymore. 

So I did. I told the Jewish policeman that I think I have a broken finger. So the next day, they called up that they understood that the surgeon, the Jewish doctor, told me this. They called him up and they beat him. He came down half dead to the cellar, back the doctor. 

One of the days among the 12 days I was there, I was-- you know what soccer, the playing of the soccer ball is? I was the ball, and the six agents were the players, With there legs, with their feet. They pulled me back and forth, back and forth. Until they called up the Jewish policeman to take me down because I couldn't walk anymore down. 

So every day we had different beatings and different ways Until after the 11 or 12 days, they sent us home. We gave them away whatever we had. 

INTERVIEWER: These people were German people? 

SUBJECT 2: German, born in Poland. Real Germans who were raised-- 

SUBJECT 1: This was established by the Nazis. The Nazis established it. It wasn't their own doing. 

SUBJECT 2: All the Volksdeutsche-- 

INTERVIEWER: They weren't Jewish? 

SUBJECT 2: They were Germans. All of them became Nazis. All the Germans. Suppose in the United States, there are Germans living here, right? God forbid, they became not Americans anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were they beating you? Did they say? 

SUBJECT 2: They wanted we should give them the gold, the silver, the diamonds, whichever, the jewelery of whatever one has. They took them away. 

INTERVIEWER: They thought you were hiding it? 

SUBJECT 2: That's right. We did hide. My younger brother, who is living now in New York, he took them-- the agent-- to the place where were hiding, took out from the ground and gave them away. But before they ask you about this, they beat you. The beat you days and days and days, then they say what they want. 

INTERVIEWER: In other words, you didn't know why they were beating you? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. We knew that, but-- suppose we told them we had it hidden. We will give you away. This and this. But they didn't believe you? You have more, you have more, you have more. 

SUBJECT 1: No matter what. 

SUBJECT 2: But if we didn't have anymore? You know what I mean? They ask for more, and more, and more, and more. They didn't believe you if you said, I have only this or I have nothing. Some people came up, they have nothing to give away. They beat them. An uncle of mine they beat to death there, because he didn't have anything to give away. 

SUBJECT 1: I was there for one day. 

SUBJECT 2: They take out the [Unintelligible]. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was "there"? A special place-- 

SUBJECT 2: In the city-- 

SUBJECT 1: The office. The Kriminalpolizei. 

SUBJECT 2: The Kriminal-- We called it Kripo for abbreviation, for short. Kripo-- Kriminalpolizei. The gestapo were in the gestapo uniforms. But they were in civilian clothing. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you after that soccer game? 

SUBJECT 2: They took me down. I was laying down on the bunk, couldn't move. Next day they take me again up and beat me again in a different way. 

INTERVIEWER: This was in the police station? 

SUBJECT 2: The police station. They call it a police station. They call it a police station. Kriminalpolizei, we called it. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't let you go home? 

SUBJECT 2: After the 12 days, we went all together home. My father and all three brothers. We three brothers, we went home. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? 

SUBJECT 2: You didn't think anything. You couldn't-- There's nothing to think about. We knew what happens. We knew that every day if you live one day more, you didn't know what will happen the next day. You didn't know what will happen the next day. 

SUBJECT 1: It was hell. It was just hell. 

SUBJECT 2: Now, let's say about food. We didn't have enough food. So it was a time already that I couldn't walk. I moved my legs like an old man. I couldn't move anymore, because the legs were swollen from the starvation diet. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you survive the kicks of the soccer players? 

SUBJECT 1: May I now say something? When I met him, after the war, we were taken to Sweden. We are jumping five years. He was nine months in the hospital in a cast with his back-- 

SUBJECT 2: From the beating. 

SUBJECT 1: Still the aftermath. 

SUBJECT 2: I couldn't walk anymore. 

SUBJECT 1: Before we got married, nine months he was in a cast. 

SUBJECT 2: I couldn't walk anymore normally from the beating. My back beating. After the liberation, how I survived-- this is a miracle. I didn't survive because I was strong or I was physical. It's a miracle. If you believe in miracles, it was a miracle. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- were you supposed to be curled up like a ball, to be a soccer-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, no. I was laying on the floor and they kicked me. They kicked me from one to the other. I was laying on the floor. I couldn't move. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean on the ground? 

SUBJECT 2: On the floor, on the office there. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, the soccer game was in the office? 

SUBJECT 2: In the office, sure. We go in the room. 

SUBJECT 1: They called it a soccer game. They were just kicking him. 

SUBJECT 2: I called it a soccer game, because they were kicking me from one to the other, like soccer players are doing with the ball. I called it a soccer game, not them. How I survived the whole thing is a miracle. Only a miracle. 

SUBJECT 1: And this is only-- 

SUBJECT 2: Now, it happened in 1942. The orders came-- all children up to 10 years old had to be brought down to the street. 

SUBJECT 1: The reason-- 

SUBJECT 2: And young couple-- excuse me-- and couples, parents I mean, took their children, 99% at least, took their children to the street. They were put onto the trucks, and we knew they were going to the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they take the children? 

SUBJECT 1: Because they're not productive. They can't work. They can't feed the children. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did parents take the children down? 

SUBJECT 1: That's a very good question. We didn't understand why. We just didn't understand why. 

SUBJECT 2: After this happened, the same day the German military police, whatever they called themselves, ran all over the apartments and all the buildings in the ghetto to look if some children are left. And suppose they would caught somebody, the parents will go with them. So the parents took them down. 

SUBJECT 1: The reason may be because they were lying. They said the children are not productive. We can't feed the ghetto. We don't have enough food. We will take the children to Germany and give them to German families. And some people believed it, which was of course not true. But I saw the truck with the children, with the screaming children. And if I ever lived until 300, I would never forget that. Little four-year-olds, five-year-olds. I had friends personally-- 

SUBJECT 2: Until 10 years old. 

SUBJECT 1: They had the screaming children on the truck going to wherever they went. This was one thing of the war and the ghetto that's impossible to live with. It wakes me up at night. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were the children screaming? Were they hurting them? 

SUBJECT 1: No, but they were taken away from their parents. They were put on a truck. And children are children-- I mean, they didn't-- according to Eichmann at the trial he said, we gave them chocolate. I don't know whether they got chocolate, but all I know that I saw at my window was what I heard. It was early in the morning. I heard the truck with screaming children. 

SUBJECT 2: Not only this. It happened that before this, they took away the children that some of the agents or military men, soldiers came to a house, they could take a child. Rip off in two-- 

SUBJECT 1: They did it to babies. 

SUBJECT 2: They threw them through the window. 

SUBJECT 1: They did it to a newborn baby. This I saw. This I saw. A mother, a woman, ran. She just ran with the little baby, and she thought that she would appeal to the soldier. That she has a little baby, he should let her go or whatever. And he took that baby and ripped it apart. And I saw. Just like that. Of course, I ran too because I was afraid he shouldn't be at me next. I was standing like it was across the street. Where she went, whether she was going somewhere, she was running somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER: He killed the baby? 

SUBJECT 1: He killed the baby. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the mother do? Did you see? 

SUBJECT 1: Screamed. She screamed. She was wild. She was just wild. And like I said, I left the place. 

SUBJECT 2: Nobody can do any-- could have done anything. I mean, even if you saw he will kill your father, your mother, your brother, you could stay and look and run away. That's all you can do. 

SUBJECT 1: If you ask about feelings, if you ask people about feelings-- I asked myself in the beginning the same thing. The first ordinance was tragic. We cried. People pulled hair. What's it going to be? The second was bad. The third, you take already. And then it just comes to you, you're already-- how do they-- 

INTERVIEWER: Numb? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. You numb. We were numb. We were already known. We were numb. The five years there were no feelings. There were no-- just-- 

SUBJECT 2: Waiting either the war should end or the end of us. Just waiting. 

SUBJECT 1: What they do to people, our only dream, our only thoughts-- this was their scheme. To make the animals out of us. Our only dream was a piece of bread. You went to bed at night dreaming about a piece of bread. You got up in the morning dreaming of bread. You would do anything for a piece of bread. A piece of bread was your whole life. We were just-- we weren't thinking. 

SUBJECT 2: After my father died in November 1942, my mother was laying in bed with pneumonia. Then I got sick the same pneumonia, the same time. We called in a doctor, Jewish doctor of course, to the ghetto. He didn't have any-- he said, I don't have any medication for you because we didn't have any medication. Let's hope. You'll stay in bed, but we need some food. So he prescribed a prescription for a pound, or a kilo, two pounds, of potato peels. Potato peels, you had to have a prescription from a doctor to get a pound or two pounds of potato peels. And this my mother grounded in like a meat grounding machine and made-- 

SUBJECT 1: We all did it. 

SUBJECT 2: We ate this. 

SUBJECT 1: Coffee grounds. 

SUBJECT 2: Coffee. Coffee grounds. 

SUBJECT 1: We made puddings out of coffee grounds. 

INTERVIEWER: Made what? 

SUBJECT 1: Puddings out of coffee grounds. Just to fill the stomach. 

SUBJECT 2: And this made you a hole in your stomach. 

SUBJECT 1: And you have pictures here of people-- 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? What else did you see? Do you remember other things that you saw? What is that man carrying? 

SUBJECT 1: A soup. He went to the kitchen to get his ration, and he's carrying a soup. He hardly got home with the soup. He just drank it going home. These are the faces of the people in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: Why are they standing in line there? 

SUBJECT 1: For the soup to get their daily ration. The soup. The daily soup. 

SUBJECT 2: We were working in the shops. They gave us a soup. At lunch time they gave us a soup, which was more water than anything else. 

INTERVIEWER: Who gave the soup? 

SUBJECT 1: The committee. 

SUBJECT 2: The German-- the Germans, ordered the Jewish governments are called in the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT 2: Every day, except the ration we got, we bought in the store. We got ration cards, right? The working people, and almost everybody did work for them, got the soup in the middle of the day. They have kitchens in each shop. They established kitchens, big kitchens. 

SUBJECT 1: Public kitchens. 

SUBJECT 2: And then we were standing in line to get to soup. The soup was-- 

SUBJECT 1: Three pieces of potato-- 

SUBJECT 2: And water. 

SUBJECT 1: A little bit of barley. 

SUBJECT 2: It was nothing. Nothing to-- it was better than nothing. 

SUBJECT 1: It was still a soup, but it wasn't enough to fill your stomach. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- people must have been dying. 

SUBJECT 1: Of course. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened-- 

SUBJECT 2: People we spoke to people today-- after 5:00, like my wife said, there was a curfew. You couldn't walk out the street. So people gathered in the-- 

SUBJECT 1: Houses. 

SUBJECT 2: In the yard of the buildings. The yards. You spoke to them. Neighbors. The next morning, a few of them were dead. Tonight we spoke to them, next morning a few of them were dead, because of starvation. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to the dead people? 

SUBJECT 2: They took them away. They took them away. The Jewish committee, or the Jewish government, which I called them, established-- [NON-ENGLISH]. In Jewish, we said [NON-ENGLISH]. This is in Hebrew. People who take care of the funerals. This was-- we had it before the war, all the [NON-ENGLISH]-- funeral committees, but in another way. But this time-- let's say my father died in November. I said, you know, the Jewish tradition you have to wash the corpse, the body and everything in the funeral parlor. But then there was no funeral parlors anymore. We did it in our house on the table, which we used to eat. My father-- came in, a few men, the [NON-ENGLISH] of the funeral committee, and they washed him. I held his head. I didn't cry. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't cry? 

SUBJECT 2: I would cry now. I couldn't cry. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't cry? 

SUBJECT 2: No. I couldn't cry. 

SUBJECT 1: You don't want to take that picture? 

SUBJECT 2: My mother died in the concentration camp later after the evacuation of the ghetto. She died-- we were in different camps. She was in a different camp than me and my three brothers. 

SUBJECT 1: I was in the same, but not at the same time. In the same place. But Ravensbruk was one of the camps. And I think 1944 when they-- 

SUBJECT 2: For some reason, I cannot explain now, how we got the news that she died in the beginning of 1945 in a concentration camp. The day she-- we took this day for the day she died, [NON-ENGLISH]. Yuletide, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: Wasn't your sister with her? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. Helen. Helen was there. My sister-in-law, she married later my brother, she was in the same camp. She told us the day-- she told us the day that she died. We didn't know the exact day. She died from starvation and beating in Ravensbruk concentration camp. And we took this day. 

SUBJECT 1: We could sit-- we could sit and talk about-- 

INTERVIEWER: When did you leave the ghetto? What happened? 

SUBJECT 1: 1944. August 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know each other? 

SUBJECT 1: Not then, no. We met after. 

SUBJECT 2: We met after the liberation. 

SUBJECT 1: After the liberation, the Red Cross took us to Sweden to get medical help. And that's when we met. We didn't get married right away, because he was nine months in the hospital, as I mentioned before. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. But when did you leave the ghetto? 

SUBJECT 1: We didn't really leave. They took us, they came with the story-- these were the Germans. The Nazis. They came with the story that they cannot support, the cannot bring any work for us. We were working, right? I was working. I was sewing. I never knew anything about sewing, but I was sewing. You had to work in order to get your ration, to get your daily soup and piece of bread. Or else you wouldn't get anything. 

So they told us they cannot support the ghetto anymore. The truth, we learned later, that the Russians were approaching. And they didn't want us to stay there. We probably could survive, more people could probably survive. So they took us to Auschwitz. But they wouldn't tell us. How? In cattle trains. They put-- oh, yeah. They put 50 people-- I was among them. 50 people in a cattle train. Just a floor. Not enough places to lie down. Maybe to sit down cramped like that. For three days. It was a journey from Lodz to Auschwitz, maybe would take seven hours normally by train. It took three days. 

A lot of people died. And it was locked, and you were a human being. You have to do human things. So right there they put a pail, just to strip us of our dignity. This was also their way, their scheme. You had no choice. And after the three days-- 

SUBJECT 2: Men and women together, of course. 

SUBJECT 1: Men, women, and children. There were no children left, but men and women. They opened the train, and there was-- young people one side, and old people. And then we knew, but it was too late. We had no choice, even if we had known sooner, because the ghetto was dismantled. 

SUBJECT 2: Will you please tell also about the naked-- what happened to the young women. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh well, I'm going to. I'm coming to that. Young people one side, the older people the other side. And we knew. We saw the smoke already. And we were told later where they're going, and we knew where they were going. They were going to the gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? 

SUBJECT 1: Nothing. Nothing. Nothing. I was on the side, I know where-- I'm going to work. I knew I was young, I was strong. How I kept my health-- I went through in the ghetto. I went through dysentery. I had typhus. I had pleurisy, because of living like that, but somehow I survived. And I lived. 

And then they took us to barracks, and shaved our heads. This was Auschwitz in 1944. You asked us how we didn't leave-- they gave us the transportation. They were very good to us. Shaved our heads, took away whatever they told us we could take some luggage. What do you take? Underwear, a change of clothing. They took everything away. I don't mind those things, I wouldn't have them any more, but the pictures. I would like a picture of my mother. Even that they wouldn't let you keep. Nothing. 

Naked, stripped naked, they took us to a different place. The other people from Auschwitz thought that they'd take us to the crematorium, but they got word that they need people to work. They have to send new people, new replacements, to the Russian front. So they needed soldiers. And we were young and strong like, I say again. They took 500 women-- selected. 

The selection went on every day. Zahlappell, zahlappell. You were so precious to them, they counted you every hour. Every hour we had bare feet, too. No clothing, of course. I was barefoot with a shaved head. August, and during the day the sun was still strong. Burnt our head. The ground was cold. Barefoot. They gave us-- have you ever seen the stripe something? And on the back they painted a cross, to make you more ridiculous. To ridicule you more. Maybe shaving your head isn't enough. To ridicule you more. 

And after the seven days, every day they selected and selected, the nicest and the prettiest and the healthiest. We didn't know what it is about, but later they put us on a train. They gave us a shower, without a towel, of course. We walked out from the shower, outside. You didn't wipe, you couldn't you're body. No. And we were told that we are going to a factory to work in an ammunition factory. We were 500 women between the ages of 18, let's say, and 30. Anything older than that went to the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever molested by the gestapo or the guards? 

SUBJECT 1: Personally, I was just beaten once in Auschwitz before the transport, because I didn't stand straight in line. I was a little out. So I got a few slaps. One day, I-- the Kripo, he told. I had 100 Swiss marks, but then we have to go back to the Kripo. I was arrested for one day, and I was beaten. I wore a sweater embroidered with beads, and that stick, the beating, was so strong that the beads became powdered. The beads became powder. But this was not the same time that he was there. It was a little later on. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you-- 

SUBJECT 1: At Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever molested sexually? 

SUBJECT 1: Examined. Not otherwise. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean, examined? 

SUBJECT 1: Later, when we came to that camp, to the Muhlhausen it was called. It was a munition factory in East Germany. They examined us. Again, we were like 500 women, and we had to be healthy and strong. And they sent in doctors to see if somebody there was nobody pregnant. Two women, unfortunately, were pregnant. And they took them away. 

INTERVIEWER: Away? 

SUBJECT 1: Away. Yeah, away. We knew already what away means. They took these two women away. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT 1: To the gas chamber. 

INTERVIEWER: And they examined the rest of you? 

SUBJECT 1: They examined the rest of us, again and again. 

INTERVIEWER: Internal examination? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Only in Ravensbruk, also like I said, if I live until 300, I wouldn't forget. There are certain things that are more tragic. There was this German doctor-- those same 500 women, they kept us together. From Auschwitz they took us to Ravensbruk. It's another concentration camp. At Ravensbruk did us, a very good thing to us, too. Any way, this doctor, a German doctor, was sitting like that, and 500 women have to parade all naked. Now, I couldn't kill a fly. If I see a fly, I would chase it away. I wouldn't stamp it. But I could kill that man at the time. If I had the means of shooting him, I would. See how circumstances could make you say, do we think? 

We do think. We are numb, we were numb. But at that time, 500 women-- just he was sitting and smiling and having a good time seeing 500 women parading naked in front of him. We learned later-- I don't know whether it's true, because I personally didn't see it-- that he selected a few to be his mistress. For his own. But I am not sure about that. We heard about it. At the parading, he just wanted to see the prettiest bodies, the prettiest face. He wanted everything. Sitting and parading for a half hour. This was before they took us to Muhlhausen. 

Also they took us to walk by-- we walked by a little chamber, a room, and we saw like when you cut up a body after death. What's it called? 

INTERVIEWER: Autopsy. 

SUBJECT 1: Autopsy. We saw the human organs. And they made us look there. Just to look. And we did. We saw it. Walked by-- of course not in, but by. The door was open, wide open. And there it was different dishes, different things, human parts. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say? 

SUBJECT 1: Nothing. They didn't tell us-- they just wanted us to see. No, nothing. No explanation. No explanation. 

INTERVIEWER: You knew what it was? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yeah. By then we knew everything. But we believed that if we go to Muhlhausen and we will be working in the ammunition factory, we have a chance for a while. And we did. We survived there for six months. On a soup a day and two slices of bread. Once in a while a little sugar. Once in a while a slice of Bologna-- once in a while, maybe once a month. And somehow, nobody died. A few girls were sick, but they had a place where they could stay a day or two. If they were very sick, they were taken that way. The five of us, we got to Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: What five of you? 

SUBJECT 1: The 500, I meant. We got two Belsen in March. 

SUBJECT 2: 1945. 

SUBJECT 1: 1945. Of course, again, we had no news. We had radio. We had no newspaper. We don't know. We didn't know why they don't need us anymore. One thing we knew, that I was working-- I had to fill six machines. And the part was called-- I still remember-- Federhaus Zahne Schneiden. That means where the spring that pulls out the bullet, that part. Federhaus Zahne Schneiden, this has to be a very precise thing. 

I knew that they had no oil. They had to do it with soap and water. And the foreman-- you know, I heard them, overheard them, saying, oh things are getting bad here. They were cursing. Things are getting bad here. And we thought to ourselves, this is the end. That's the end of the war, the end of something. And sure enough, it was the end of us there. Because had they left us there, we could see-- again, the Russians were approaching. The Russians-- things were bad already. The American bombs, the Russian bombs. Things were bad for Hitler already. But us, they still had to finish us. 

They sent us to Belsen. Again, three days in a train. Again, three days crammed together. Again, three days without food and water. And Belsen was the finishing point. There, I think out of 500, maybe 20 or 30 survived. 

The day the British liberated us, I was already getting blisters. I was 79 pounds. I weighed 79 pounds at the end. They weighed us later when they took us to Sweden. They cleaned us from the lice. Lice like sand. You go to the beach, now you have sand on your body? We had lice. Just like sand. And they were eating and burning your body. The head, fortunately, was shaven. It began to grow back of a little bit. So there were no lice on the head. 

So later, when they took us to Belsen. And this was-- no barracks, no place to sleep, no place to be. And people were just lying. And I have in this book here of the Nuremberg Trial that they showed, and the atrocities. The piles of dead bodies that they photographed. 

SUBJECT 2: You told me-- 

INTERVIEWER: You saw that? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, I was there. 

SUBJECT 2: She was among the dead bodies. She was laying among the dead bodies. 

SUBJECT 1: The British nurses came in to select-- let's say we were in a room, a barrack, right? It was a room a little bigger than this. There were about 20 girls there. And some of them were dead. I was with blisters, but I was still-- my eyes were still open and I could still say a word. They figured they'll take me out to a hospital. They had erected a hospital-- 

SUBJECT 2: The English. 

SUBJECT 1: The British. And they took me there for two days. Even if they call it a hospital, I didn't see an aspirin for two days. I didn't see a drink of water for two days. But at least I was cleaned up. I was clean, and I was-- 

INTERVIEWER: They found you in the dead bodies? 

SUBJECT 1: Among dead bodies. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were you lying there? 

SUBJECT 1: Because I had no other place. 

SUBJECT 2: If the English would come in a day later, she would-- 

SUBJECT 1: If they had come a day later, I wouldn't be here. I would be among the other dead. 

INTERVIEWER: You were lying there? 

SUBJECT 1: Belsen was a finishing place. They were just bringing in from all the concentration camps to Belsen. This was the finishing place. 

SUBJECT 2: This was April 14th, the English came into the camp, into Belsen. 

SUBJECT 1: They were shooting. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

SUBJECT 2: I was in Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg, in concentration camp. I was evacuated from the ghetto in November, not in August, like she was. A group of 250 men, which we were evacuated, taken, to the concentration camp in Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg. Then after two or three weeks they sent us to Arbeitslager-- this is a working camp in Königs Wusterhausen. We had Königs Wusterhausen before was the war was the biggest registration there. And when there we walked-- we were the 250 men, only Jewish people from our ghetto. And when the Russians-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the trip to Sachsenhausen? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, we were in the same-- 

INTERVIEWER: Describe that trip. 

SUBJECT 2: In those cattle wagons, you know? Cattle cars. We went, they took us there to Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you saw? What you felt? What it was like in that cattle car? Do you remember that ride? 

SUBJECT 2: The same way as my wife explained. We were about 50 or 40 or 50 men. Only men, not women, in the car. And without food, without water. I couldn't remember how many days we were there-- one day or two or three days-- I can't say this. I don't remember this. 

But when we came there, they kept us in Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg about two or three weeks, and sent us to the arbeitslager working camp there. Koenigs Wusterhausen. There we were until the end of April, April 20th about. Every day, about the end of April, the American pilot bombers came and bombed Berlin. This was near Berlin, about 30 kilometers east of Berlin. And we were glad. We were glad to see the bombers coming. Some bombs reached us also, but it didn't matter. We were glad the bombers were coming to bomb Berlin. Maybe this will be the end of it. 

Then they evacuated the camp. The Russians came from the east. They were near, already near Koenigs Wusterhausen. The Americans came from the west. So they evacuated the camp, and they sent us back to the concentration camp Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg. And then they evacuated this camp also, and sent us away on a march. From April 20th until May 2nd, we marched northwest in Germany to the American side. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember that march? 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. This is I will never forget. 

INTERVIEWER: What about that march? 

SUBJECT 2: The whole camp had about from 30,000 to 40,000 inmates. They called us inmates. Haftlinger-- they called us haftlinger, a German expression for prisoners. They gave us a piece of bread, a loaf of bread on the way. We walked without food, without water from the morning until late at night. Then we slept on the ground. Wherever we arrived, we slept on the ground. Rain or snow-- this was in April. It was still cold in Germany. Still cold. I will go back to the Arbeits camp in Koenigs Wusterhausen for a moment. It was January, March, April-- bitter frost. Not like in the United States. But there it's bitter cold. We didn't have any-- the bare clothing, we would call them rags, or shmatas, in Jewish. Rags on our bodies. 

So we walked. And we had cement, bags of cement. 50 kilo bag of cement. The cement we used to build houses, cement houses. So we stole the paper from the bags to put on our back and the top of shoes. If they caught, they killed you right away if you took the paper. Now, we walked 12 days without food. Only one village, while walking, German women from the village came out with piles of water to give to people, to us. Whoever ran for the water, they got shot right away, because guards were walking with us. They didn't let us get the water. They killed right away. 

In one place, it was in a forest, they gave us a ration of food. One can of liverwurst. A can of liverwurst-- you know what liverwurst is? 

INTERVIEWER: Liverwurst, yes. 

SUBJECT 2: A can is a kilo, or two pounds. For 100 people. So everybody got so much. We walked like this until about nine days. The last three days, the Americans or the Canadians, the Red Cross, sent over packages of food to the Swedish Red Cross. And they came and gave us the packages of food, so called. Until May 2nd. May 2nd we were liberated by the Americans. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you trust people? 

SUBJECT 2: Generally, yes. 

SUBJECT 1: Now let me say something. Of course, when things became normal-- not in our memories, but we do try to live normally. We have two children, educated lovely girls. They are both married. When we came to this country-- first we went to Sweden for six years. And when he went to business-- and if I have seen honesty, with his two brothers-- and if I have seen dignity, and if I have seen honesty-- and I'm talking about my husband, because he deserves it-- in business. And to this day, consideration, willing to help. Both of us-- I am very active in Hadassah. We are both very active whenever anybody will come to ask us for help, we help. We do whatever we can. 

We remember, but it doesn't destroy our minds. Some people, it did. It didn't destroy our minds at all. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us, how did-- go ahead. 

SUBJECT 2: Whatever we told you, me and my wife, it's not the one percent-- 

SUBJECT 1: We scratched the surface. 

SUBJECT 2: We scratched the surface, like she says. Because otherwise-- 

SUBJECT 1: We would have to write a book. Maybe in a book, I could probably describe a little more. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think people can learn from others about cruelty? 

SUBJECT 1: No. One is born. Cruelty is something that you're born with. 

SUBJECT 2: Let me give an example. Suppose, God forbid suppose, it happens in the United States. You will find people who will do the job. The cruel job. In any country. 

SUBJECT 1: In our case, they did it because of the hunger. Because of a piece of bread. 

SUBJECT 2: I mean the Germans. I'm talking about the Germans. I'm talking about the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel about being Jewish now? 

SUBJECT 2: We are very proud to be Jewish. 

SUBJECT 1: We are happen to be Jewish, so we are Jewish. I don't know what I feel about it. We are just born Jewish, so we are Jewish. And we have to keep up our faith and our heritage. There's nothing to be ashamed of. We have a beautiful heritage. 

INTERVIEWER: All clear? 

CREW: Cut tape? No, but it's a good time to stop and check. 

INTERVIEWER: The question I'm going to ask you is why you think that you survived? Wait until he tells me he's rolling. 

SUBJECT 2: I don't think I survived because I was a hero or I was strong. It's a miracle. If you believe in miracles, it is a real miracle. Because I couldn't work anymore of starvation in the ghetto. I had swollen legs. As I told you before, we had only about 450 or 500 calories a day to eat. It was not enough for working men, or even not for a man who was not working. And without my two brothers, who helped me to hide me in the garbage can. I actually did hide. I didn't work. I did hide, because if the guards would see I'm not working, I'm hiding, they will take me to a hospital and this is the end of it. And I say to a hospital-- I mean to death. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you hide? Where? 

SUBJECT 2: In different places. In the working camp there-- it's hard to explain. I did hide. Because we were 250 Jews only, we were not afraid for spies. Because it happened-- at one of the other camps, someone spied for a piece of bread. He went over to the guards to tell them, oh, he did this or he didn't do that. You know? So I was not afraid for this. I did hide. And when it was the zahlappell. Zahlappell means like in the army, in the morning, they take a count, make the count. There were five rows. We were standing in five rows at 4:00 in the morning in the very cold. I was standing-- I was putting myself with my brothers in the middle row, the third row. And they were holding me here with one and here with the other so he could see me, counting me. Otherwise he would never be able to see me. And that's the end of it. The Commandant. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you afraid now to die? 

SUBJECT 2: It's a normal thing. Every human being knows that sometime there will come a day and you will say good bye. I mean, this is nothing special. When you reach my age, I mean it happens. After the liberation, they that took me in Bergen-Belsen to a hospital. The Americans took me-- the English, rather-- to a hospital. And there, the Red Cross from Sweden took me to Sweden to a hospital where I was treated for nine months laying in a cast in a hospital from the beatings I got. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you explain it all to your children? 

SUBJECT 2: We told them, but are like let's not talk about it anymore because nobody wants to listen anymore to horror stories. They're nice kids, they're very good. Two girls, they're married. We are going even next week to see them. 

INTERVIEWER: But you don't think people want to hear? 

SUBJECT 2: No. Even if you live now-- let's say we live now in a condominium place, about 900 families. And you wouldn't talk to them, tell them the stories because they heard a lot of it actually after the war. They read books about it, they saw movies about it. And we don't want to talk about it anymore. We even didn't want to talk to you about it, if it wouldn't be for some reason that it was good to tell the story. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think it's good to tell the story? 

SUBJECT 2: It shouldn't be forgotten. It shouldn't be forgotten. Another 10, 15, or 20 years we'll will be passed away, all the survivors. Nobody will be alive anymore. We're getting older, not younger. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much. I just wanted to finish up. 