SUBJECT 1: We were sent to Hamburg, which was bombarded day and night. And we, all these young women, practically naked, wintertime, in the snow, we were building homes for those who were bombed out, from the very foundation to the roof, with one German supervisor. Both of us digging the foundation, carrying the big cement blocks. 

Sometimes they took us to these bombed on oil factories in the harbor in Hamburg. We were painting those up. Marching home, I remember a most painful memory was when we marched on the street. And occasionally we would see a house with a lit-up window and a family sitting by a table eating. That was a very, very painful sight to know that people are still living together in a warm house, eating by a table. There we were marching in the winter snow. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where you-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you look in the town? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yes. As a matter of fact, once Germans passed by and they asked the SS, who was watching us, who are these people? And he said, these are whores. 

SUBJECT 2: Whores. 

SUBJECT 1: And they are being punished. This was his answer. He didn't say who we were. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you think of how you looked? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, we saw each other. And you get to used to it. And believe it or not, the hair started to grow up-- grow back a little bit. And just that little touch gave us, again, a touch of human feeling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was your mother working, too, building? 

SUBJECT 1: My mother was very lucky because she stayed inside. She was cooking, washing, cleaning the barracks. But there was a lot of bombing going on. And many of us died from the bombs also. But somehow in spite of these tragedies that we were killed by the bombs, each time the planes were coming, those were the happiest moments. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the names of any of the people you cooked for, any of the Gestapo people? 

SUBJECT 2: No. This was the Gestapo. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, but-- 

SUBJECT 2: This was Roma? 

SUBJECT 1: Kimmel. No. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, one Kimmel and one Raizor. 

SUBJECT 1: There was one whose name was Raizor. 

SUBJECT 2: In Hamburg was Raizor. And in-- 

SUBJECT 1: Edelstadt. 

SUBJECT 2: No, In Freihafen was Raizor. And in Hamburg was Kimmel. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't know the last names, just the first. 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: No, these were the last names. Kimmel was the last name. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, last name, yes. 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you call these people? 

SUBJECT 2: Herr Unterscharfuehrer. 

SUBJECT 1: Of course they didn't call us by our names, only by our numbers. 

SUBJECT 2: No. I was called my name, Frau Rosa, Mrs. Rosa. I have a very special luck. They liked me. I cooked very good. I made herring. So I had luck, and that's all. So then I cooked them. I ate it. And what I get, I give it for her. She shouldn't have dog food. I was lucky. 

SUBJECT 1: It was a very beautiful memory that I have. As we were marching down in Hamburg, we encountered a group of French prisoners who were their prisoners of war. But they were still getting packages through the Red Cross. 

But when they saw us half naked, starved, women, they started to take off their jackets, their scarves, their sweaters, and started to throw it to us. So in a day or two, we started to like half like prisoners and half-- I mean French prisoners because we had their jackets and their hats. Later, they made an underground passage because the building in which we were housed was halfway under water. 

This was a harbor where they used to bring the wheat. And when the sirens blew, they took us down into the basement. And this basement was how half ground, half water. The building was over the water. 

The French prisoners swam to our basement and gave us all the food that they had from the Red Cross. They-- in spite of their misery, when they saw us, they gave up the little that they had. It was-- we must have reminded them of their wives and families. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Around you Jewish prisoners, French, is the city of Hamburg-- 

SUBJECT 1: These were not necessarily Jewish prisoners. These were regular French. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There's two groups of prisoners, you and the French. Was the city of Hamburg living normally? 

SUBJECT 1: Normally. They are mostly older people and women. Men were mostly older people, very old or injured who were sent back already from the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But this was in the winter, and you were dress with almost no clothing? 

SUBJECT 2: One dress. 

SUBJECT 1: One dry dress in the snow. And the worst part was when it was snowing or raining, and our clothing would get wet. And even if the rain stops, you were shivering all day. 

SUBJECT 2: Next day, the wet under you wore and get ready to move. 

SUBJECT 1: You had to put again-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have underclothing or-- 

SUBJECT 1: No. 

SUBJECT 2: No, nothing. 

SUBJECT 1: I must tell you something, that people tend be depressed on rainy days. And my friends know it about me, on rainy days I'm always happy because I'm happy to have a roof over my head and dry clothing. But we tend to take things for granted, so we don't appreciate it. But I never, never take it for granted that I have dry clothing and a roof over my head because I always remember what it meant to be in the rain outside, cold. 

SUBJECT 2: No, I don't think people-- 

SUBJECT 1: So I'm so happy on rainy days. 

SUBJECT 2: --here can be so happy, like people who was in concentration. When I go night in my bed, I always think of my concentration. And my husband, he lost a wife and three children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your husband now? 

SUBJECT 2: Now, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When women don't have any underclothing, they can suffer great difficulties. 

SUBJECT 2: Aye, this was in Auschwitz difficult. But they give us broth in the one form of food. 

SUBJECT 1: They put a chemical in our food so we did not menstruate later 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: There was a chemical in our food. And we did not have menstrual periods anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they do that to convenience you, to sterilize you? Why did they do that? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't know. 

SUBJECT 1: I really don't know. I don't know what was the purpose of it. 

SUBJECT 2: In Hamburg, we begin to eat it more. 

SUBJECT 1: Later, they didn't put it in the food again. So occasionally, it happened. There is another incident in speaking of Hamburg. When we got in the ghetto, some women were pregnant without realizing it, young women. 

There was a beautiful woman among us. And she was pregnant. By the time we got to Hamburg, she was already in her fourth, fifth, six month, and so on. And believe it or not, she was the hardest working person, even with her pregnancy. Maybe this life was in herself giving her this courage to go on and wanting to give birth to her child. And the SS let her stay with us because he saw she's a good worker, so there was no reason to do something. And then the day of delivery was approaching. 

He actually made us prepare a little box for the baby. And my mother worked there in the kitchen. He asked her to prepare hot water. 

There was a prisoner doctor woman who assisted with the birth. And I stayed in the next room. I was afraid to see a delivery. I was young. I never saw a delivery. And suddenly I heard the baby cry. And the SS brought out the baby, and there was a sink. Past him there is the little box, holding it for the baby. 

He took the baby under the sink faucet and drowned it. And he said, here you go, little Moses. And he drowned the little baby there. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. It happened. In the hot water. 

SUBJECT 1: And the woman went to work in two days. 

SUBJECT 2: The baby, and make it could happen. I was sure that they have to clean the baby. And he took the baby, "little Moses," down with the head in the hot water. 

SUBJECT 1: He said, here you go, little Moses, nonbeliever, or something like this in German. And he drowned the little baby. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, this was Kimmel. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did the woman get pregnant? I thought the men and the women were separated. 

SUBJECT 1: She came in the ghetto pregnant, or she might have gotten pregnant in the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: She was in the beginning. 

SUBJECT 1: Now, the ghetto was in May. We were taken to Auschwitz in May. So if you figure out nine months, that takes us to, what, December or January. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you're talking of January 1945. 

SUBJECT 1: Five, right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Three months before the end of the war. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the midst of Hamburg, with Germans all around living nicely. 

SUBJECT 1: Right The population went on living in Hamburg as if nothing happened. I don't know if they really knew what is happening, except some soldiers who came back, and they must have seen some time, somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you were there. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yes. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did the people just walking around didn't know anything? 

SUBJECT 1: The citizens? No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They didn't see you daily walking, marching back and forth? 

SUBJECT 1: They saw us marching by, but, as I said, when they asked who are we, one of the SS said, oh, those are whores. They are being punished. And they kept us very much isolated. So I don't know if they ever find out, the troops. Some of them, at the risk of their lives, tried to help us. 

There was a German foreman in the factories, in these oil factories. And one day he brought a package, two of everything for me and my mother, two toothbrushes. 

SUBJECT 2: Two tomatoes. 

SUBJECT 1: --two brushes, two tomatoes in sort of a little package. Now, he did this at this risk of his life. And once we were in a bunker. This was where the Germans went when the sirens came. And the Germans were so afraid, they had to go there, the SS. And they didn't like to leave us behind. 

So they took us there also. And now we encountered the civilians real close by, and they kept asking very fearfully, because it took courage even to ask us. And when they found out, some of them were handing us bread. Not many, but some did. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I must ask you, you said he did at risk of his life. Did you ever see a German punished for helping a Jew, a German? 

SUBJECT 1: No personally. But-- 

SUBJECT 2: No. I would know. They would shoot him. 

SUBJECT 1: --I'm sure that they would-- 

SUBJECT 2: They would shoot him. 

SUBJECT 1: I'm sure that if they wouldn't kill him right then and there, they would have sent him to a camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In 1945 Germany? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, they would have punished him, yes. 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: You see, the point is that it's difficult to expect sacrifice on somebody else's part towards us. But even within the system, there were individual choices that enabled us to survive. For instance, I was whistling a classical tune while I was working. And one of this SS came over and he said, how come you know these classical tunes? 

I said, I used to play the piano. Oh, then I don't want you to work so hard. I want your hands to be in good condition. Well, I thought he was joking. I could never envisioned myself again by a piano. 

But from that day on, he'd try to get easier work, and he brought his lunch and dinner for me and my mother. Every day he would eat behind a building. But this was at the risk of his life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He was in love with you? 

SUBJECT 1: No. This is what I want to stress. The help I got was not a personal help. There were some cases maybe that other girls had help on an individual basis. But let's say you are marching home. 

There were roads that were muddy and difficult. And when an SS makes a special effort to take the whole group to a better road, that's not being in love with one person, but caring for a whole group. And this is what I'm trying to show. That even within that system, even under those circumstances, they had choices where they could be brutal or could still help us and thereby enable us to survive. 

It was another incident. These are the paradoxes of human nature. These very killers occasionally, side by side, they couldn't help to be a human being, which means to have the potential of both extremes of good and bad. 

There was another incident that we were pushing a carriage, and it was stuck this oily mud. And we couldn't get it out. And one SS says, why don't you beat those Jews? That's the way they will work. And this other SS took this-- I don't what you would call it-- a whip they always carried. And he started to whip us. 

But we hardly felt it. He really didn't hurt us that much. And the one who gave the order said, said, you don't how to hit Jews. And he took the whip and started to really, really hit us, kick us. And that night many of us went home with broken ribs and bloody faces. It was a terrible, terrible sight. 

But the next morning, we had again that SS who didn't want to hurt us that much marching us, and he said, I am ashamed to be a German. I am ashamed to be called part of the human race. So what I'm trying to show that even within that system, they had individual choices. They didn't have to be always the killers, even within that system. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How about Kimmel? 

SUBJECT 1: Kimmel, he was a very primitive proud man. He must have been injured. He had a big scar on his face. And he must have sent back with an injury and put to this post. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Most of the people you talked about were women supervisors. 

SUBJECT 2: Oh, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: No, in Hamburg we had SS men and women. 

SUBJECT 2: And women. 

SUBJECT 1: Some of the women were as brutal or more than men. I shouldn't say more, because you find good ones and bad ones, even among them. But they were mostly ignorant women in fear for their lives. Some of them probably never achieved anything, and now they had a uniform that gave them some status. 

I remember one incident. We were digging tank traps because the Allied forces were coming. And that's a difficult job, and you were the all the way down throwing up the mud. And as I looked up, one of the SS women was standing there. And some of them said, come on, come on. Faster, faster. And this one was standing there with her light complexion, beautiful blue eyes, blond hair, with the gun on her side. And I looked up. 

I pitied her. I really pitied her because somehow I couldn't help to believe that if life had put her into other circumstances, she could have been a very merciful nurse. I sort of pictured her in a nurse uniform, bending over the bed. And this was the painful realization that we have both of these potentials. But some circumstance, like the Nazi era, really brought out the worst in man. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was Kimmel ever decent with anyone? 

SUBJECT 2: We didn't saw him, just when he arrived. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, I did have an incident with him. He was a very proud man. This was the most characteristic about him. And the first day, a woman-- when he threw away his cigarette, a woman jumped for it and wanted to pick it up. And he stepped on her hand, and he said, if my enemy would throw away a cigarette, I would never pick it up. And this stayed in my head. 

I knew that he's a very proud man. Now, he had these SS women working in the office, the administrative part. But they were so dumb. They didn't even know how to make the books. And they found out that I know how to write German or how to do the books. 

So they asked me to help them out. And one day, this Kimmel, this SS came in there. And somehow he says that maybe I'm a little bit educated person. And since he was so uneducated, it gave him a pride that he can carry on a conversation. And this was very interesting what he said. 

He said, you know, you Jews wanted to really kill us. And, you know, with your maneuvering, you would have really, sooner or later, destroyed us. So we just got ahead of you, and we are destroying you. So I looked at him. And this was really the arrogance of a 17 year old, but also my recognition that this man is a very proud man. 

I said, you know, before I came in the camp, I read an article that two meteorites will clash. And if that will happen, we'll all burn. So maybe we'll burn sooner. But eventually, we'll all be destroyed. 

Well, when the SS women heard this, they all were turned white. They thought he was going to shoot me right there and then. But he stood up. He Took a look at me. He wasn't white himself. I turned around and slammed the door. 

He respected the fact that I had the courage. This was the only thing he respected. After that he started to be after me. And he ordered that Sunday morning we'll all have to walk naked in front of him. He wanted to show me that he is above me and I'll be forced to walk naked in front of him. 

But I found out that if you have a toothache-- you see, they needed our work. We were laborers. They needed our work badly. If you had a toothache, you could have your tooth pulled, but not fixed, just pulled. And I had one tooth tool that needed a little filling. 

But I said, I'm going to have it rather pulled than walk naked in front of him. And it was a prisoner woman who made the list who is going. And I told her what was the story. And she assigned me to go to the dentist. 

The dentist heard-- 

[BELL RINGING] 

The dentists were also prisoners, Jewish prisoners. And as I said, they were only pulling teeth. They put me in the chair, and he started to pull my tooth. And the SS who took us there says, hey, let me try this. I never pulled a tooth. So he took the-- what do you call that what you pull a tooth with? And he, a man who never pulled a tooth in his life, started to pull my tooth. 

Of course, it was breaking down into pieces. And my tears were rolling. And this prisoner dentist couldn't look at it. I thought that he's going to do something to the SS. But there were four, five SS and this Jewish prisoner and the few girls. Ad my tears were coming down-- 

SUBJECT 2: She was sick. 

SUBJECT 1: --as he was breaking down. He even injured the tooth next to it. And at one point, this Jewish prisoner, the dentist, just couldn't look at it anymore. And he said, please let me help you. Maybe I can help with it. And he says, OK, I guess I had enough fun, and gave up on me. 

My face was like this for days. But what happened meanwhile in the camp, the march took place. And we he noticed that I'm not there, he says, where is die Kleine Julie? And they said I went to the dentist. 

He said, verdammte, you know, the hell with her. And next day, he asked me that I go to his room, and my mother was fainting. She expected the worst. 

SUBJECT 2: So was she. 

SUBJECT 1: She expected the worst to happen. And I was let out from the camp to his room. And he says I should clean his room. I cleaned it very thoroughly. And then he took a plate with food, and he says, here, have some. He always avoided to look in my eyes. He just wouldn't look in my eyes. And I tried to look in his eyes. And I said, thank you. I'm not hungry. 

He says, take it! I said, I'm really not hungry. So he took the plate and threw it to his dog. He started to pace the room up and down. My mother was waiting for me to come back. She didn't know if I'll ever come back. And now he took it again, some food. 

He says, here, take it to your mother. She's starved. And I looked in his eyes, and I said, my mother wouldn't want this. She's not hungry. And he opened the door and took me by my collar, and he says, get out from here. And when my mother saw me come back, she didn't know what happened there. And this is all that happened. 

You know that after that every week he sent a loaf of bread to me because I guess he respected. This was the only thing he would respect, his pride. And I learned this when I first saw him. This was the man who drowned that little baby. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was his end? 

SUBJECT 1: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was his end? 

SUBJECT 1: His hand? 

INTERVIEWER 2: His end? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, his end. I will never know because-- 

SUBJECT 2: He went away. Before we ever could, he went away. 

SUBJECT 1: Before they evacuated us, he went away. 

SUBJECT 2: The Wehrmacht said, they won't touch him. The doc, he had his suit already on the bed-- pillow. He went away. He ran away. 

SUBJECT 1: He changed into civilian clothes and took off. 

SUBJECT 2: He ran away. 

SUBJECT 1: There's another memory, a very short one. But it was one I think I will forget. It was December 9th, and it's my birthday. And I was 18. And you know what it means to be 18 at home. And we got up always 4 or 5 o'clock. This was December, cold. 

The snow covered everything. The moon was still out. And as I looked around and saw the watch towers in the corners and the weapons pointing at us, I looked around. And it must have been such a painful realization that I fainted just from the realization that it's my birthday and I'm 18. And they put me in a so-called hospital, which was really a recovery room. 

You could only stay there if you had a temperature. And I don't know why or how, but when they took my temperature, I really had a temperature. And I stayed there for the day. Even now when I'm sick, I hardly ever get a temperature. But somehow, maybe medically this will not stand up, but if I get emotionally very upset, that time I ended up with a temperature. 

I don't know. Maybe it was a coincidence. But he came in and he says, how come they are in the hospital? They said that I fainted and I have a temperature. And somehow he found out that it's also my birthday. And again he sent a loaf of bread. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's who? 

SUBJECT 1: This is that killer, that dog Kimmel. He sent a loaf of bread. There is another beautiful, beautiful memory, if I can call it beautiful. But this is the highest testament into human nature to-- to transform suffering into creative outlet. But it was Hanukkah. And we made a contest among ourselves that whoever can make the nicest sandwich will get a bite from everybody's bread. That was the reward. 

We were working in this oil factory. So at night, of course, the lights had to go out at a certain time. But we came home. And we gathered in a bigger room. And we set the table with all these decorative sandwiches that we found in dirt roads or anywhere, rotten beets or whatever you could find. And the girls made a sculpture out of the oily mud. And whatever little junk they found, they made the most creative things for that evening. And there the table was laid out with these beautiful things made out of nothing. 

Suddenly the door opens, and Kimmel came in. He says, what's going on here? And somehow, while we were always afraid of him, that moment, nobody seemed to be afraid. They felt that this is more important to us this moment, it even overcame fear. And one of the girls stood up and she said, it's Hanukkah, and we are celebrating it with a contest. We And he looked at the table, and then he saw the display, the manifestation-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was so nice. 

SUBJECT 1: --of these pieces out of nothing. Even this killer couldn't help to have respect. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that-- 

SUBJECT 2: And she created a beautiful song from Hanukkah. And I told her she already give me this paper. We go home, and you need this. Ma, humbug. We don't go home. I beg her she should give me, a beautiful song from Hanukkah. 

SUBJECT 1: I kept writing always, Time trying to encourage. The theme of my songs was always giving them a cause to survive. That the world will be so beautiful and worthwhile living. Nobody will ever want to have a war again. 

Who would ever want to have this insanity? I was convinced that there will be no war ever anymore. I kept writing songs or tunes encouraging them, giving them causes to live for. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any of the songs? 

SUBJECT 1: I only remember what the theme was always. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. [HUMMING] 

SUBJECT 1: That it's worthwhile to survive because there will be such a beautiful world worthwhile living for. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you sing it? Can your mother sing it? 

SUBJECT 1: Just one of the --. 

SUBJECT 2: I-- just the melody. [HUMMING] 

SUBJECT 1: --Every day or so I would make new-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was so beautiful. It was there a woman. She was a Zeitungsschreiber. 

SUBJECT 1: An editor. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. She said, Jolly, don't lose the paper. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did they make that was on the table? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT 2: From bread, everybody give it something, a little salami, a little this. It was beautiful. 

SUBJECT 1: Mainly out of the clay from the factory, the oily clay. They-- 

SUBJECT 2: He was jealous when he saw the table. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there a star of David? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, yes, even a menorah out of clay. 

SUBJECT 2: Menorah too. 

SUBJECT 1: And we made out of rotten potatoes that we find in the-- in the field, we made a little candelabras. And, um, we celebrated Hanukkah. And to me, this is the highest testimony to human spirit. That even under those circumstances, it existed side by side with all the atrocities. 

But we didn't stay there. When they found out that, um, the Allied armies are closing in on us, they put us on a train again and sent us to Bergen-Belsen. We chose another annihilation camp. 

Most people died there of typhoid fever. And when we arrived there, we both realized that we will not survive this. And I didn't know this, but my mother made up her mind that if she'll know that she's about to die, she will go away. She didn't want me to see. 

But I made up my mind that if I'll see that end is coming, I didn't want her to see me dying. And one day an SS man came, and he said, whoever would volunteer to come to work will get an extra bowl of soup, extra bowl. We didn't get, by then, for days anything. And everybody was dying of typhoid fever. There were skeletons laid out all over the streets. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you talking of March? 

SUBJECT 1: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: February, March? 

SUBJECT 1: This was March '45. And, uh, the typhoid fever was the biggest killer then. And of course, by then they hardly gave any food, if any. And he said we would get a bowl of soup if I volunteer. 

My mother didn't want me to go because she didn't trust them. She felt that if they take us, I might never come back. But I knew that I don't have much of an alternative. Maybe I will get the bowl of soup, and that might help us. So I went. And the job was-- 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: --pick up the bodies, hundreds of bodies, and to throw them into these mass graves to cover up their atrocities the last days. So all day that's all I was doing, throwing in hundreds and hundreds of bodies into these mass graves. And then the evening came, and they did bring a big dish of soup. 

But were all so hungry. And the girls ran over to this big dish and turned it over accidentally. And as it spilled all over, they started to lick it from the ground. And I stood there with the bowl. 

I was usually the youngest among them. And again, an SS noticed this. And these people were the once responsible for all these corpses there. Yet he said, look at this little one. She didn't get anything. And he made an SS bring a bowl of soup for me. 

By now it was dark, and I started to walk back with the soup to find my mother, tripping over hands and legs and bodies. And somehow I found the barrack where she was waiting for me. And then I came in. 

I said, look, Mother, I have a bowl of soup. And she says, I don't want any. You eat it. I said, I had already a bowl. She says, no, I want you to survive. You are young. I had my life already. And I said, please, no, you have to survive. Father will be waiting. My brother will be waiting. We both have to survive. 

So we decided to share it. My mother took a spoon. But the spoon was half empty. She hardly took anything. And when I took a spoon, it was also empty because I didn't want to take much that she should have. 

So we realized that we're not getting anywhere. And we decided to feed each other. So she was feeding me, and I was feeding her. And that bowl of soup most likely really saved us. Because in a day or two, we were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I just-- I wanted to end on that note. I want to shoot a couple of these. Can you hold this as a cut away. That's great. Yes, just talking and just talk. It's really very difficult to comment or to, you know, even feel after what you said. 

I-- I don't-- I don't want you to talk now. I want you to listen to me. Because you see, a lot-- we used a lot of tape, much more than we normally do. And because we stopped the planes because the stories were so important. I didn't want to lose the stories. 

So that means we have to go back and start with the story. And meanwhile, tape doesn't-- you just can't cut in a piece. And you have to-- you can't have what they call is a jump cut. One time you look like this. And the next time you look like this. And you can't 

So you have to put in something else. And I can put it in a shot of your listening to me or if your listening to me or even of picture because, you see, your stories had great flow. It's not a chopped up piece. Your stories also had rhythm, you, I guess. Are you still writing music? Do you still play? 

SUBJECT 1: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You don't? 

SUBJECT 1: No. I write articles. But, no, my music ended. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you use any other methods instead of talk? 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. Can I talk? 

SUBJECT 1: Certainly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'll talk. I'll take the picture, and I'll talk. You just have to listen to me. Sorry. 

SUBJECT 1: Can I possibly add one sentence that is very meaningful to me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT 1: That in spite of my experiences, it was a tragedy. But tragedies happen, even when you're not in a concentration camp. And you have the choice of taking a defeatist attitude or learn to grow through it. And if you learn to grow through tragedies, you become stronger for it. And in spite of war, I still believe in people because I did see and still am convinced that people have the potential for both extremes of good and bad. And This potential gives me hope that one day maybe we'll be living in a world that the best will be brought out rather than the worst, as those days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm just going to keep talking to you, not because I want to keep talking to you, because there is nothing to say after someone says like that. But I need your reactions. And I'm sort of talking to you about-- you married. And you don't have to comment. 

I assume you married. You met a husband here. Obviously, wherever, you live a rich life. I don't mean rich money. I mean rich in terms of what you have within you and rich in terms of what you give to each other. I cannot believe you both daily must agree that they lived because they had each other. I mean, I don't know what else you could do wuth something like this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: If the world is beautiful, it's because you make it so. Don't answer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't answer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't answer. Just you being in it makes it beautiful, OK? That's all. Otherwise it loses the light. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there anything that we need? 

CREW: Yes, if she could look at her mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, could you look at your mother and talk to-- no, don't talk to your mother. I'll talk to her from here. Is that-- should I be talking? You know, in a way-- would you look at her? Would you look at Jolly? 

SUBJECT 1: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You know, in a way, I want Jolly to just listen. In a way, it sounds maudlin, almost dumb to be saying these things. I cannot tell you-- I mean, I think that Jolly said something that I don't know whether I will ever be able to say it any better than that. Although, I feel it's even better than that. 

I feel as though you've said something that I feel. I feel maudlin about feeling it almost. I can't believe you exist. I mean, I can't believe you exist with the feelings that you have now. It makes me-- I think I'll walk around my whole life being happy in the rain and really happy in the rain. I never thought about it from that point of view, my god. 

SUBJECT 1: I'm very thankful for that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's so comfortable to me, wet. I hate being wet and miserable. And I always-- I love that feeling when you get into dry clothes. I really always do love that feeling when you get into dry clothes. 

SUBJECT 1: But we take it for granted. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Of course we take it for granted. Whoever every dreamed that you're not going to be able to have something. I know I was inquiring about a very personal thing, menstruation periods and whatnot. But what we're trying to do is to give this specific allusion so that people understand. I can't take this. Hoo, boy, ask him if we've had enough. 

CREW: OK 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. OK? All right? 

CREW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did we have-- is it OK? 

CREW: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT 1: I thank you for your patience. And I still admire for doing it. And I hope it will serve some day, somehow, something, even if it will be a grain in a grain in a grain. 

SUBJECT 2: You need the little pictures? 