LAUREL VLOCK: --feel now about Berlin? 

BETTY COHN: I wouldn't go back there if you give me a million dollars. This is my feeling. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why? 

BETTY COHN: Because they took people like us, educated people, intelligent people, who never needed a penny from anybody else-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes, go on. 

BETTY COHN: I had a good business. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Oh, OK, you know, go ahead, I'm sorry. 

BETTY COHN: A-- an-- and-- and why did they do that? Why did they make us leave this country that we were so acquainted with and enjoyed it and had such beautiful times, you know, that I still remember? The schools, you couldn't beat the education there. You can't. Why did they do this to us? 

I should go there today and say, hello, how do you do, I'm back again? I swear, for a million dollars I wouldn't go back. I love this country that took us in and gave us an opportunity to start from the beginning. It was very tough, believe me. If you think it was easy here, no, it wasn't easy. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you know what to friends of yours who didn't leave, I mean, do you-- 

BETTY COHN: Yes, not friends, it was my brother-in-law that we don't even know where he is. And what concentrat-- tra-- camp, you know, camp he was killed. We couldn't find this out at all. I had my youngest brother went back, you know, in the Second World War as a translator because he spoke fluently English and German to mention when they have the trials. 

Now, you would think a young man, you know, who went-- he was in a war, you know, for the American people. And uh, drove around, you know, all these big shots, you know, here are the generals and, and inquired at the Red Cross. Couldn't they find out something in-- wh-- in what camp was he killed? ca-- concentration. 

LAUREL VLOCK: The Germans, as you told us, kept very, very sp-- uh, meticulous records. 

BETTY COHN: You don't think-- do you think for one minute that they are going to kill six million and keep a record of it? Nah, that would be a joke. Of course not. You have some people talking today, oh, I don't believe that. I heard a man saying this on a-- the other day of last week, he was laughing. He had an interview, 60 Minutes. I, well, you know, I don't even want to listen to it. And he spoke to this elderly man. He said, don't believe that. It's not true. So they should keep a record of that? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why did you-- 

BETTY COHN: The only th-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: --believe it if you didn't see it? 

BETTY COHN: Pardon me? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Why did you believe it? You didn't see it. You left before it all happened. Why do you believe it? 

BETTY COHN: It happened to us. You see, we don't even know where his brother is. We can't even find out whether it was Auschwitz or Baden Kaisheim or wherever, what-- you name it. It doesn't make any difference. Of course I believe it. These-- these were animals. They were not human beings. 

They didn't have it against their own people, just against Jewish people. Just like Arafat today. We don't have to go too far. Doesn't he say it himself? We have to just get rid of them. They are not going to stop 'til-- maybe he will get rid of himself first. I don't know. Something could happen. You see, we got rid of Hitler. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You think it was only the Germans? 

BETTY COHN: Only the Germans? I could only talk from a place that I was growing up and married and have a baby. I don't know. Wasn't it in Poland? I don't know Poland, you see, I don't know what happened there. But they do, uh, uh, discriminate ag-- against Jews or in Romania. I mean, it wasn't only in Germany. But I have nobody there. So how should I know what happened to those people? I don't know. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Is there anything-- oh. 

CREW: That was it. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yeah, no, it was fine. 