INTERVIEWER 1: So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe an evening of the eight-- mother, father, and eight children. 

SUBJECT: Well, was only-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Donna, I would like to understand and hear something about the daily life in the ghetto, even what it was like to be hungry in the family. 

INTERVIEWER 3: OK, anytime you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me about-- 

SUBJECT: We kept hoping-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like, with your family and the regular day or regular evening? 

SUBJECT: Sit down and talk. Sometimes playing cards, at the very beginning. That didn't last very long. And hoping. Sometimes we'd even meet with neighbors and discuss things, the good old days, how it was, and if God's gonna be good to us, and we'll survive, how are we gonna change. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How were you going to change? 

SUBJECT: Appreciate everything, what we had. Because those were the good old days. On the-- it got so bad that you couldn't even talk to one another. You came home, you just sat down and we used to fall asleep. Most bitter thing was when father died and then to see mom deteriorating. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you describe about father's dying, day by day? 

SUBJECT: It was very heartbreaking. We couldn't help. And mostly he didn't worried about himself. The only thing about mom. What's gonna happen to mom? And we-- oh, try to help her as much as possible, which we did. I'll remember that to the day I'll die. He closed his eyes three times and opened them. And he kept holding on mom. What's gonna happen to her? 

INTERVIEWER 2: All of you were together? 

SUBJECT: We were together. Yes, at his bedside when he died. And even, there was no funeral, like it used to be. There was no more that people went-- came to the funeral or anything like that. And when we got to the cemetery, there was throng, like, 100, 200 people and one grave, because I did go back after the war and I went to the cemetery. But you couldn't find anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- you were how old when he died? 

SUBJECT: I was 18. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think to yourself when you-- when he closed his eyes and when he was taken to the cemetery? 

SUBJECT: We were shocked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You. 

SUBJECT: We were all shocked. But like, neighbors came in and said how lucky he is. He's dead. And how much longer are we gonna suffer? That he's lucky that he made it already. In fact, it-- when-- that's how it was from day to day got worse. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you envy him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. Because he suffered so much. If a doctor did come in, all it was, how old are you. He was 58. And they-- all they need to know, was 58. And they walked out. And I would cry. I'm 58 years old and I have no more right. 

And he was a very well-known man. He had-- he a very smart man. My father knew five languages and very successful man, a very good man. But then, you're 58 years old, and you're no good to nobody and that's it. 

And there was no medicine whatsoever. You know, if there was something for him-- if we did have something it was like beets or carrots. No flour too. Give it a little flavor or whatever. No speaking about butter or anything like that. And he couldn't even eat that. 

We used to-- a piece of bread-- we used-- when we got our bread for the week, it was cut a piece, like that, for the day, for everybody had his portion. We used to-- oh, give it to Father first. He wouldn't take it, but he was so that he did at times. 

While I was working at the garden, they , for Rumkowski, we planted carrots or whatever. I would steal a few. You could only do it-- I had a pair of wooden, big, big shoes, especially put on and put it in my shoes and bring home a few carrots. 

Or when we planted potatoes, I would take the potatoes, cut them up, and bring home a few. And that was almost like a party. Two of-- one of my brothers and a sister were lucky to get a job where they used to-- with a wagon, they pulled-- used the pull it to bring the vegetables and the fruit and the-- like, potatoes, vegetables. There were no fruit given to us. So they-- we used to call it cooperative, where it was passed out to the people, and if they were lucky enough to steal a couple of them to bring it home. 

That didn't last too long. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you came back from the funeral-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you say to each other? What was it like? When you came back into the room? You remember that-- 

SUBJECT: Very sad, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember that moment? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Very sad, because there was no mourning or anything. We-- my brothers had cottage. We did sit a couple of days. But we had to go to work. Mom had a cart that she had to go to work, because of my oldest brother. He knew some people who they were good enough to-- that she could take that work home. 

And she used to, you know, like ripping cloths. And she was braiding them for slippers they were making to send out to the Germans and Poles. So she did that at home. And she had-- and we used to help her out with it, wherever we could. As long as we had a home, that she shouldn't go out. 

There was-- you know, like you sit among us Jews you sit shiva for a week. You go-- there was not-- none whatsoever, because we cried. It was very sad to lose Dad, in one way. And then, as I said, we were happy he made it already, because we didn't think that anything good-- we-- no, at the end, no, none of us ever thought that we'll survive that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It didn't last long. 

SUBJECT: What? Well, somehow time went on, until, like, '44, when they finally said that we all have to leave. And they gave us three days to get out. And we had to-- it was a walk, like-- probably, like 10 miles from we were. And together at that place, where they had that-- it was a jail actually, what they had. 

And we met there, where we were picked up by the train. They kept us there for three days. And we were sitting on the ground on floors. There was no place-- there was so many. And people were dying. There were dead people all over and nobody did anything about it, help, the-- it was just unbelievable, until we finally were packed in-- in the train. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was September 1944. 

SUBJECT: '44. Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the day? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't. It was end of September. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know at that time what was happening-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the war? 

SUBJECT: No. We didn't. And we-- we got on the train. The Germ-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't know that Germans were losing the war? 

SUBJECT: We had no idea about anything. We knew-- nobody had any radios. That was taken away. And if somebody had something, then it was-- we knew nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No rumors? 

SUBJECT: No rumors. No nothing. But when we did get on the train, the German would say to us that family should stay together. And if we had a knapsack or whatever, they said to leave it. That gonna be shipped after. And we were dressed in a lot of clothing. 

Like my mother said, if they should take away our belongings, try to put on as much clothing on yourself as possible. Maybe they're gonna leave that to us. Which we did. And it was so hot for the few days til we got to Auschwitz. But we tried to hold on. Once-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember of the train ride? 

SUBJECT: The train ride-- it wasn't a train, seats or anything. It was, like, for cattle. They had coal on the train. We were sitting on the coal. And there were men and women and children and everybody. And all they had for, you know, for our needs, for facilities, was a bucket. 

There was no water. They gave us a bread. Each of us received a bread. But no water. And people were dying. Children were screaming. I remember a woman-- we used to-- on once-- when we lived on one street and she was in labor. And she screamed to her husband. And he was just sitting numb. There was nothing what he was able to do. 

When we got to Auschwitz-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the child was born? 

SUBJECT: No. She was in labor. But the child wasn't born on the train. When we got to Auschwitz, first thing they said to us, men at one side and woman on the other. Again, she screamed. How could you leave me-- how-- in a time like that? He had a pocket knife and took out the knife and tried to cut his throat. And she begged him, please, don't. And it didn't take long at all. In minutes, we were separated. We were ripped apart, like paper. 

Me-- my-- we were three sisters and mom. My sister and, the older-- she was older from me, two years. She said to me, I'll try to go with mom and to help mom. And you help your sister. And she hug-- held on tight to my mother. And like, just OK, two and two. We were on one side and they were on the other side. And that was the end of it. 

And we went in-- that was 

INTERVIEWER 2: The selection? 

SUBJECT: That was the selection. And we went in to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: She went left. 

SUBJECT: She-- let or right. One side, just in seconds, showed. This-- this side-- right, links, the way you say. I forgot already. And we went in. They said we gonna shower-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- do you remember the last you saw of your mother and sister? 

SUBJECT: Not much. My youngest brother was 14 years-- 14 year old-- years old. And he was ill on the train. He had a headache, kept sleeping. So my mother said to me, if you get together after, you be together. Sit. Help him. 

They took us in to shower. And we undressed and put our clothing, like we're gonna pick it up after. We got in. We were shaving our heads, our hair went, everything. After a couple of minutes in the shower, where you hardly had a drop of water, we you got out. Completely naked. No clothes. And we were marched out. 

And I saw the men go in. And I recognized my brother. And I was screaming his name. And he kept looking. He said-- I didn't see my two younger brothers anymore. He was the only one, because one was 14, one I was 16. I saw him already alone. And he never recognized-- he didn't know. And I yelled that I'm your sister and my name. And that-- and I never saw them-- him again, or anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember the name you called? 

SUBJECT: I-- his name? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Was Noah. Noah in Yiddish. When I came home from concentration camp, I heard people what were with them together, that he was in Dachau. And a week before, he couldn't take it anymore. It was horrible there. And he begged that they kill him. And they shot him. 

And just one week before the war ended, because he was with some guys, what we were neighbors. Couple of them came back, two brothers. And they came and told me about it. The rest of them, like, where my oldest brother went, where he was, or what, I never heard anything. I kept hoping that I'll find somebody. But that's why we went home. But we never found anybody. 

Of all relatives-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So it was your sister and you-- 

SUBJECT: My sister and me. That's it. And there are only-- four cousins survived. Two brothers of my mother's side and two brothers of my father's side. One of them died already. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And is it split at the moment or sort of over? 

SUBJECT: Over. That's it. None of us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you imagine what-- what-- where they were taken? 

SUBJECT: No. But after a couple of hours, we were out there. We-- they-- we ask them, where did they-- we were told about the inmates, that on some days we're gonna meet. 

And after, when we were talking, the inmates used to say, you see the smoke, those are your people. But we knew very well, but not until then. 

I also remember my brother had on a pair of boots. And the guy said to him-- he asked for about shaving stuff or anything like that. He said, don't worry. You'll get that. And they told him, at least cut those boots. Maybe they're gonna let you keep it. But nothing was kept, what we had, everything was taken away. 

Because for three days in Auschwitz, we were naked. In three days there were, like, six selections. They asked who is under 18, they're gonna get white bread. They picked out us. And whoever, you know, they just didn't like, we were weeded out-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: They picked those under 18 and-- 

SUBJECT: Under 18. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they send them to the chamber? To gassing? 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Under the pretense of giving them white bread. 

SUBJECT: Right. And while we passed through, they would look everybody over, thoroughly. There was a girl behind-- front of me. And I heard him say, she's kratzig. And she would plead with him that-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Kratzig is the skin is not clean? 

SUBJECT: Right. And she said, no, that she's dirty from that long journey. And they took her away. And that was in right away, where they kept the people for the gas chamber. And-- oh, I'm so numb, I can't even describe the-- the windows had bars. And they were that tight. And that girl-- that girl came out and tried to go in front of it. And they caught her. And we didn't see her anymore. 

They just tried to weed out as many as possible. And the lucky ones, well, for three days, we were in Auschwitz and slept on coal. My sister constantly kept crying. She couldn't-- I had on my-- I held on my knees. And after three days, we were given some clothing. A tall girl got a short dress. A little girl had a long dress and barefoot. And they stacked us again in trains. And we went on the journey. Nobody knew where we going. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And that's how you left Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 4: We have to stop here. 