SUBJECT: Where did that tape finish? 

SUBJECT: Uh, the proposition to your-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: To my mother. Is that on the tape? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. You can begin again maybe with saying this man-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I knew the-- oh, sorry. 

CREW: John, are we up to speed here? 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: At this-- my mother came out. She was clearly very upset. And she said, she told me that the policeman there had called her aside and asked her to come into the inner office and told her, listen, I know you're not Anna Hitsakova I know Anna Hitsakova. I know that-- she and I were lovers. 

But I like you. And I'll keep you safe, if you and I can be friends, if, if, you'll stay with me. And so my mother promised that she would. 

And so she came out. She did get her identity card. And immediately that afternoon we packed up, and we left. And we left for a place called Bratislava, which is-- which was the capital city of Slovakia. We didn't know anybody. And we were-- we had very little money. And we had no, uh, coupons for food. We arrived in Bratislava in the evening. And we were sitting at the railroad station on a wooden bench, my mother and I, and trying to figure out what to do. 

And at this point a beautiful young girl came up to us. She was 20, I know she was 20 because she told me-- she told us so. And she said, you know, you look like you need some help. 

And my mother said, yes. We have no place to stay. And she just took us into her apartment. She had-- she lived, ironically, on Zidovska ulica which means the Jew street. It was the old Jewish ghetto. 

And she lived in a, in a small apartment. It was a two-room apartment. And she had one room, and another woman with whom she was sharing this apartment had another room. And this was just heaven for me. 

The three of us slept in the same bed-- my mother, this woman and I. And I slept in the middle. These are my first sexual memories. She had a very soft behind. [LAUGHING] And I cuddled up against her behind. That was terrific. [LAUGHS] 

And next door lived-- next, in the next room, lived-- the woman who lived there, she was, she was some sort of a distant, old cousin of this young woman with whom we lived. And this woman played "Fuer Elise" all night, over and over again. And "Fuer Elise" for me, [LAUGHS] is another special song. You know, it just brings back a lot of just real safety. 

This woman worked in a, a bookstore. And she brought back for me every couple of days a book to read, which I would read and take-- she would take it back. Just a good life for a while. 

My mother had to get a job because we had no money. She worked as a, as a seamstress, tailor in a store. And I didn't go to school at this point. So I'm just sort of hanging around this store. 

And one day, we were there for about a month in Bratislava. The last possession that we had was a camera. My mother-- we had a camera, a Dollina, it's the trade name. 

And so my mother and I were walking around the black-- place, the place where the black market sort of was. And she sold the camera. And we bought some horse salami. And it was very bad. 

Then my mother got this job at the tailors. And one day, a German officer came in. And he-- I wouldn't say fell in love, but he wanted my mother. And he invited us for supper. 

And so I remember we went into this beautiful apartment that evening. Crystal chandeliers. It was a Jew-- it was an apartment, he told us, of a rich Jew. And he was living there in great luxury with servants. And we were served this meal. 

And my mother then told me that he wanted to go to bed with her. And she said that she would but in two days or so, because she had her period. But that night, we immediately left Bratislava. We just got on a train and again just, just moved out. 

And this time, we just, we got off the train. I remember the scene. It was raining again and snowing and cold. And all we had was summer clothing. We couldn't afford any winter-- you couldn't buy any winter clothes. 

And we got off the train, just got off the train at a place. Never heard of it before. And we were very hungry. And we went into the restaurant, the train station restaurant. We sat down to eat something. 

And there were three Slovak policemen there. And one came over to us. And he said, can I help you? Do you need some help? You look lost here. 

And I was petrified, and so was my mother. And my mother said, no, no, we don't need any help. And she went out to see if she could buy tickets to get out of this place. 

And one of the policemen called me over. And he said to me, "Sprechst du Yiddisch?" And I said, what are you saying? What is that? I pretended that I didn't know. And he said, oh, go away, get-- 

And then I heard them speak to each other. And he said-- the policeman said to the other one, he said you know, I know that these people are Jews. But I really want to help them. 

So when my mother came back, I told her that I want to speak to her outside. I have to show her something. And I said you know, I overheard these people, these soldiers. And they know we're Jews, but they want to help us. And I think this is the right thing to do. 

So we went back. And my mother spoke to the policeman. And he said, I'll take you someplace where you will be safe. And the three of us-- the police, one policeman, my mother and I-- we started walking. And we walked for about 10 kilometers through a little path. And it led to a very small village where-- which was right at the foot of the mountains there, maybe 100 people in it. 

And he went to the mayor of this small town, hamlet, and he said that he will leave us with him. And he wants us to be safe there. And the mayor took us and took us to the house of the-- of the the village prostitute. And we stayed with her for a while. 

But we interfered with the business. It didn't work out. [LAUGHS] So then we moved to another family. And we lived in this village till, uh, till the end of the war. 

A couple of episodes that I remember from that time. The Hungarian army came and stationed itself in this village. Although it was really in a very remote place, it turned out that it was in the path of the oncoming Romanian and Russian troops which were moving through the area. And they were going to, um, make a stand there. 

Throughout this whole period, men kept falling in love with my mother. I don't blame them. She was a beautiful woman. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have a picture? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have a picture? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I have a really good picture of her. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Go ahead, I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: Here is a picture of my mother. This is my mother here. The man in the middle is my second father. And the other woman is my aunt. 

The general in charge of the Hungarian army fell in love with my mother. And he kept courting her. And he got together a musical ensemble from his troop and serenaded her. [LAUGHING] It was nice. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was end 1944? 

SUBJECT: This is now beginning of '45, this is now like February, '45. And then, then one day, there was explosion and, and guns and, and fighting. And we hid into in a cellar. And then next thing we knew, a Russian soldier came into the bunker, and the war was over. And the next day, we were free. 

There are-- there are two more memories from this place, which was called Raksa. One is that it's the-- it's about, it is about two days after the war has ended for us. It's beginning of May, very close to the end of the war altogether. And I am at the cemetery. And they're bringing in the Romanian dead soldiers. Most of them were killed by mines. 

And we're standing there, a bunch of the children. And they're just bringing them on sticks, and they're tossing them down. And they look just horrible, putrefying and blown-up, Blocked. 

And I walk up to one of the Romanian soldiers. And I see a pocket knife is sticking out of his pocket, the dead soldier. And I pulled it out, and I put it in my pocket. And I went home. 

This was a city-- this was a little village which had no electricity. It was a very, very primitive little village. And I remember going to the toilet, to the outhouse, all dark, pitch black. 

And suddenly I feel the knife in my pocket. And I'm thinking of the dead soldier. And I got very, very scared. I was sure he was coming after that knife. 

So I went to my mother. And I said, this is what I did. And she said, we'll fix that. And the next day we went to the cemetery, my mother and I. And we buried the knife next to the grave, the mass grave of the soldiers. 

That's one memory. The second is that now we're ready to leave Raksa. It's time to go and see who survived. The war is over. 

And a friend from this village came to me and said that he has something that he wants to show me. And I asked my mother whether I could go with him. And my mother said no, we're going to be leaving any minute now. 

And just then I heard this enormous explosion. And I went-- ran over to see where the explosion was. And it was my friend. He was blown up by the grenade. 

His father ran out there also. And his father picked him up. And what I remember very clearly was that his testicles were just dangling between his legs, all torn up. And we left. And we came back to where we had-- to where we had lived before the war. And hardly anybody else came back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Paul, just one last question. Your conversion. What did it leave you with? What does the-- what currently-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The baptism. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, just a vague feeling of ill-at-easeness. A vague feeling that I should go someplace and undo But there is no mechanism for that. What I 

Would like to just show you, tell you is just one other thing. And that is that during the same period two years ago, when I was down in the chasm, the feeling that overwhelmed me was that there were people who only lived in my memory. And I was the only link to the world for these-- for the people. shoychet And the feeling was just so awful. 

But what I did was I called in my son. I was still in bed then. And I said what I want you to do is hear about the shoychet so that you will also remember him. And I told him about the shoychet. 

And my son said to me, OK, I will remember him. And, and I know he will, I know he will. And my daughter also. She listened, but she said I will also remember him. 

I don't know-- I would just like to do this. I'd like to show you a picture of my son and my daughter and my wife. This, this is my son, Michael. And this is my daughter, Deborah. This is-- she's, she has a dog. And this is Judy. There. 

INTERVIEWER 2: End of a program. It's an end of an everything. I mean, that was wonderful of you. Thank you for sharing that. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. 

NARRATOR: On what they called the final solution of the Jewish problem. This meant death. The extermination of the entire Jewish population of Europe. The ghettos were emptied. Jews by the hundreds of thousands were shot, like this mother and child, hanged-- 