INTERVIEWER 1: Don? 

CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: We were put on a regular train with the instruction not to talk to each other, and we went to Munich-- Munchen-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Munich. 

SUBJECT 1: Munich. And in the underpass-- you know, when you get from the train to the next-- what do you call that on the rail? They were standing there with the cow whips. And if the guys didn't go fast enough, they would smack you over the head. So we got put on one of those bahnsteig. What's a bahnsteig? Where the trains stop? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Gare? No, gare is french. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Platforms. 

SUBJECT 1: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Platform. 

SUBJECT 1: Platform. Oh, there it is. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think when you saw people with bullwhips being hit? What did you think to yourself? What did you say to your friend? 

SUBJECT 1: I just went up the road, ran as fast-- ran as fast as I could that I wouldn't get hit on the head. And that's all you could do. 

SUBJECT 2: You didn't think at that point-- 

SUBJECT 1: You didn't-- 

SUBJECT 2: I mean you-- you-- you did the right thing that you thought was the right thing like a machine. 

SUBJECT 1: You couldn't-- you couldn't fight them. If you tried to fight them, you would be dead that same minute. So then we were put in three cattle cars. And we were put so close together that we couldn't move. And these cattle cars were led by one engine. 

And the guy in the engine, the engineer, whatever you call it, had the orders to make it as miserable as he could. So he stopped all of a sudden, so everybody knocked each other over. And then he drove on for a little while. He stopped again, you know, not like a train stops. He just stopped. 

Then we arrived in Dachau, which is very close to Munich. The door was opened. Out comes the Nazi. And there again were the black guards. Easy-- and the trains were that far or more from the ground. And it said, "Easy, easy, slow." So the people sprang down as carefully as they could because they didn't want any broken guys-- they didn't want any broken guys there. 

The minute you were on the ground, they would take the back of their guns and punched you in the back. Run, you Jew. And you had to form lines. And we got into the gates. And of course when you saw that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: First, you marched to the town, I understand. 

SUBJECT 1: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You marched to the town. 

SUBJECT 1: No. The train landed right in front of the camp. You got to the main gate and got in. And you saw-- saw these rows of barracks there, blocks they used to call them. And you saw the main building on your right. What was that--? Arbeit macht frei. Work frees you, was the big sign over it. So then we had to stand, and we'd stand and stand. Finally, they took us in, and we had to give up our wallets, wristwatches, and other things that we had. They put them together, and they were put aside. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, but they gave it back. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. They gave it back. 

SUBJECT 2: Orderly. 

SUBJECT 1: Then we were put into a big room where we had to undress. It was a huge shower room. There were hundreds of showers from the top. And everybody had to take a shower there, and that the Jews were dirty. And I looked to the front, and I saw some-- I heard and saw some screaming and jumping. I was pretty much in the back head. 

And when I came closer, I noticed that after you took the shower, there was a guy standing there with a small fire hose. It was bigger than a garden hose, a medium between hand-- and there they sprayed the healthy, ice cold water against the body of these guys that came out of the showers. And where they sprayed them, I don't have to explain the lower part of the body, of course. And there were men there up to 65. And some, they just jumped for fear and for excitement. So they-- and the man, the more he jumped, the more he got. 

And then they went to-- there was a doctor sitting there. And he said, OK. Didn't look at the guy. That's OK. So when I came to the front there, I said, you SOBs, I know what you're doing. I stood there like a tree and didn't move. I let him spray me. You know, I was a little used to-- did a lot of sports. And I got through, got by the doctor, and got dressed again. And then we had to go to get our hair cut. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you say that out loud to them? 

SUBJECT 1: I wouldn't dare to. I wouldn't be here. So I said that to myself, you know. You know, sometimes a little smartness you have to have to survive. And most of the survivors that come from anywhere east or west, a little bit of brains belong to it, or else you didn't. 

So then we had to get our hair cut. Put in a barber chair. And one of the-- they called them kapo. It was the political prisoners. They were in charge. They did work and got more freedom. They cut your hair. I had-- didn't have much more than I have now. But everybody had a normal haircut. They cut it all off. 

So a little trick, a little inhumanity. You sat there. And the guy said-- the guy that did the cutting said, "fertig," ready. That means off the chair. If you weren't off when he said the last fertig. You got a needle from the-- somebody stood in back of the chair and stepped on something, and a needle got into your back. Now people-- some people with the-- the guys that were fast when he says fertig and you got off, just got a touch. But some of the older guys, they got really-- yeah, it hurt. 

So then we were put into-- I wasn't put-- block number 23. They were-- there was-- 

SUBJECT 2: 21, it is, yeah? 

SUBJECT 1: 21. I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT 2: I count both. 

SUBJECT 1: And it was for the Jewish men. And there were only racks there on the walls, no beds or anything like that. And there was straw in there, and that's where you had to lie down on. They gave you blankets-- a quarter of a blanket per man or something like that. It was ice cold. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What month was this? 

SUBJECT 1: This was in November 1938. 

SUBJECT 2: 8. 

SUBJECT 1: '38. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So it was cold in Dachau. 

SUBJECT 1: Cold. It was-- it was up in the mountains. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Munich is-- 

SUBJECT 1: It's in the mountains. And the experience there was they were very strict. They weren't trying to kill anybody there on purpose. You know, they were not the final solution. They just mistreated you wherever they could. In the morning, you had to be there at 6 o'clock there on the-- what do they call it in the army? Appellplatz. And you stood there in line. And when the guys counted, it took an eternity in this cold weather. At the beginning, the first couple weeks or so, three weeks I think, I had my regular suit. I couldn't have a tie, but my own suit. The others, the early comers, had these blue white striped uniforms, which they didn't have enough of to give it to all of us. 

But it was cold. And the ears were freezing, and the fingers were freezing. And if a guy were sick, he stood there. I know this guy from Wiesbaden. I don't know what his name was. He was almost 60. He stood there and had diarrhea. It was terminal, you know. And he dropped right then and there, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He died? 

SUBJECT 1: On the place there, on the Appellplatz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: From dysentery? Because he had the diarrhea, he died? 

SUBJECT 1: Sure. He couldn't go to-- if you went into the-- what'd they call it, a hospital? That was the end of you altogether. Nobody ever came out of there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't know what happened, though, in there? 

SUBJECT 1: No. We don't know what happened. 

SUBJECT 2: But anybody that died always died of a heart attack. 

SUBJECT 1: It was always what the family heard. 

SUBJECT 2: Family was always informed heart attack. 

SUBJECT 1: So during the day-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And they said that he had died of a heart attack? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But in this case, this man that you saw died of exposure, died how? 

SUBJECT 1: Food, no food, not the right food, or whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And cold. 

SUBJECT 1: Cold. And we marched and marched and marched. You know, they formed-- each block was put together, and we had to march around the place. There was a-- you know the towers were there where the guards are armed with machine guns? And there was a green grass, a strip of grass, between the walks and the barbed wire fence. If you stepped-- you were told, don't step on that grass. If you step on that grass, they shoot you from up there. 

And so we marched and marched and marched. And the guys that were in charge-- each block had a Nazi as a guard, as a special boss. And he would come occasionally and inspect the inside. Now we had little cabinets like locker room. Locker, you can call it if you want to. 

You had to put your plate and your fork there and the food there, and your comb and brush and toothbrush on a separate shelf. And if somebody by mistake put his comb on the shelf where something else that's not-- the block had-- the stube, the room had to get out and do some exercise. That was a little bit. 

So one day, my-- my room had to get out. And the commander took the guy. And we all had to line up by size. The first one-- and the first one in the hole was a guy by the name of Baum. And the guy, the Nazi, knew him by his name. I don't know. He didn't know my name, but he knew this guy. 

He says Baum, you give the-- you count. You make 25 knee bend, you know. And so he counted and counted. And when he came to 12 or 13 or whatever it was, he says, "Halt!" Hold. Baum, you counted wrong. Start from the beginning. And he did that twice. So by the time he got through, we had not made 25 but 50 or more. And, you know, if you're not used to that, there was a tremendous, tremendous strain. And the older the guys were, of course, the more because they weren't used to gymnastics and athletics. 

So this went on. The food was lousy. We got whale meat with potatoes mixed. And-- but we got something to eat. And I wasn't such a big eater and a lot of other guys. But next door, next room to us, there was some young kids, 18, 20 or so. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They're all Jews? 

SUBJECT 1: All Jews. They were hungry. And when we had a little bit of bread left over, we would bring it over to them. So then they had one day the specialty of the house was herring. Fridays, we got herring. As it came out of the salty-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Barrels? 

SUBJECT 1: Barrels. And we washed it and we ate it because we didn't have anything to do. The other meat-- meat that they got was-- they had meat, you know, from the heads of cows and bulls and whatever they, they caught. It wasn't so bad. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Compared to whale, it must have been a real delicacy. 

SUBJECT 1: And so we could write once a week. The first card we could write, I am in Dachau and healthy. You may send me $25. 

SUBJECT 2: 15 marks. 

SUBJECT 1: 15 marks a month. So Trudy sent me-- this was in December, the 5th-- 

SUBJECT 2: 5th. 

SUBJECT 1: From Wiesbaden, 15 marks. This is her receipt that she saved for the first 15 marks that she sent me to Kurt Schreiber, [INAUDIBLE], block 21, stube number 2. 

SUBJECT 2: Turn it over. 

SUBJECT 1: Dachau. 

SUBJECT 2: Sideways. Sideways. The writing is-- 

SUBJECT 1: Ah, yeah, but this way, OK. And this is the postal stamp, you know, that-- there was her receipt. So we could write that card. And that took us two hours to write that card with these exact words because the guys there said, you cannot write anything, no other word, than these few words. And the guys inspected the cards from left to right and on and over. Somebody would have written, I uh-- we are in Dachau, they wouldn't go. 

So there we suffered, and it went on like that. And guys died. And every day at 6 o'clock before we went to the Appellplatz, there was a call. Jude in haft, number 75, Moses Coen, so and so. Then called about 15, 20 names-- sometimes a few more, sometimes less. Those were the guys-- they were the lucky ones that could go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They could leave? 

SUBJECT 1: They could leave. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They called-- they used your names? 

SUBJECT 1: They called the names. But they said-- before that name, came the word Jude in haft. Can you really translate that? I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Jew under-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jew in custody, in the custody. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Custody. 

SUBJECT 1: Jewish-- Jew in custody, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was the preface to the name, that word Jew in custody? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. That was my-- they were my title. Not that kind of-- colonel, but that was the title, Jude in haft. And there was a law. It was-- or whatever, a regulation, that said anybody that was a veteran of the First World War, front-line soldier-- 

SUBJECT 2: For the whole time. 

SUBJECT 1: Not the whole time. Front-line soldier or who could prove that he would leave Germany immediately. At that time, the end solution wasn't the planning yet. They wanted to get rid of the Jews. Would be released. So my darling wife had an aunt in Holland. We talked about there before I guess. And this woman was contacted. It's a long story. We don't need the details. 

And she got a fake visa promise for a Latin American country. She bought that, mind you, at the Chinese embassy in Holland. 

SUBJECT 2: In Amsterdam. 

SUBJECT 1: Now why, you ask, Chinese embassy? This guy that did the job stole or had gotten the seal of this Latin American country. And he knew enough Spanish to write it in there that-- and sealed that and sold the thing. With that fake visa promise, Trudy went to the Gestapo police and asked for my release. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you hadn't served in the war. 

SUBJECT 1: No, but I was-- she said-- I got-- she went to the police and said, here I-- we can move out of the United States. 

SUBJECT 2: Out of Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Out of Germany. 

SUBJECT 2: And not the police, but the Gestapo. 

SUBJECT 1: Gestapo. We can move-- we can leave Germany because we can go to this country. 

SUBJECT 2: You get rid of us. 

SUBJECT 1: You get rid of us. Let my husband go. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you frightened when you went to the Gestapo room-- building. 

SUBJECT 2: Well, when I went to the Gestapo building, you know, everyone that had been released from the camp had to report once a week. Jude in haft so and so reporting to be-- for a head count. So when I went there with this paper, quite a few men-- it was very cold, and there was snow on the ground and slush. 

And a few of the men, the older men, were standing there in a cluster, my girlfriend's father amongst them. I said, what are you doing here? They had just come back from the camps, you know. I said, why don't you go home or whatever it is? Why do you stand around on the street? Well, we don't know what we should do. On the door of the Gestapo headquarters was a sign, no-- uh, visiting besuch. 

SUBJECT 1: No visiting. 

SUBJECT 2: No office hours today for Jews. Now they were-- that was the day that was assigned for them to report. Now they didn't know should they report and be slapped around because there were no office hours for them? Or if they wouldn't report, would they be arrested again? So he said to me, Trudy, what are you doing here? This-- my girlfriend's father. 

And I said, I have papers for Kurt I want to-- Child, you can't go in there. I said, I will go in there. So I went, and I rang the doorbell. And one of the higher ups in the SS uniform, not the little underlings, opened the door. And he looked at me. And he said, are you Jewish? 

And I said, yes. And he said, can you read German? And I said, I don't see any reason why I shouldn't because I've been born here. I've been raised here. I attended school here, and so have generations of my family before me. So I should think I'd be able to read German. He said, read it to me. 

And I read it to him. And then he said, oh, OK. You know, then you-- you get that feeling now you play for keeps. I mean you have to brazen it out. I said, oh, that's all right. I can come some other time. You are so interested to get rid of the Jews, I just wanted to accommodate you. I knew exactly what was going to happen. 

And with that, I turned around and grabbed a hold of the doors. And he closed the door behind me walking out. And then he said, oh, no, no, no. As long as you are here, you might as well come in, you know. And that's when I handed him those papers. 

SUBJECT 1: And with that, with-- 

SUBJECT 2: With those papers-- 

SUBJECT 1: Then a few weeks later, my name was called. It was on a Saturday morning. It was the best Shabbos that I ever had. And we went-- we marched to the railroad station in Dachau and then we went home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: On the train, you got tickets? Who gave you the tickets? 

SUBJECT 1: The tickets we bought. 

SUBJECT 2: Oh. 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know. How did we get the tickets? We bought-- 

SUBJECT 2: Just something you have to-- 

SUBJECT 1: I can't remember anymore how we-- how we paid for the tickets. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you religious? You said it was the best Shabbos you ever had. Were you a religious Jew? 

SUBJECT 1: I'm a conservative Jew, and I've been brought up very-- pretty strongly when I was a kid, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As a religious person? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. So we went home. There were only six or eight of us there-- well, at least that Saturday morning. And the next Monday, I reported to this place. [INAUDIBLE] from Dachau. And he said-- the guy was sitting there said, yeah, you got out for immigration. I said, yes. I'll give you to the end of this month. And if you're not out by then, you go back where you came from. 

So I said, sir, that's impossible. I says, I don't have a passport. It was taken away from me. And you know it takes time through your office, internal revenue, and wherever things that it go. It takes more than four weeks to get that. So I dick around with him, and he was pretty OK. And he says, OK, I'll give you to the end of February. 

SUBJECT 2: Last day of February. 

SUBJECT 1: This was in January, the 7th of January. End of February, if you're not out by then, I'll do what I told you before. I send you back to Dachau. So we had only an application with the American consulate in Stuttgart for our-- for our visa. 

SUBJECT 2: Registration. 

SUBJECT 1: Registration because they have a number. I don't know-- 4,008, 200 and something. Our turn didn't come up, and it wouldn't come up in a long time. To Latin America, we couldn't go. So what the hell do we do now? So we got in contact with a couple-- 

SUBJECT 2: I had started the first-- I had started that with-- 

SUBJECT 1: Then we contacted the friends in England, and they got us a temporary visitor visa to stay in England till we would get our visas to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember-- is that a passport? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. This is-- I come right now to it. So I got the permit to go to England. On the last day of February, I left Wiesbaden. I received my passport. Here's a J. It means Jewish, you know, Jew. That's the passport. That's the front page. Then here it's the inside. And you see my name. My name is Dr. Kurt Israel Schreiber. And Israel was given to all Jews. One of the laws, everybody had to take that name. Israel is a man, and Sarah is a woman. 

And with that, I was on the train to Holland, you know, to go to England. Between Cologne-- it was the biggest, last biggest town in Deutsch-- in Germany. At the Dutch border, some Nazi guy in uniform comes to the train, and he says, passport. So I gave him the passport. And he looked at it. He said, OK. 

He took my passport with him. And I sat there shivering. Now I got everything. Now they do that to me. So from Cologne to the border, I didn't have a passport. And I was sitting there and sitting. And finally, the last minute just before the train stopped and they're on the border, he came in and handed me my passport. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Both of-- you were together. 

SUBJECT 1: No. She was home. 

SUBJECT 2: Mm mm. 

SUBJECT 1: And he gave me the passport back, and I had to go to the inspection, you know. Like when you come here from the plane, they're going out. They inspected you. I had to completely undress. They examined you-- whether you had any German marks, or foreign country money, or anything with you, gold or silver, if you had anything. You could have only 10 German marks when you left. 

So I was there. They left me in there and left me in there. And just the minute when the train started whistling to go over the border, they let me go and jump on the-- on the moving train. And I got-- then I went to England. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that moment for you, getting back on the train? 

SUBJECT 1: A deep, deep breath and a thank you to God. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How much was 10 German marks in American dollars? 

SUBJECT 1: At that time, 2 mark and $0.50 was $1. So we got actually the equivalent of $4. But we had a little money in England that was sent to me by an uncle and by whatever. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I just-- yes, I just wanted to ask how Mrs. Schreiber joined you. And that's all. 

SUBJECT 2: I waited for a few things to be packed that we were allowed to take with us and left the 20th-- 20th-- 19th or 20th of April. In the meantime, because he had such an unpleasant trip and I was pregnant then, he wrote and said, would you mind flying? So I made the arrangements to fly to England, from Frankfurt to England. 

And I got on the airplane. And when we were airborne, behind the pilot's cabin, the flash that come through. It flashed due to the political situation-- oh, this plane was supposed to stop in Brussels or Antwerp. Due to the political situation, this plane is going nonstop to London. And I asked the--the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The stewardess. 

SUBJECT 2: The stewardess. And that was nice. There were quite a few Jewish people on that plane. Stewardess stood inside the door. When we got onto the plane, she said, welcome aboard. You are now on British territory. So I asked her. I said, what does that mean, due to the political situation? 

She says it's Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia-- 

SUBJECT 1: In Czecho-- 

SUBJECT 2: Czechoslovakia in crisis, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: Same in Mediterranean. 

SUBJECT 2: So she said, we don't know but the war hasn't broken out while we are airborne. And if we land in Belgium, you will all be interned. So we go nonstop to England. And you know what went through my head? I couldn't understand why I would think of that. I said to myself, boy, if we crash now, I'd be buried with the rest of them, not in a corner by myself as the Jew. And we landed in London, and he was waiting for me at Victoria Station because they had a bus, you know, that went from Croydon Airport to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you saw her, what did you think? 

SUBJECT 1: What'd she say? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SUBJECT 2: Don't say what I said. 

SUBJECT 1: She said, take off what you've got there. I had grown a beard then. 

SUBJECT 2: He had grown a mustache. And before saying hello, I said, that has got to come off. 

SUBJECT 1: I was very happy to see her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mr. Schreiber, what happened to your mother? 

SUBJECT 1: My mother was-- she was living with-- after we left Wiesbaden, she lived with her sister in the Rhineland, in a small village. And they-- the two sisters and my aunt's son were taken and sent to Riga and they were killed there. You know, I don't know. You saw that-- where did you see that the other day on that picture? The line-- you see where they-- where they-- 

SUBJECT 2: Made them line up-- 

SUBJECT 1: Made them dig their-- dig their graves and shot them there. 

SUBJECT 2: Trenches. 

SUBJECT 1: And we know that because my cousin, the boy, he was kept there for work. And he came back and told the story. So this is not our imagination. We know that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have to do something about-- and then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your presentation went on this way. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, but he used to do it. 