INTERVIEWER 1: Eva, In 1930. 

SUBJECT: Koseljovo was beautiful. It was a beautiful town. We lived there with the family. And we have a store, We worked. It was beautiful. My father used to go deer hunting. He used to take the kids. And the-- the grandfather was taking us, you know, horses, because the family used to go on four-- Grandfather we used to go on four horses. You know, not four, I mean, he had, in Europe, he had, you know, my grandfather wanted to show off. He liked horses. So he went always with his wagon. He went on four. It was beautiful. The life was beautiful till the-- till the-- the war started, concentration camps, the lagers. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, how did it start? 

SUBJECT: How did it start? It start we heard about it already in '40, '41 when they took the Polish Jews, the Slavic, you know? We heard about it before. Although, we didn't know-- we didn't think it would be happen-- would happen to us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where exactly were you? 

SUBJECT: There I was-- we were in Koseljovo, where we lived there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which is where? 

SUBJECT: This is Czechoslovakia. That was Czechoslovakia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where in-- where in Czechoslovakia? Is it near Prague? Is it-- 

SUBJECT: It's where no, no, this was near, Khust, Beregszasz, Munkacs you know. It wasn't-- it wasn't the real Czechoslovakia before I think it was. It was-- I don't recall. I don't know what it was before. 

So then I went to Czech-- to school, to Czech school. And then the Hungarian came in. You know, they took away all the stores, everything from everybody. And then in a couple of months, the Germans came in. And they took the Jews to the-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did people do when-- you said they took away the stores. What did people do when the Hungarians and then the Germans took away the stores. What did people do with their lives every day? 

SUBJECT: I mean, what we do? We-- we were-- we were like really like now, after the war, we talking about it. We were like animals. We were-- we were doing what they-- what that said for us to do. We didn't-- we didn't go against them. We were afraid. 

But they were going-- but-- with the dogs, with the big dogs, they were going around. You know, the Jews, they were afraid. We were afraid to go on the street. And then if they going to go on the street, they gave us the star, the Jewish-- you know, then they know we are Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What I meant was, what did you do with your life every day? I didn't mean how did you act. I meant, they took away your store, so your father was home with you all day. What did you do from morning to night? 

SUBJECT: We were hiding. We were afraid. We were in the house. We were locked up. And then, you know, they used to come. They wanted money. My father gave them money. They know we have money. They wanted it all the time. 

And they came to the store. They said, it's not true. My father was wealthy. You know, we had the restaurant, a big restaurant, we had. So they wanted liquor. How much liquor we had? We didn't have so much liquor. What we had, we gave them everything. And our lives should be saved. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Eva, you wanted to show us some-- how it looked. 

SUBJECT: So this was beautiful, but we always had-- we had the pictures. My-- the family used to for the holidays, for Pesach, for all vacations. We had weddings in the family. We used to-- it was beautiful. The life was gorgeous. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you hold it very still for us? That's your family? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yeah, my sisters, my uncles, cousins, my brother. I have only one brother, and they killed him. So they killed him. We were still alive. They killed him in '39. The Germans killed my brother. And that took my mother's life, because we were five girls. And my mother couldn't cope with it, that her son should die from hunger. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He died from hunger? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where? 

SUBJECT: In Moravska was traveling in Budejovice. It was a big factory like here the Sikorsky factory. And my brother was there. One of a very dear friend of my father, who was a writer, who made movies in our town, and he took my brother there. But then he liked my brother very much. You know, he was very close family. They even wrote that book about that family. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Will you hold up that other picture and hold it very still so we can see it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, this is-- this is my sister, my sister, who-- this one here, this one have a baby. The pic, and they took us to the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Are you in that picture? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I'm here. Now this is-- this is a picture from home. Oh, you have the other picture. That's my sister here. Here is my sister, my younger sister. She had a baby that month. She was late that weekend. And the people in our town, they were demonstrating again. They didn't want my father to go, because my father did a lot of good for the people. If somebody needed money for a house or that somebody was sickness. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean, the non-Jewish people. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah, the Russians, the real-- I mean, the-- not-- not the Russians, the today Russians, the older Russians, Podkarpatska Rus. It was where I-- you know, where we lived before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The local population. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, the local population. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's go back and talk about when they came and took away the stores and made you afraid to go out on the street. What did you do? You woke up in the morning. What did you do? 

SUBJECT: We woke. We-- what we did, my father-- my father went down to the headquarters. And he told them he don't want to stay. He don't want to stay in town. He would like to go. One of his daughters is going to have a baby. And the only thing he would like, the people should help him. They should help him to be with his family and children, because one of his sisters wanted my father to hide, although he didn't want to. He wanted to go with my sister, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where was your sister? 

SUBJECT: She was in Khust. She was about 60 kilometers from us. She was living there. And she had another child. And my father was thinking then they take us to-- well, you know, he didn't know where they taking us. So he was thinking he's going to help my sister with the children. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you, what were you doing? 

SUBJECT: What I was doing? I went to-- after, we went all to barracks, all my sisters, we were together, because like I said, they didn't want my father. Or that he just begged them they should put us all in one town. They should go from one city, like [INAUDIBLE], you know, or Beregszasz as it was a-- so after, his sister here, they killed-- her husband was killed about six months before everything happened, this one. And they said, those people who their husband was killed before, they not going to go. They're not going to-- they're not going to take them. 

So what we did, my sister had two children. One sister had one boy. And the other had two. There were seven children. And they took them to this sister in Louny. This is another little town not far from Beregszasz. And-- and they said they're not going to take us. So everybody took-- we were thinking, you know, to save the kids, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you eat? Where did you get food? 

SUBJECT: So that's what I want to say. So we didn't-- when we went to my sister's, we had food. Or the still we had in the lagers that they took us for four weeks, where we-- not us, we weren't there, because like I said, they demonstrated, and they-- they worked it out. My father shouldn't be in the barracks with the other people, because they said Daddy did a lot of good for them. And they would like to help him, anything they could for him. So he didn't want nothing. Just the only thing, he wanted to be with his children. 

So then we took our little nephews and nieces. I have here a picture, beautiful. You want me to show you? So we took those kids. And I was with my sister, maybe about six or eight weeks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You and your sister and all the children. 

SUBJECT: All the children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father was-- 

SUBJECT: Because my father then left-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: With his-- 

SUBJECT: My sister was a week in the hospital. And my-- my father-- is it all right? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, fine. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: My father, you know, he had a lot of diamonds and things. So my father then my sister. And he made a button for my sister, that beautiful she came out. In the hospital, she had beautiful pants on, you know, dressy, those silk pants and a beautiful tight blouse, beige, not. I remember like today. She came like a doll from the hospital. And my father mounted-- and my sister, he made a button for her from diamonds, you know? 

We had-- we had a lot of diamonds. And my father mounted the same diamonds. I don't know carats, a half or two, I don't remember. And he made a button. He says, honey, this is, you know, grand-- the baby, you don't have enough milk, and the baby need milk, and so it's something. So you-- you take a button and you're given-- I'm sure, he said, for that you're going to get milk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And he stayed with this sister? 

SUBJECT: He stayed till the last minute with my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did he-- 

SUBJECT: In Beregszasz 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where was he sent? 

SUBJECT: And then they took him-- then they took my-- and I heard when they get there-- when they get there, they separate them, just the mother-in-law. They took off the clothes. She was naked, you know, the old one. And-- and my sister was telling me, my older sister, she said to me, when my sister went, then Mengele saw my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's where already? 

SUBJECT: Mengele, in the lager, in-- in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So Your father-- 

SUBJECT: So my father wasn't already with my-- they took away. They separate them. You know, the man then go on a side. The woman went on the other side. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your father was sent with your-- with his daughter to Auschwitz with a baby. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, Yeah, they went with a baby. And when she came-- when she came, then Mengele saw her. You know who's Mengele? You heard about-- you know who is Mengele, no? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is that the only name of a Nazi that you know? 

SUBJECT: This, I heard, he-- he-- because he was keeping a woman for himself, I heard that, you know, that the war would be over. And he saw my sister. And he took my sister on his side, where he had the-- you know, the pure evil man. So he grabbed my sister from-- the mother-in-law was there and my sister and my other sister, the older sister. He grabbed the baby from her, and she started to scream. She didn't want to give the baby, he said. 

So he then-- he gave her back the baby and pushed her. She fell with the baby on the face. And her-- and he said to her, you [SPEAKING GERMAN], which means, you stupid young woman. But nobody knew he wanted it for her. She did just want to keep the baby. She didn't know they going to take away the baby. And she didn't want. 

So then she didn't want to give the baby. She was screaming. She was holding. The baby was screaming, and she was screaming. And then he pushed her in the other side, where the next day they put her in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Through the gas. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you there? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to you? 

SUBJECT: To me? I went with a sister, because she had the children. And-- and they-- you know, how could she be with so many children? So then in the six weeks, six or eight, six, I don't remember, they came and they said, Bertha, you have to go, you know, the sister. 

[SIGHS] So she says, you told me I'm not going to go. He says, I'm sorry. He says, they-- they don't want no Jews around anymore. So they brought a wagon-- came a big wagon. And they tagged everything. We packed for the children, clothing, food. The children were screaming. I don't know how God can listen to that. They were screaming so bad. [CRYING] And the little one, that my sister's baby, she was holding him like she didn't want to let him go. 

[SIGHS HEAVILY] 

And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? 

SUBJECT: My sister came to me, and she said to me, Eva, she says, I'm telling you right now, you're not coming with me. I says, what do you mean, I'm not coming with you? How could you with-- with the children, how could you be with so many children? I says, you can't. She says, I tell you, you're going to come and sit on the wagon. I says, where shall I go? She says, Daddy made arrangements before, because Daddy knew-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Daddy. 

SUBJECT: My father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT: He knew already she can't stay anymore. They don't let them stay. That was just that. Like they say in America, full of baloney. And then he gave 25,000 crown for one of the fellas who I was very, very friendly with the daughter. And he says, my daughter has gold. And when you run out of money, he says, then she's going to give you gold. 

So I didn't know about this. My sister knew they didn't want to. So my sister-- my sister, I don't want to stay. I want to go after Daddy. And I want to go with my sis. She says, you cannot. When you're going to do that, I kill myself right in front of you, she said. I jumped down from the wagon. She says, I want to go with my children. So then I was hiding by this family. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: How old? I was born in '21. That's 35 years. 20, 19, I don't remember, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 19, 20. 

SUBJECT: So I was hiding by his family. The other in the town, the police, everybody, you know. I'm bad, because I didn't go with the wagon. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened to your sister with the children? 

SUBJECT: To them, she went into the concentration camp. She went to the concentration camp. And my sister was telling me, while she's here, they took away the children from her. And the same thing, she didn't want to give her two children up. So what's the difference? So she-- they pushed her, because they pushed on this left side. And her, they pushed on the right side. She gone with the children. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They- 

SUBJECT: I don't know, the next day. I think the next day, they-- they were-- the children were screaming. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They went to the gas chambers? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. They went right away. I think, the second day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. And what with you? You stay behind, hidden by the-- 

SUBJECT: I stayed behind. I was hidden [INAUDIBLE] by this guy on the base. The police was looking for me all the time. Almost every day, they used to come. You know, they wanted because they know my father had a lot of money. They wanted money. They wanted where is the jewelry? They wanted where is the-- because my sister, one of my sisters, they all- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me what happened to you? 

SUBJECT: To me, what happened to me? So I was hiding. He used to-- I used to, like the whole household, I have to clean shoes. I have to cook for them. I have to-- they-- you know, they-- they were working people. They went on the field all-- all day. And they hardly came home. And they wanted food. They want, so I was cooking and baking. And I didn't do too much, because I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how did the men treat you? 

SUBJECT: The man was-- was terrible. Every night, he got drunk. Every night, he was drinking. He wanted-- he was-- he was nasty. But he was so drunk, he didn't know that his daughter was behind, all the time, behind me when he used to come in, because I was like-- I wasn't in the house. I was like on the farm, they have those feed boxes, corn. 

And he-- I was in there, because when the police came, the girl pushed my head in. And besides, I was thinking, maybe I'd shut my eyes. But oh, terrible, all the scratches. My whole face looked bad, like somebody was-- was killing me, because from the corn. From the corn, I was all scratched on the face. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He tried to molest you sexually? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah. He tried, but his daughter was all the time behind me. And then I said to her, I can't take it anymore. She says to me, you know, we can't take it either. She says, I'm going to bring-- I'm going to bring you my mother's bright dress. I was so skinny. His-- her mother was very skinny too. I'm going to bring you my mother's dress. It's like a big skirt with big stuff and a black-- I looked maybe 100 years old. [CHUCKLES] So she says, and you have to leave, because we just got a telephone call. He says, they-- they looking for you again. 

So it was in the middle of the day, in the morning, and everybody was on the field. And everybody knew us in town. And I was walking. There was little-- you know, on the field was little streets, and I was walking. Nobody, nobody recognized me. I was going. I want to jump in the water. I want suicide, because there wasn't much that I live. I didn't have for what to live. And I don't want this guy shoot, you know, well, using me. I think I didn't want it that badly, you know. 

So I said to myself, I'm going to-- I have to. I says, I have to. I have to finish myself. I didn't want to live. There wasn't for what to live. But at the sixth month, I couldn't take it. I never home. I have to clean the shoes every day. He wanted me to clean his shoes and the house, you know, the cows-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? 

SUBJECT: So I was going in the-- I was going back to the-- I'm going in the-- I want to jump in the water. I don't want the police, because then the police would get me. Then I would have trouble. I don't know what they want. I really don't know. I don't know. They just want to get me, you know, like a prisoner or what or maybe send me the same to concentration camp. 

So I wanted to jump in the water. I said, this is my only day to go, because the water, the ocean was not too far. And then I sat on the side of the ocean, and it came in my mind. I says, my god. I have to live. Something-- I says, I have to. It looks like I have to live. The guys thought, you know, we believe in-- in beshert. I don't know if you know know what's beshert. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Fate. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, fate. So I says, nobody recognized me. I know everybody in town. Everybody was around the town and working on the field. Nobody recognized me, nobody. Everybody was looking at me. And I was going with my little bag and think like an older-- so I says, maybe, maybe somebody is going to come home. They need me. I was thinking maybe my sister. You know, who knew? I didn't know about the concentration camp. I says, no, I'm not going to do it. 

Came the night. I went to another town. I was sitting there and thinking, what shall I do? Shall I jump in the water? I didn't know what to do with myself. I was thinking. And I think, where shall I go? Where should I-- I remember, not too far, about 20 miles maybe, there was a guy who used to work on the field for us. And I remember he needed money. And Daddy gave him money to buy the house. And I remember he wanted to give back Daddy the money. Daddy didn't want it. He was a very, very good worker. So I says, I'm going to go to this guy. 

I come in the nighttime. I knock on the window, and I says-- I said to him, [GASPS] he didn't know. He says, Helka, because my name is Helen. He says, Helka in Russian. What you doing here? He says what? And I says, I-- I run away from the lager, I says, from the-- from the barracks, I says. And I told him, there I was. And-- and I says, would you hide me for a-- a little while? 

He says, look, Eva, he says, you went through so much. He says, I could see you are finished. I was scratched. I was. You know, all-- it was terrible how I looked. So he said to me, Helka maybe tonight or maybe tomorrow, he says, or that here is a lot of partisani, he said to me. And he says, I'm afraid I don't-- I can't keep you in the house. When you run, he says, I put you in the hay. Hay, he had-- you know, in Europe, they used to have those hay. 

So he says. I'm going to make here a hole. And I'm going to put you in. I can't, because I'm afraid the partisani going to find you. They're going to kill you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean, the Russian partisans-- 

SUBJECT: The Russian partisans-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --was going to kill hiding Jews. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yeah, because that was the story. You know, because who was the Russian partisani? The Russian partisani were the-- the jail people, the killers. They let them in the front row. They didn't care. They were from jails. They didn't care they going to be killed or not. They let them-- they let every prisoner out. And those prisoners came in the first line. 

And in the nighttime, but god [INAUDIBLE] all of the It's the Katyusha, Katyusha. They say they-- they start the lights and everything. And he says to me-- he came back-- he says, Helka, he says, have a little patience. And the mice and all kind-- you know, they used to-- they climb on me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There were mice in the hay field? 

SUBJECT: Not mice, those big rats. And they climb, climbed on me in every-- and I was so afraid-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were standing in the middle-- 

SUBJECT: I was in the middle, yeah. And there was the rats were coming up and down the-- the hay, you know. And they-- they were going on my head. And then I made myself like to lay down. I couldn't just stay. I made myself a little. And they were running. [CHUCKLES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they bite you? 

SUBJECT: Bite, what's not to bite? I'm sure they bite. They bite the bone of-- well, here on the neck, I had an infection from one of the-- and then he says-- he came to me. He says, now, he says, I think everything is going to be all right. 

So the next day, I came out from there. I know he brought me milk in the nighttime. I know that I couldn't smile. I didn't. I wasn't hungry. Maybe I didn't eat that week. And I didn't feel hungry. My stomach was I just-- so he said to me-- he says, I think now, he says, it's over. So a partisan, one of the Russians came in. A [NON-ENGLISH], a [NON-ENGLISH] comes in. He says to that Joe-- he says, Joe, he said, did you-- you have some Jews here? Oh, I'm sure. 

He said, do you have Jews here, zhidy? So he says, no. The zhidy they took to the-- to the lagers. He says, no zhidy. He says, why are you asking the zhidy? He says, because when I find one zhidy, he says, I take a knife. I-- I-- his stomach, he says, "I open his stomach" in Russian. You know, I mean, I'm in the other room, and I listen to this. I says, my god, what's going to be again? 

So he says, why? He says, because he says, in Russia, the Jews, they lay on their stomachs in the sun. The sun's hitting their stomach [INAUDIBLE]. I have to work for the Jews, he says. And the Red Jews, they suggest they don't do nothing in Russia. They just lay on the, you know-- so he came again and he says, ay-- I know, he says, I wouldn't tell you nothing. Just you heard the story. He says, you have to go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even after the Russians came in-- 

SUBJECT: When the Russian came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --you had to continue running. 

SUBJECT: He said to me, he was afraid, you know, he was afraid. He didn't-- nobody knew what's going on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what happened after that? 

SUBJECT: After what happened, again, I ran out in the field And in the field, they have like-- like cornfields, you know, with the four stems. And on the top was like a house. And he brung a ladder, and he put me in there. Well, there was the rats, my god. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how long did you stay there? 

SUBJECT: There, a night. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And after that? 

SUBJECT: And after that-- after that, in a couple of days already, they start to come the nicer-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The soldiers. 

SUBJECT: --the nicer soldiers and heard them. I heard-- I heard this came home. And this is in Beregszasz And this is-- so I said to this guy, to Joe, I says, you know what? Will you take me to Beregszasz? I says, my brother-in-law has there a house. And I says, let's see. I know there are a lot of non-Jewish people. I know my uncle-- uncle's friend. You know, I thought at the time, Dr. [? Morna. ?] 

And now I remember, and I went to him. And then in a couple of weeks-- a couple of days-- I remember a couple of days, my brother-in-law came home, one brother-in-law. And then the other brother-in-law came home. And then the people heard about me-- I'm there. And a lot of Jewish people were hiding. And they came all. And there were about 30 of us in my brother-in-law's house. A lot of them need medication. We went to the hospital in-- they help him to cooking, baking, and washing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So-- 

SUBJECT: and then after, we heard the tsores what happened were killed we didn't, I didn't know. We didn't know nothing. Or they're in the lager, you know, the men. Because they took them before, they knew where at they was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, it's just a horrible story. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. And then I find out my sister. But really, my father for being life. Then my sister, everybody. It was my sister, my sister. So this is the life story. And then we came, and then we went to Prague. We went to Prague again. And there again, spotted tourists, because the Russians told us they won't leave us alone. 

We had to fight. I had my older sister. She lives here. My two sisters in the morning. We, again, my cousins, my sister's sister-in-law came, everything. We didn't know what to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, but I shall interrupt you now, because this is the-- 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Russians are bad, but the Russians-- 

SUBJECT: The Russians were bad, but the Russian wasn't good. It's what they wanted. And you know, they wanted a girl. They wanted-- were drunk. And every night, my sister used to hide us under the bed-- 