INTERVIEWER: I can't answer that because I don't-- I don't know what they're talking about. 

CREW: You don't remember? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Please. Thank you. You know, I know your really busy. Take you time. And send a number of copies, right. OK? Because I don't get--. 

CREW: Later on in the day, all day long, we reach a point during the day where I couldn't make a reasonable radical move right without permission. 

INTERVIEWER: I didn't sign off. 

CREW: It's on-- it's on a little page. 

INTERVIEWER: You say that. 

CREW: So it's recording how it happens. 

INTERVIEWER: Say it. 

CREW: OK. Later in the day, what happened was we lost the color while interviewing. It wasn't the two brothers it was--. 

INTERVIEWER: --the microphone. 

CREW: Microphone on. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. You assume that you're sitting in the living room. You're opening the picture album, and you're beginning to tell about yourself way back, way before the war, about yourself, the family, the town, the customs, mostly images, things that you can see, or not general experience, but things that you personally remember, the way it stays with you. As you talk about something, it would help if you could say this was a year so-and-so, month so-and-so. 

IRENE WEISS: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: In general, not-- if you know only the year, it's OK. 

IRENE WEISS: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: All right, so your name, the day of-- no, the year of birth, place of birth, and then back into the past. And as though you visualize the pictures and tell us what you see. 

IRENE WEISS: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? 

IRENE WEISS: Start? My name is Irene Weiss. I was born in 1930 in the town of Poprad. Very small town, population 1,000. 

INTERVIEWER: What country? 

IRENE WEISS: Hungary. Czechoslovakia. It was Czechoslovakia when I was born and until 1939. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: The year was 19-- 

IRENE WEISS: 1939. 

INTERVIEWER: That you were born? 

IRENE WEISS: No, no, no, 1930. 

INTERVIEWER: 1930. 

IRENE WEISS: And I started out going to Czechoslovak schools, Czech schools. And then in 1939, when the war began, then I-- and the Czechs were thrown out of that area, then I went to Hungarian school. 

INTERVIEWER: What it was like, the hometown, the family, customs, the size of the family, mother, father, what pictures come back? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Uh, an orthodox Jewish family. Um, there were six children. My father, um, owned a lumber yard. And, um, went to work in a-- a nearby town every day. Um, very devoted Jewish family, a typical Jewish family. And our-- our entire life really revolved around our Jewishness. 

You know, our holidays and the celebrations. And it really is vivid in my mind, looking forward to the celebrations, getting ready for the holidays. You know, as a child, that's what was important. You know, the-- if-- if new clothes were bought, it was bought for those occasions, or you know, special foods and so on. 

In other words, it was-- it was a family-centered, religion-centered type family. And it was-- there was really a complete separation between us and the Gentile community, you know? We-- we always knew there were two worlds. 

You know, our inner world and our inner customs, and that other world into which we would go out, but come back. And um, it was easy to maintain that separation because they looked at us as a separate entity also. There was really no real mixing between, you know, the Gentile community and us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many children-- what was your place in the family? 

IRENE WEISS: I was, uh, the third. Um, there were younger ones. When the war started, the youngest one was, uh, six. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. How many children altogether? 

IRENE WEISS: Altogether, six. And I was 13 when the war began. And, um, of course, um, the younger children didn't survive. And the only one-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell us more about-- 

IRENE WEISS: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the home. You were born in 1930. 

IRENE WEISS: Mm-hmm. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Birthdays. What did those holidays pay forward? 

IRENE WEISS: Uh-huh. Oh, I see. Um, well, we-- we all, um, reli-- received a religious education. Of course, but not very formally so. My father would teach the girls the alphabet and the reading. And the boys would go to the hader in the nearby synagogue. 

And we all knew our, um, all the songs and all the prayers and everything that went with these holidays. Because they were, as I said, a focal point. And, um, of course, it was an orthodox observation at all times. Um, the, um-- well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was father like? What images come back a little? How do you see him? 

IRENE WEISS: Well, I see him as, um, like, extremely loving and devoted and, um, caring. And, um, probably not as, um, forceful, in terms of, um, the upbringing of the children as my mother. I think of her more as the, um, the one who, uh, set the rules and standards, you know, for the children. 

Um, but the family-- he was-- he was always like the special guest who comes home and we're looking forward to his coming. And there was absolutely no fear attached to any of that. It was a tremendous amount of respect that we felt for him. But he was more like someone that you, um, look up-- look up to and look-- look towards to-- to come home and sort of complete the circle. 

And, um, he was a very gentle person. He-- you know, my image of him is that he was not a very forceful, um, personality. But at the same time, um, he-- he had a, um, you know, he was, in the family, a very important part. There was-- he had a sister who lived with us, who was widowed some years ago. And she was, um, like a second mother to us. 

She, um, helped raise us and I understand that when we were all young, we used to ask the question, who was our real mother? She or the other one? You know, there was sort of no distinguishing between the kind of love and care that she gave to the children. So she was really an important part. 

There were the two of them, my father and her. And, um, well, you know, we often talk of having extended family living with-- with people. For the children, it was wonderful, but we later became aware that there was tension between, um, the two women in the household. And I suppose I recall incidents where my father was sort of tor-- tormented by having to take sides and, you know, that sort of thing. 

So that is the only type of tension that I remember at all, you know, in the household, occasionally. The children really didn't know what was going on. But there seemed to be times when he was, um, as I say, torn between his wife and his sister. But you know, as far as we were concerned, we had two mothers. She cooked and she read to us, and she tau-- taught us the prayers and she held us on our knees-- her knees and that sort of thing. Knitted clothes for us. 

And we also had our grandparents nearby, in a-- in a nearby town, which was also, um, sort of further stre-- strengthened the ties, you know, of the family. The children were sent to my-- to the grandparents for summer vacations. And, uh, was always a, um, vying who should-- who would go and, you know, how long we would stay. 

There were a lot of things-- even though it was a little town-- there was a lot of things that the children had to look forward to. Probably more even then our children today, even though they can go to camp and they can, you know, take trips. We also had these things. It was-- you know, a trip to the mountains where the grandparents had a-- had a place. And-- or a-- or a trip to grandparents or aunts and uncles for special holidays. 

And these were always, um, there were very large families. Everyone had a lot of family. And, um, it was a-- a social gathering that we miss very much here. Because we just don't have that kind of excitement. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The grandparents were on whose side? 

IRENE WEISS: My mother's parents. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And most of the family was on mother's side? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Most of the family was my mother's side. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So there was really father and sister were-- 

IRENE WEISS: That's all that-- that was. Their parents died at a young age. Mother-- the grandmother died. But the other side was a huge family. And, um, some of the uncles were not much older than we were. And there was a lot of fun going on, you know? 

And so there were all these exciting things to look forward to that, probably, our children don't get the same, um, closeness and, um, a loving kind of a care. If you go to summer camp, it's not quite the same, you know, as when you go to a large household of relatives when-- where, you know, there-- first of all, there was a new, um, part-- another part of the country, you know, mountains and rivers. And boat rides and hikes and all kinds of things like-- like that. And always with lots of other cousins there, coming. 

And so there was this very close-knit mixing, mingling, helping type of a family. In school, the Jewish children went and did well and-- but there wasn't-- we never made friends or any kind of connection with the students in-- in the public schools. Because there was just a nat-- there was almost like a natural division that one didn't mix socially. And, um, in the schools, there-- there was sort of an understanding that, um, the Jewish children did better. And, um, the others rarely did, in such a small village. 

You know, so we always felt sort of elite in there. We-- we did not feel, um, different in a derogatory sense. We always felt that, um, you know, we-- most of the Jewish children did-- did very well compared to-- it was a farming village. And so the other children actually did look up to us in that-- that setting, you know? And there was no outright anti-Semitism or anything in between the children as such. And yet, there was a complete separation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This is Czechoslovakia or-- 

IRENE WEISS: This was-- well, I would say mostly Hungary since, really, my best memories after I was already in the Hungarian school. Well then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was not Slovakia. 

IRENE WEISS: No, not Slovakia. That is a different region. No, this was, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Carpathian. 

IRENE WEISS: Karpaso, Ukraine. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Kar-Kar-Karpa-- 

IRENE WEISS: Port Karpatski roso. Yes, you probably have heard. Well, what happened, really, beginning about 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In a way that you remember and can visualize it, in your own images, feelings, thoughts, only you-- yours. Not the historical. 

IRENE WEISS: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You can mention historically events, but what we want to know is about you. Just tell it inward, to your own memories. 

IRENE WEISS: Well, I recall the, um, announcement on the radio when, um, the Germans invaded, um, the, um, Sudetenland. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 19-- 

IRENE WEISS: In 1939. And um, I remember playing, uh, ball on the side of the house. Um, my father was sitting around with, um, a friend of his from the town. And I remember the, um-- somebody ran up who heard it on the radio. 

Because we didn't-- we didn't have a radio, and this young man ran up and said, uh, that the Germans invaded Sudetenland. And even though I was just a child, the-- the overwhelming tragedy of-- the impending tragedy, although we didn't know the details, was felt by everyone. 

And I remember myself-- I was, I guess nine years old. We just knew that something terrible is going to happen to us. That we really sort of felt that our world is going to change enormously. There was this enormous doom that befell everyone around. It was just silence. 

They, um, they didn't say anything about it. They didn't analyze it. You know, like, later on in the war, they would analyze every bit of news that came in the-- through the BBC or, you know, whatever way they could. They would take it apart in minute detail and project what might happen. This was-- nobody said anything. It was just the longest, gloomy silence because we knew that something terrible is afoot. 

And somehow, as a child, you know, the mood changed. It never lifted after that, for me, as I recall. I began to feel like the adults, you know? Having this-- this burden and fear that they had, and worry for, um-- for each other more than anything else. 

Because somehow, um, we knew that, um, you know, that-- I don't know exactly. We didn't know what would happen, but we knew that the family was in trouble and the Jews were in trouble. And so after that, nothing-- there was no more youthful fun or no more-- everything had to be qualified. Everything that-- you know, a shadow hung over the children. The children felt it very strongly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They stopped playing. 

IRENE WEISS: They stopped playing. That's right. I-- I, uh, you know, if I think back carefully, um, about childhood, I don't remember being a child past the time when I was playing with a ball that particular afternoon when I heard that news. After that, I was never a child. 

And one never had to be told, you know, to behave better or be like an adult, or don't be childish. There was this enormous burden. And then there was reason enough to remain that way, and even more burden because things did start happening very fast after that. My father's business was confiscated. And then a-- a Gentile man took over the business and just moved in. There was no compensation or anything like that. And my father then stayed home all the time. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was that like for him? Do you remember what the house was like? 

IRENE WEISS: I remember a lot of silence, you know? There was-- they did not have to say. You know, it was sort of an understood thing that, um, things are bad and let's just hope it doesn't get worse. You know? 

There was-- he and there were other men in the-- in the village who lost their businesses. And they sat around talking politics, you know? And-- and as I say, analyzing all the news, or reading between the lines most of the time. Because the news was, uh, certainly-- well, the news we got was-- was, uh, censored. And so they got it whatever they could. 

And they were watching the, um, progress of the Russian army, counting the days. And hoping that, you know, the Russian army would get there before more things would happen. But it went on and on. And-- but he stayed home doing some chores, you know? 

We had a-- a farm that was just for family use, you know? Cows and gardens and fields that was not for, uh, production for selling or anything. It was just to maintain the family. And we used to, you know, have help to do that. One person would be in the barn and another one would be in the fields and so on. 

But he took over the whole thing. He would get up at 5:00 AM and milk the cows and take-- you know, even things like, um, help deliver calves. And you know, he just took over the, um, operation. And, um, but I used to-- as a child, again, I used to-- the longer it went on-- worry about money. 

I used to-- I remember pleading with my mother to tell me how much exactly did we have. Because I was, day and night, thinking that one day, they couldn't be having anymore, and one day there'll be absolutely nothing like other families in the-- in the town. Jewish families who-- whose fathers became, uh, beggars and traveled around the, um, region begging for money to feed 10, 11 children, you know? 

And I remember having this enormous fear that, after two years, three years, you know, they couldn't be having anymore to, uh, take care of the children. And you know, in other words, the whole, um, load of adult concerns was, um-- I felt-- I shared as much as-- you know. 

My mother wouldn't tell me, you know. She laughed about it. It was a funny thing. We had a table with a-- with a top. If you turned the top, it was hollow on the inside and they stored papers and documents and things there. 

I remember, when nobody was looking, turning that table and looking to hope to find the money that the family had so that I could count it and be sure that, um, there was still enough left. Of course, I didn't find it. And-- and my mother would never tell me. I often wonder whether she should have, you know? A minor thing like that to reassure a child. 

And of course, they talked a lot about the money. And there was reason enough to worry because they did talk about, and worried how they would, you know, feed the children and that sort of thing. But so you know, there were always these problems that, um, were extremely scary to a child. 

Um, then, too, there were occasions when-- you know, in those days, TB was very prevalent in communities. And, um, one by one, the children would get a-- the younger children would get it. 

And, um, there would be this-- again, the-- the added concern that if they-- can we afford the medicine? Can we afford the necessary food? And everything became magnified and-- and very scary. 

And I remember the-- the young-- one of the little boys-- he was about eight years old-- had, uh, just been declared cured of a case of TB that he had when we, um, were taken to the ghetto, uh, in preparation for transport to Auschwitz. And I remember thinking, oh, thank god. He's finally-- he's at least cured. So now that, you know, he-- just in time, you know, he's cured. 

I mean, these-- I never discussed this with my mother, but I added up things that will he-- uh, were going to be OK despite the new setback. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The pluses. 

IRENE WEISS: Yeah, the pluses. And, um, of course, it made no difference at all that he was cured just in time. It-- it mattered-- did not matter at all. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did it begin? If you want to tell about the-- if that's where you-- what you-- 

IRENE WEISS: Yes, well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Or would you like to speak something more about the time before those years till '44? 

IRENE WEISS: Well, I-- I just, um-- you know, I think it-- it began as a, uh, an extremely happy childhood. And it ended with an abrupt change from-- from a carefree childhood to an overload of adult concerns and fears. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Until '44, you are living at home together, in fear. Did you know, for example-- I mean, the war was discussed. Were you informed? Did you know, one, about the situation of the war? Two, about what was happening with Jews? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes, we knew. We, um-- because they got the news and-- well, the-- the local radios were blaring anti-Jewish propaganda all the time. And, um, re-- re-broadcasts of Hitler speeches, what was going on in Hung-- in Germany. 

And although-- of course we were very worried because the Hungarians cooperated with the Germans. We still felt that, um, well, that was in Germany. Those terrible things were happening in Germany. But there-- we're not in Germany, you know? This trouble here-- there's a lot of trouble, a lot of influence of the Germans. They had their, um, fascist youth groups. But, um, still, we're not Germany. 

But, um, there were a lot of anti-Semitic incidents and scary incidents. For example, there was a, um, there were Hungarian soldiers billeted next door one day in the village, and next door to us. And in the middle of the night, um, they, um, discovered that they had a Jewish neighbor. And they came knocking on the windows and doors and screaming to open up. 

And of course, we knew what that sort of thing meant. You know, they'd come in and they-- we heard from other places they did that. You know, it was-- I think they were drunk, too. It was-- it was their sport to find a Jew, preferably one with a beard, and humiliate him. 

You know, they would, um, cut his beard off. You know, pull his beard, taunt him, tease him. You know, it was-- it was their sport, as if it were some, uh, animal that you can tease and play with. 

I remember they knocked and they knocked and they carried on, and my mother wouldn't-- you know, wouldn't, um, open it at all. And of course, everybody was up and listening, and terrified, you know, whether they'll come in or not come in. Or break the window or-- you know, this was just an ordinary night. 

And then apparently, the way this ended is that the superior officer, whoever was in charge of them, became aware of it and called them off. But when this-- you know, when he-- if he hadn't and if they had come in, there would have been a-- a terrible ordeal, you know, for my father. So there were these incidents. 

Then one day, um, after my father had, um, lost his business, he-- he went, um, back to the town where the business was. Because my grandfather lived in that town. And um, both of us-- he and I-- took a train back, from that town, home. 

And he had a beard, which was normal for Jewish males, orthodox males. And um, again, some hoodlums on the train came up to him and began to laugh and to taunt and to tease and to speak among themselves, you know, what should we do with this Jew? 

And you know, one suggested, well, um, wouldn't it be a good idea to throw him off the train? And, uh-- so there I am with my father, you know? Um, in absolute agony and terror at what-- you know, watching out the window-- it was a five-minute ride. Watching the landscape to see how soon we will be home and we can get off. 

Because again, even though the train did make it home before we-- before they decided upon what to do, we heard incidents like that all the time, where people were thrown off trains or, uh, made to get off miles from home. And in fact, my, um, mother's young brothers were made to get off some time before in a-- very far away from home, and they had to walk for I don't know how many-- day and-- a day and night to-- to get home. You know, the-- this-- this sort of thing was very traumatic. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And was Auschwitz, Treblinka, gas chambers-- anything of that known? 

IRENE WEISS: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing. 

IRENE WEISS: We did not know of that. We did know that Jews who could not prove citizenship were deported on the-- then put up on the other side of the Hungarian border into Poland. And occasionally, some would make it back home. And they would tell horror stories about what happened to them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They would? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Oh, yes. But see, these were not concentration camps at that point. They put them on the other side and the Polish population, it was anti-Semitic enough. And there were Germans, of course, there. They, um, they killed them in-- in their own fashion, you know? But there wasn't-- there were no-- we had no knowledge of camps or extermination camps. 

But being deported to Poland was the-- the terrifying possibility, you know, that families were separated. The children that-- of these people seldom came back. You know, whole families never came back. You know, one or two adults would wander back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Let's come back to you. 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Well, you know, it-- it's-- it's been a long time, but I think of the whole period as a series of traumatic events. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. And then, in '44, even that changed. 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you remember-- 

IRENE WEISS: Well, at one point, I was, um-- I was going to school all this time. And in fact, I was going to, um, a different town by train because we-- they didn't have a junior high school in my town. So I was going-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Every day, back and forth? 

IRENE WEISS: Every day, back and forth. And that in itself was, um, a daily trauma because the-- the trains were filled with soldiers. And you know, it wasn't like students had any kind of special train or bus or anything. I was part of the-- the passengers, whoever was there. And it was, um-- I would witness and hear anti-Semitic incidents directed towards Jewish passengers, just like it happened with me and my father when we were coming back. 

But then, at one point, when they declared that the Jews will wear the Jewish star, I was still going to school at that time. And I had this enormous problem, what to do about the Jewish star. I would, uh, pin it on, and, um, go to my, uh, my-- in my town, go to the train station. I felt confident nobody would hurt me in my town with that distinction of the star. 

But then in the train, I would take it off. And in the other town, where I was a stranger, I would take it off. And when I'd get to school, I'd put it on because the teachers knew I was Jewish. And it was just this constant, where am I safe and where am I not safe showing my identity? It was really a daily, incredible trauma, you know? It-- with-- with the star on and off. 

And um, it didn't last very long because then, very soon after that, they, um, declared that Jewish children were not allowed to go to school anymore. So then that was that. I stayed home and didn't have that to-- to concern myself with. 

But you know, it was-- as I look back at it, it-- it was, um, every-- every day was, uh, enormously stressful, you know? And-- and yet, somehow, even as a child, I understood that, um, that it-- it was-- that as a child, I had to take it just like the adults did. There was none of this needing extra, uh, support or-- or having additional problems as a child. It was-- it was no different than my father had and, um, you know, when he was about to be thrown off the train or, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Then 1944 came. And do you remember what it was like when the Germans, in essence, took over from the Hungarians? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your own memories. 

IRENE WEISS: Again, my own memory-- I was-- I was about, again, nine years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were-- 

IRENE WEISS: No, it was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --14. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --14. 

IRENE WEISS: No, the Germans came into Hungary before then. I think, um, the Germans maybe came in 1943, they occupied. And this was maybe a year later. Anyway-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: 13. 

IRENE WEISS: That's right. Um, the news went out in the town that the Germans were coming. And it turned into a huge celebration and a welcoming committee was formed, and the townspeople lined the streets and looked up towards the only highway from, uh, the direction that they were coming from. And, um, stood for hours waiting. 

Now, of course, the Jews-- again, this constant conflict-- conflict. My father said, um, he ought to go out there and be with the crowd because if he doesn't, it will seem that he isn't happy. Or the townspeople will feel that he should be out there. If he does go out there, there's another kind of a problem. 

So he-- he thought he should go to show his face to satisfy those people in town who was very happy and waiting for the Germans. So as a chi-- you know, I went with him, and probably, my other brothers and sister. I really don't recall. But I remember being in the crowd watching, looking up this road where they were coming from. 

And of course, it took all day. And people went up to-- into the church steeple, which gave a-- a view of the area, and looked to see. And when they-- and I remember my father and older brother went up into the church steeple, too, with different emotions, I'm sure, than, um, the others, who were happily awaiting them. 

And at one point, the cheer went out that they were sighted. And the church bells started to peal. And there was this huge celebration. And I remember my father, at this point, withdrew and went back home. And I, as a child, you know, I stood around and waited. Soldiers marched in and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: With your star? 

IRENE WEISS: No. No. This was not yet the star time. This was not. Um, the star, perhaps, came, um-- I think not until 1944, perhaps early 1944. I think this was 1943 when the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

IRENE WEISS: And um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what did you see that-- 

IRENE WEISS: Well, it was a huge celebration. Everybody was very, very happy. They gave them wine and flowers and welcomed the-- the-- the Germans. And um, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who marched in? 

IRENE WEISS: Troops. Troops. They occupied-- or they were permission-- given permission to, um, bring their soldiers in. It was sort of a-- it wasn't an outright occupation. They were collaborating with the Germans and they allowed them to use the country any way they liked in-- in relation to the war. 

And so, um, at this time, the German soldiers did not stay. Except they-- you know, when the celebration was over, they sat around. They were wined and dined and then they marched on further. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your feel-- what were your feelings like at that time, as you-- 

IRENE WEISS: Well, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --watched all of this going on? 

IRENE WEISS: Well, it was-- it was a detachment that, actually, one had to develop a-- a detachment of, um-- you know, this is not my joy. This is-- this is-- this is not for me, just like so many other things were not. It's sort of a, um, looking on like an outsider, and assessing it. 

And knowing that, for us, it's not good news. And-- and watching the townspeople people and-- this sort of became, I think-- for me, as a child-- always this onlooker attitude developed, where I fully understood that I was different. And the things that happened to, um, other people affected me differently. 

And you know, right-- somehow, one is able to integrate it. It's never-- it's not a-- a sort of a break where you can't integrate the two. You do, but-- but you-- but one does remain looking on to events. Um, and that's how I, as a child, I-- I observed it. 

I knew that my father ran home because he didn't want to be seen, a Jew with a beard. I mean, I-- I understood, as a child, the kind of adult conflicts and worries and fears that my children today, or you know, when they were young, would certainly not integrate as well, and not accept. And there was never any, um, outward manifestation that this, uh-- you know, never any emotionally disturbed type reaction. 

It was a silent acceptance and observation of what was going on, which you know, looking back, and having my own children now, I realize that, um, in normal times-- what we call, you know, what we-- children would have all kinds of nightmares and conflicts and problems. But it was just an-- an accept-- accepting the fact that, um, the adults were in great danger. And therefore, we all were. And just watch-- watch every step and, uh, and be-- be resigned and wait. 

They had hope. I mean, they had-- everybody thought that this war will be over before much longer. I mean, it went on and on. And so we thought that we would get by with just, like, what happened up to that point. We-- we never anticipated that we would be removed from our homes. We really didn't, until it actually happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did that actually happen? 

IRENE WEISS: Well, it happened, um, the last day of Passover in 1944. And, um, it happened in the town next-- the one next to us, where my grandparents lived. And um, they-- they were the first ones. They, um, put all the, um, people in the town into cattle trains. 

And, uh, my oldest brother spent Passover with my grandparents. And this last day of Passover, when this happened, they allowed him to go home. And so he walked home. It was about five kilometers. He ran home, all the way. 

He ran home and, um, announced this-- what was going on there. And my mother, um, decided that she had to do something about it. She started running and walking back to the town to see her parents, and see what was going on. And of course, they stopped her at the border of the town and sent her back. 

And, um, anyhow, we became aware that we'll be next because they went from town to town. So, um, the last day of Passover, even though it was still, uh, Passover, we didn't have any, uh, bread and that-- of course, in the house. So my aunt and my mother began to bake and, um, cook. Because for six children, you know, you-- they felt they had to prepare some food. 

So they baked day and night. All day and all night. And, um, my mother went to the neighbors and bought extra eggs and butter and, uh, whatever food she could buy. And, uh, sure enough, the very next day, they came and, uh-- it was my high school-- my, uh, elementary school principal was in the official party, and the mayor of the town. And the police-- Hungarian police with the tall boots and the plumed hat. 

And they came and announced that, um, we should pack our bags and take a suitcase each, and go to the nearby city hall. And, um, in the meantime, they said, uh, they would like to have all our money and jewelry because that was part of their, um, uh-- part of their direct instructions. That we are to turn over everything valuable. 

And, um, in anticipation to this, um, my parents and my aunt, um, did attempt to hide some things. You know, they'd sew things into linings and-- because-- see, we-- we knew-- they were really very well aware of what was going on with the people who were deported to Poland. That they confiscated everything from them and so on. And that those who managed to keep anything, once they got to the Polish side, they could somehow buy their way back. You know, that helped a great deal. 

And so we thought that we're also going to Poland to be let loose in the forests and in the fields, just like the others were. And that, um, you have to buy your food from the peasants and-- and perhaps buy your way back somehow. And, um, so it was very important to, um, take the valuables. 

So they-- however, they did turn over what they thought would satisfy them because they had to. They knew that they had to turn over some. And, uh, we, uh-- also then, you know, it was-- um, a frenzied attempt to-- to hide things. They, um-- my father hid some jewelry in the cellar, where he removed a-- a stone from a-- from the wall. And uh, sort of a block. And he put things in there, which later, we found, to our utter amazement. 

And he-- my mother and my aunt also, uh, put linens and family heirlooms that, you know, were kept for generations-- that would never used. These gorgeous hand-embroidered linens and laces and things. I remember they filled a huge bathtub with all these things to the very top. And my father and brother dug a hole in a wood shed that we had, big enough, deep enough, to cover this tub full of linens. And, uh, we all worked on it. 

And we would carry the linens out in a-- in the wood-- in the basket, you know, like the wood. And I remember, um, we had to take many trips back and forth. And there was, um, a little grocery store across the street from us. 

I was sent to go to the grocery store, look out the window from there, and see what activity was noticeable in our yard. So that-- in case somebody was watching and seeing us going back and forth with what seemed to be wood on top of each basket. Whether, um, any-- anything suspicious was noticeable. So I was sort of a lookout for a while. 

And then, um, and when it was all buried, it was covered with, uh, wood-- fire wood-- up to the very top. And again, we thought, you know, we'd planned to come back, obviously. Um, that-- these family treasures, you know, were-- were to be kept, if possible. 

Later on, when I-- I was the only one who returned to our home. So I went right to the woodshed and found absolutely nothing. So I went to my Gentile neighbors and, um, they said, oh, yes. 

There were-- soon after you were gone, some, uh, German soldiers were billeted in your house. And they tied up their horses in the yard. And they used up the wood, and-- and then they put the horses in the woodshed. And the horse's foot fell into something soft and so on and so forth. Anyway, they-- they found it soon enough. 

And, um, I-- I also remember my mother giving belongings to-- to this very neighbor across the fence. She gave her a big bundle of bedding and things. Because we knew, as soon as we walk out the house, you know, it's-- somebody else will enter it. And so I-- I said to her at that time, um, what about these things, you know, that my mother gave you? 

And um, oh, she started to, um, deny it. And-- and, um, so may this and that happened to her. May she, you know, may she drop dead. May her children this and that. She never saw a thing. That is-- she-- and she began to pull me through the house to show me open closets and chests and so on, to show me there was nothing there. 

It was the most horrible experience, another incredible trauma to me, that particular event. Because I came back into the house, um, alone, with a-- with friend, a Jewish woman who was also a survivor. Um, I delayed coming back into the house. I was in the town for several days, living with other survivors in another house. And I didn't have the courage or whatever to go down to my house. I was waiting for someone to be able to go with me. 

And um, finally, this other girl said, OK, I'll go with you. And um, so I-- I went into my house, and uh, there was a Gentile family living there. And as I entered, they, um, sort of stopped what they were doing and went over to a corner in the kitchen, I remember, and sort of stepped aside. And, uh, I walked through, from room to room, and there was absolutely nothing recognizable. Nothing of ours was there. 

And after I sort of made the circle of the rooms, I went out the front door. Went down-- went out to the, um, garden where, um-- this was summertime or the fall, towards the fall. And, um, the trees were full of fruit. And, um, that's the first time I started to cry, when I saw, you know, that it grew without us very well, and proceeded. Nothing else was familiar, but, uh, somehow, it didn't seem right for, uh, the trees to be so full of fruit. 

So then I went over to the neighbor. And um, I saw her boy, who was the age of my brother. And again, he had grown enormously. I almost didn't recognize him. And again, it struck me that this isn't right. You know, my brother, who was his age, is-- is dead and gone. And he thrived, uh, and-- and grew and-- and then, at this point, with these emotions, she drags me through the house to open every closet and, you know, to-- to prove to me that she didn't, in fact, receive anything from my parents. 

I assure you, I never-- you know, looked into her closet or really didn't care to recover. It was more-- I could not have taken it with me. I wasn't staying there. But, um, I just wanted something, you know, to take with me. 

Um, so after that, um, the woman across the street from us, uh, saw me and, um, called me over. She was, um, an interesting case that-- it was the, uh, house of the, um, local minister, the Presbyterian minister's house was across the street from us. And the last minister who was there when we were taken away, um, had a wife who was rumored to be Jewish. And um, she kept herself apart from the Jewish community completely. She lived across the street from us, but never even said hello to any of us. 

This was the woman who was standing there, beckoning me to come. She wanted to talk to me. Again, I-- I didn't recognize her. She did not flourish in the year. She became old and gray and the minister, too. Old and very, very sad and broken. 

And, um, before I could tell her anything of myself, she began to tell me the-- the horror story that they lived for a year. She was indeed Jewish. And she was converted when she married the priest, the minister. 

And, um, some church official made it his crusade to have her deported after all the other Jews were gone from the town. And it seems that she and her husband fought this the entire year that we were gone, and managed to fight it through-- I don't know how. But they spent their entire life fighting her deportation. 

And, um, she just wanted to tell me the terrible ordeal that she went through. And then, of course, she asked me about where everybody was and so on. Um, I told her a little bit of what had happened. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What had happened? Will you share an example? 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Well, what-- what had happ-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, just go on. 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. She-- she-- again, I-- I thought, well, you didn't even know my mother. You didn't even know us, even though we've lived across the street for years and years. You know, she'd go to church in the morning on Sunday mornings and hold her head high and look the other way so she wouldn't have to greet us. And suddenly, you know, she wants to know what happened to us. 

But it was-- the whole coming home, with these components of switching emotions, was absolutely traumatic. Going, you know, from-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you tell her what happened? Did she hear it? 

IRENE WEISS: Oh, I told her. She-- oh, she was-- she knew, in fact, by then. You know, what had happened to the Jews. But, um, she didn't know exactly. I mean, it's one thing to hear about it. Another one to have a single child come back from a huge family, you know, and-- and say that my, uh, mother and my two brothers and sister were gassed the minute we got there. And my father was killed and my brother was killed. You know, the-- she didn't know that. You know, she was wringing her hands. 

But I felt that, um, I-- I gave it to her in sort of um, um, a matter of fact way. And for me to say that they were killed was almost impossible. Because it-- it took 20 years to be able to say. I felt that-- you cannot just say that they were killed. That-- that is, um-- that does not, you know, that is, uh, like, not doing, um, them just-- I don't mean doing justice. 

It's like blasphemy to just say it that way. That-- that-- that-- it had enormous significance to me in how one said it. And yet, when it come-- came right down to it, to ordinary people who wanted ordinary kind of statistics, that was the way, you know, just to-- to say it. Actually, nobody wants to hear it any other way, most of the time. 

But I could not just say that, that they were killed. Not because I didn't accept it. I knew it. But it was-- you could not even say they were murdered. You couldn't-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when you parted from that woman, I wonder whether you felt that you had really told her anything. 

IRENE WEISS: No, I didn't tell her anything. She told me about herself. But I was extremely disturbed because I was put in a position of having to say to her that which I could not yet say, that they were killed or they were gassed or-- having said that, that-- that is not enough to say about such-- such an event. 

And so I don't suppose, up to that point, anybody made me say that. Oh, and then she asked me, wasn't I hungry, or wouldn't I like to have something to eat? You know. I said no, no, no, no, no. I just want to leave. 

So then I had another trauma, I think, a big one. We had a dog, a pet. And, um, when we left the house, of course, the dog stayed behind. Closed the gate. And-- And so did the farm animals, but that didn't concern me. You know, the dog. And, um, somebody told me in the village that the dog was taken, adopted by, um, two women, the postmistresses who-- two single women who ran the post office. 

And just like I couldn't go to my house alone, I could not go and search, look up the dog, somehow. And, um, I never got-- got d I never got up the courage to go look. I didn't get that far, which-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it it that stopped you? What were you feeling? 

IRENE WEISS: It was mixed emotions. Some of it, um-- you know, again, to-- up to this point, I-- the closest I came to, uh, the familiar was the house and the garden and the neighbor's kid, who grew so much. Somehow, to actually deal with, um, the dog as part of the family and so on. 

And I had this crazy notion that what if the dog didn't remember me at all, and would perhaps even attack me? You know? It ran through my mind. Because, um, pets, in those days, were not like here. You know, they were sort of a yard dog. And if you didn't feed it, he would nip at you and so on. 

There was too many conflicts. And I think too many things happened to me that day, you know? But I-- a strange and a minor thing-- I always regretted not having completed, you know, the, um, visit back home. Because I never went back. And I left, um, and never came back again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you ready to tell us what you skipped? 

IRENE WEISS: Um, the-- the, um, camp experience? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, you said that this is the one thing that's so difficult to-- the account alone is not enough. And I think that's why-- 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. Well, I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The deportation, too. The whole-- 

IRENE WEISS: The whole event. Um, well, it was-- perhaps, you know, others will give you basic statistics. We were then, um, in-- in the, um, first, we stayed in our-- in this town hall thing. All the villagers-- all the Jews in the village-- about 10 Jewish families with lots of children. So we stayed in-- in what was sort of an auditorium, and we slept on the floor and so on. At this point, we ate what we brought. 

And-- and, um, we became used to, a little bit, of what's to come. They-- they, um, announced, um, again, um, that they wanted all the valuables from everyone. They, one by one, called the men into a special room and interrogated and demanded more, uh, jewelry and so on. And, um, always with threats of punishment and beatings and, you know, bodily harm and all that. And so each time, um, everybody had to give up some more to satisfy the situation. 

And then eventually, we-- we were transported by horse and wagon from this town to a-- to the, um, next-largest city, where the ghetto, was where they gathered the people from, um, the whole region. The first night, um, people were coming in by the thousands from all the villages. And, um, dropped our bundles and packages right on the, um-- there was a, um, a brick factory. 

And, um, everything was dropped at the entrance on the grounds. And the members of the families would sort of stake out a little patch and move further in to get out of the way of the newcomers. And, um, set up bedding for the night and-- and we slept outside the first night. 

And the next day, people sort of seemed to be going further into the factory, so we-- we followed and there were lofts and barracks. And very crowded. And hauled our things up to a-- a floor above the ground, sort of a great big open area. And again, stake out a little place for each family. And, um, began the game of waiting to see where this would lead. And uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know the name of the town? 

IRENE WEISS: Oh, yes. Munkacs. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Munkacs. 

IRENE WEISS: Yes. And, um, the young people organized a, um, sort of a little nursery, kindergarten for the children. The teenagers, the young adults did that. And so the children would, um, have something to do all day. And it sort of, um-- it began to function after a fashion, you know? 

They-- they did give, um, food once a day. There was a soup given out. Certainly not, you know, three meals a day. But there was this soup that was given out. And, um, my, uh, mother had a brother in this town. And they, too, were in a ghetto, but they didn't bring those people into this-- this-- they were in a ghetto that was just a blocked-off part of the city. And they were still allowed to go to, uh, the market. After the general population had finished, the Jews were allowed out to shop for an hour. 

And so my brother-- my mother's brother and his wife, of course, heard that we were there with, you know, six children, and they knew that we must be needing food. So she, my aunt, sent in a-- a huge kettle of soup every single day. There was-- they organized, um, sort of a delivery service. So the Jews would go-- allow-- they were allowed to go out, you know, to the-- 