INTERVIEWER: Friendship, the camp-- 

SUBJECT: Plaszow? 

INTERVIEWER: Plaszow. Plaszow. 

CREW: Do you want your glasses? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you want to take-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. We came-- well, we came to Plaszow. I thought we got rid of-- there was SS women and there were SS men. But they were not as, as, as mean and vicious as the ones in-- in Majdanek. The ones in Majdanek, they were brutal. They were just unbelievable. The SS women at Majdanek. 

INTERVIEWER: The women more than the men? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, because we had very little to do with the men in pla- in Majdanek. Instead of SS men, we had SS women. And they were brutal. So when we left Majdanek, we thought we left all our problems behind us, but it wasn't so. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember how you kept clean, under those circumstances? 

SUBJECT: Yes. You would try very hard to wash. You got up in the morning. And you got washed. The water was ice cold. When you walked into the washroom, that was like a steam bath, because the steam from the hot bodies and the cold water, you couldn't see each other. But somehow everybody was getting washed. And somehow you were able to have a piece of wipe to be able to wipe yourself dry, and to get dressed. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there soap? 

SUBJECT: Yes, there was-- if I didn't have, somebody else. There was always a-- if you would call it a piece of soap. What happened as we are left from Majdanek, left Majdanek from Plaszow, the SS women were following us. They came from Majdanek with us to Plaszow. On the train, we had men guards, but they were on the same train, in the back of the train somewhere. 

So within days, we realized that we did not escape destruction. We realized that they were with us, again. Good enough, enough to know all the women had to leave work, and go to a roll call, if you call it. And there was, again, a selection, the women, elderly people, and the young people. There were no children, but there were people, 10 and 12, would you call, people. Some youngsters that they were able to survive the destruction were in Plaszow. 

And that particular day, there was a roll call, and they took the elderly women and the youngsters. They picked them out from the rest of us. And they were sending them to destruction to Auschwitz. The radio was blazing away. 

INTERVIEWER: What radio? Where? 

SUBJECT: On the gathering point, on the grounds, the camp grounds. The loudspeakers, over the loudspeakers came music. I still remember the song. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- 

SUBJECT: Two of them. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- 

SUBJECT: Edelweiss. Edelweiss wie schon sind deine Blatter. And the other one, I do remember the tune, but I cannot put together quite the words. That's unimportant. And the young people and the elderly people were taken away, marched out to the gates. That was it. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hum the tune? Do you remember the tune? 

SUBJECT: it - is - es - es war eine Weile, es war einmal, ein kleines Knabe 

The theme of this song is that there was a youngster that he-- he-- he wanted to have a pair of horses. And the mother told him that he is too young. When you grow up, you'll get the horses. But, meanwhile, his mother dies. In the front of the house, there was a hearse with two-- two big horses. And the two horses took his mother away. 

INTERVIEWER: That was the song coming over the loudspeaker? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have to sing that song? 

SUBJECT: No, no, you couldn't. You didn't dare breathe. You were standing still. You didn't dare move, because the SS woman was coming along, and she was picking out the people. Next to me, there was a youngster. She must have been about between 10 and 12 years old, a dark, beautiful little girl. They took her away. And you didn't dare move or say something. No. You had to put up a nice face. 

That didn't last long, because that was over there the summer 1944. And we knew that the Russians are advancing, and there was no end to it. Anyway, it lasted about another week, maybe two weeks, most of it. And the order came. That was on a Sunday. The order came to evacuate Plaszow. And the SS men getted us up, and the kapo. 

And they took us back to the same gathering point, you know, the gathering-- they-- within the camp, and, you know, we were working outside the camp. They took us back into camp, back into the camp to the gathering point to the roll call. And, again, they were taking us, barrack by barrack, they were taking us and loading us on the trains. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell us about the kapo? Everyone mentions the kapos. Explain the kapos. Who they were. Do you-- did any survive? Do you know? 

SUBJECT: Yes. That particular woman kapo, a Jewish woman, she is alive. I did run into people after the war. They said that she went back to her home town. She is in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: How did-- 

SUBJECT: She didn't dare come out among, you know, the Jewish people, oh, somehow she was afraid to come out. There were some of them were brutal. The German kapos were brutal. They were just-- they-- they kicked you. They beat you. They thought they were god themselves. And most of them, they were homosexuals, or they were thieves, or they were killers Very few of them were-- and their affiliation with politics, most of them, 90% of the kapos, they were-- if the German-- German kapos, they were murderers,. 

INTERVIEWER: Criminals, you mean? 

SUBJECT: Criminals. Homosexuals. So, everybody had to defend their-- I should mention Cobb because I may--. But the polit-- the, the guys that are affiliated with politics had a right markings. There was a black marking. And there was a green marking. 

INTERVIEWER: The Jewish kapos-- how did one become a kapo? 

SUBJECT: I-- really-- it's really hard to say. Some of them were assigned. Some of them took their jobs. Some of them were good, and some of them were brutal. Let's put it this way. You know, the little bit of power, what it does to that person. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they get better food if they were kapo? 

SUBJECT: Of course, they were stealing from the rest of the prisoners. And, of course, they ate better. They slept better. They were more or less in contact with the SS, with the-- all the-- with the Germans within the camps. Anyway, going back to-- must have been the end of July-- again, you know, dates and-- it was still summer. 

And the order came to evacuate Plaszow. And, they took us back into the camp, because we were working outside the camp, different barracks, different-- like, for instance, I was working at the time. And I-- a brick factory, bricks. You know where you mix the bricks, you dip the clay, and you burn the bricks, and-- and the prisoners were working, you know. Some of them will pushing the wheel barrels and-- it all depends where you were assigned to. 

And, at that particular point, I was very handy with a pick and shovel. And, so I was taking out the bricks from in-- from within the ovens. That was the black Sunday. And they get us, and they were taking us down to the trains, down below, again. And, the assessment came over. And, oh, that the whole group, we was standing in one place. And he said to me, Ursula, he said, move back. 

INTERVIEWER: He used your name? 

SUBJECT: Yes. You know, if you worked in a small place, more or less, you know. And I just looked at him. And I never forget, I just smiled at him. And I remained standing there like a pillar of salt. Standing there. And he walked away. And he went to other he-- he said to her, too, he said, move back, because they won't be able to load all the people on the trains. He says, you will better be-- better off to remain in the camp. We're thought that he was crazy, that they all together. 

Anyway, from Krakow to Auschwitz was not a too long of a stretch. I know that-- I don't remember if we were a whole night. How we have got there, but I know that they stopped once. And women were trying to get off the-- the-- the train. They were killed. They were killing them, because you're not supposed to leave the train. And we got to Auschwitz. 

And, we had a big committee waiting for us. There was Eichmann. And there was Doctor Mengele. And there was the other doctor. And there was that Jewish woman. She was a doctor. She was a Hungarian, Romanian, or whatever, Slavish woman, a doctor. She was waiting for us there, too. And a lot of SS people. And-- if I recall, we were the first five women walking towards the right. 

And the others, some of them went to the left. Parted with their loved ones, crying, screaming. We have not seen them again. We went to a different-- they took us to that crematorium, but they-- somehow, they only used the showers on us. They cut my hair. And, they went to give me another number. They went to-- to tattoo me. And the woman, the Czech woman, realized that I do have a tattoo. And she said, well, where are you coming from? And I told her. 

And she ran to that assessment, and she told him that here is a woman, and she has her number from before. She is the second time in Auschwitz. What should she do? First of all, he was screaming at her, loud and clear. He came over to me. He hit me very hard. And he said to me, you stupid cow. If he would have said something, they wouldn't have cut your hair. 

I had my head shaved already, and taken away whatever washcloth, whatever you had, you know, little something to-- took everything away. And I very sore, very sore. I couldn't even cry. I was just numb. Afterward, they gathered us up again. And they put us into that barrack. They took us through a camp. Some of them, they did gave numbers, and they stopped giving numbers, because it was late in the day time. 

And for days, they didn't give the other people numbers, and we knew that we are going to go for destruction, because they were bringing in that time-- they were making judenrein Romania-- Hungary-- they were bringing in the people, and just-- without stop, 24 hours a day. The chimneys were burning. Their ovens never cooled off. And we were-- we were sitting there waiting for, you know, to be called. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you thinking? 

SUBJECT: Well, that's it. I never figured that I'm going to get out of Auschwitz the second time. No way. No way. In the meanwhile, I got a job, because I was one of the old prisoners. So they respected me a little bit, and they gave me a job to clean the barrack, to make sure that the beds are clean-- you know, made, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: What clothes did you have? 

SUBJECT: The second time, we were in civilian clothes. The first time, we were in striped clothes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have more than one set of clothing? 

SUBJECT: You asking for heaven. Didn't even have a pair of shoes on my feet. Oh, yes, I should have told you the story about the shoes, too, but-- well, anyway, going back to-- 

INTERVIEWER: What about the shoes? 

SUBJECT: When I came the first time to Auschwitz, they gave us the big long striped, you know, the clothes. We wore-- I should explain, we were very fortunate. I had a dress, and I had a jacket to go with it. I don't know how. And I got a pair of wooden shoes. And I said, the wooden shoes-- and my girlfriend was getting sick already. The first, the second day, or was it the third day? She was getting sick. And I said to her, Irene, hold on. And she said, she doesn't care. Irene, hold on. And she told me, I shouldn't bother her. 

And, meanwhile, I did run into people that they were there from before from my part of the country. And they were telling me what's happening there. And this one is that, and this one is that, and that one is that, and giving me the bad news. Anyway, that particular day, they decided that they going to make a - entlausen. That means delouse us. 

And hundreds of thousands of women-- it was a hot day. We were standing in the sun, stark naked, for hours. We never got to the-- we have never seen water. We have never seen the bath. But they took away the clothes. You know, so evidently, they must have entlaust the clothes, as they were calling. 

And everybody went back to that gathering point, again. You know, in the back of the barracks, there was a place where we used to get together there, or when they used to let us out from the barracks. Oh, we used to sit there and gossip and, you finding, out what's going on, and what's happening and, you know, meeting people and talk to people. And that day, after they-- they gave us back our clothes-- that-- oh, I forgot to mention-- there was a trench. And over the trench, there was the electric, you know, the wires were electrified. The electric fence that separated us from the world. 

Anyway, some of the women didn't know it that day, that-- not that they didn't know-- they didn't-- they didn't-- maybe they didn't know any better. They were jumping over the water. And their were went to dry their clothes, over the trenches. And they were electrocuted. They were just hanging on the wires. You know, how you get-- there must have been-- as far as I can remember-- the must have about six, seven women glued to the wires, the electric wires. That was a warning for the others, they shouldn't go closer. 

Anyway, I said to myself, if I want to go back to work tomorrow, and if I haven't got a pair of shoes, I cannot go to work. And if I'm going to sit here, I will not survive. A woman was very busy delousing her clothes. She was so busy. She had a pair of shoes standing next to her. I was very brave. I stepped out my wooden shoes. And I stepped into her shoes, and I walked away. I just changed the shoes. The shoes kept me going, til I took sick. 

And everybody envied me that I was a lucky one. I got a pair of shoes. I never told anybody that I wouldn't steal the shoes. No, I exchanged the shoes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you feel badly for the woman? 

SUBJECT: As I walked away from there, yes. But I said, well, she's not going to work. And she has the wooden ones. I was trying to clear my conscience. I didn't walk away with the shoes completely. She had a pair of shoes. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened after the summer of 1944? 

SUBJECT: I got to Auschwitz. And as I told you before, they cut my hair. And I had the number. And one afternoon, a SS man and a SS woman came from, again, politische Abteilung, from the de- de- poli- -eh, from the division, from the politische Abteilung. And they said that they decided to put me with they, uh, Polish women. They declared me a full-blooded Aryan. 

And they told me that I'm going to go back to the old camp. And from the old camp, I'm going to go to work to Germany because they were recruiting people already to go to Germany to work as the manpower-- there was less and less manpower in Germany. 

Anyway, they took-- they put me back on the old camp. And I did run into some people that I knew. And everybody was just shocked to see me still alive. I always looked well. And of course, I got a little bit of help. They came-- one came with a baked potato that night. I don't even know where she took that baked potato. 

See, the old prisoners, they were able to exchange food, exchange something. There was always something, you know, going on. Of course, the Polish women were receiving packages from home. So there was always a little bit of extra sometimes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have your own bowl? 

SUBJECT: Oh, you better. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you talk about that? 

SUBJECT: Oh, you better. You-- oh, you were sleeping on it. You were sleeping. And you-- you didn't care about your shoes. But you cared about your bowl and spoon. Because if you didn't-- you didn't have the bowl and spoon, you will-- you didn't get any food. That means starve to death. Nobody cared. That was a matter of life and death. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep it clean? 

SUBJECT: If you managed to go to the washroom-- can I tell you a story about washing my-- I went with a girl. Her name was Christina, a Polish girl, into the washroom after our meal, so-called. That was the second time. We finally got to the-- to the-- to the spigot. And we got a little bit of water. And we washed our faces and hands. 

And in Auschwitz, there was no such thing as getting undressed and get washed. Over there, you were just running away. Because to get to a wash room or to get a little bit the water was just like food, you know? 

Anyway, we was-- we were in the latrine there. And the girl was telling me-- Christina told me that she lost her-- her father was Jewish. Her mother was Polish. They came. And they took away her brother. And they took away the mother and took-- they took her. And her mother is someplace in Auschwitz, but she doesn't know where. And the father isn't alive anymore. And she was telling me the whole story. That was a night before I got friendly with her. 

And the following night after we got a meal, we came back from the work. And we went to the wash room. And finally, we needed the latrine. We need the hole. Christina went over, and she grabbed a woman by both shoulders. And she said to her, get up. You are sitting enough already, because we need the bathroom. That woman looked up, and it was her own mother. That was a sight that I'll never forget. 

And afterwards, after a few days-- I don't know exactly how many days-- they were separated again. Because we came back from work one night. And the blockakteste-- that means the woman that she was in charge at the barrack, said that I hurry up. We have to have a role call because there is a German man. He is going to pick the Polish women to go to work to Germany. 

And I was put already as a Polish woman on that block. That was the second time. That was not the first time. I was already as a Pole on that block. When the people came over to me when they saw me, and everybody got scared. They told me that, you know, I am a ghost. So I just went to them like this. So they couldn't figure out why I am motioning to them, but they got the message. Because I was with the Polish women, and I was afraid. I was in hell again. 

Anyway, we got out, all of us, all the Polish women. And we lined up. Out came a-- a German. And he's counting, one, two, three, four-- you know, goes through all the whole wall of women. He got to me. And he says, you-- get out of there, like this. 

So I didn't know what was happening. And the woman went over to-- he said he cannot take me because I haven't got any hair. He did-- they didn't want to-- the German people should see that the prisoners are without hair. Because they were not taking it, you know? They were still select-- selecting people to go out to Germany. 

Anyway, I remained standing there like a-- well, he turned his back and I went in again. He came back. And he pulled me out. He got very angry at me. And he was swearing at me in German. 

And he went back, you know? He counted. And he went back counting again. He moved his back, and I got in again. But after the second time counting, he went away. He marked. He had his contingents, and he went away. That's how I got in to get out of Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: How did it all come to an end for you? 

SUBJECT: How it came to end-- from there, from Auschwitz, I was sent as a Polish woman. As an Aryan, I was sent in to work in a ammunition factory in Germany. And I was there as a Pole. And my life was just hanging by a silk thread, because the Russian women was suspect-- suspected me that I am Jewish. 

I had to hide my number constantly. The Polish women suspected me that I am Jewish. But they were not sure. 

And we knew that the end is coming because they were bombarding. Like, for instance, the night that they bombarded Dresden, the SS came around. And they were-- they closed up the-- the-- the barracks. And they closed up the shutters. And they didn't let us even look out. 

But we would have seen. It was-- the skies were lit up for miles and miles and miles-- kilometers, kilometers. And we knew that the end is coming, but we didn't know when. And then meanwhile, I was just-- I knew that I am-- I'm living on borrowed time. Because any minute, somebody is going to squeal on me, and I'm going to-- there was no such thing as-- because we had a lager-- the commander, he was just very blood-thirsty. To him, it didn't matter, you know? Matter of fact, that he killed a couple-- a few women. 

And good enough, we used to watch the American and the British prisoners working. We worked in the factory. They worked in the factory, too. But they took them away. And we remained to working in the factory. And somehow, when they used to go to their barracks, they used to pass by the factory. And sometimes, they used to look up. And we-- we knew that the bombers are coming, because they point to us. They used to give a smile. And they point to the sky, that we knew there's going to be a, uh, air raid. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel when liberation finally came? 

SUBJECT: What I felt when the liberation came-- that time alone and the whole world. I escaped from the transport. I-- I-- I run away two weeks before-- two and a half weeks before the liberation. I run away in Czechoslovakia. 

I had no desire to live. I had no place to go. I had nobody to talk to. I was just simply lost, without words. And I know that I have nothing to back to Poland for. I knew that everybody is killed. I hoped that my oldest brother remained alive, but he didn't. 

A boy, a young boy, denounced-- went to the Gestapo. He got five pounds of sugar for it, five kilos sugar. That means about 10 pounds of sugar. He denounced 40 Semite people that they were hiding. My brother and a group people built a hiding in the woods. And I know-- I knew that he was hiding out. That's how I heard-- I had to hope that he is still alive. 

The Gestapo came. That little cow hand came with my-- with the gestapo. And they throw in a couple of grenades. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Freiler, you spent the whole war pretending you were half Jewish and then pretending you were not Jewish at all. And that's how you survived. What do you feel now about being Jewish? 

SUBJECT: I-- it took me a while till I met my husband after the war that I still had my assumed name. And afterwards, I went back to my own name, to mine own identity, and to my own Jewishness. And I am Jewish, all right. 

INTERVIEWER: And very plucky-- you were able to survive because you were so plucky. When you stepped back out into the [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: No, dear. No, dear, No. No. 

INTERVIEWER: That's why I can't get-- that's why the time gets crazy. 

CREW: That has nothing to do with what I was talking about. 

INTERVIEWER: I know, but I was-- 

SUBJECT: No, I had-- no-- 

CREW: I know that. That part I had. 

SUBJECT: I plucked my-- I-- how shall I explain to you? I knew that I had to survive. I have to survive, even running away, even being with the people constantly, especially the second part, the second time being back in Auschwitz. That time, I had determined already to survive. And you know what? It wasn't luck. It was stupidity. No, no-- 

CREW: There was a lot of guts. 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. There were no guts. There were just sheer stupidity. 

CREW: Well, you stepped back into the line. 

SUBJECT: I just, you know? 

CREW: We know. You're a remarkable person. 

INTERVIEWER: I should say so. 

CREW: I'm coming to take your microphone off. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I'm sorry. 

CREW: They asked me to. 

