SUBJECT: They did-- I've seen how, on their films, in the old days, like the Middle Ages, the Dark Ages, rather-- 

INTERVIEWER: Wait, wait, wait. OK. 

CREW: Any time. 

INTERVIEWER: All right, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: --as in the Dark Ages-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, you said that they took your brother to the police station. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Start there. 

SUBJECT: They took him-- I mean, he had to appear there, or else there will be punishment for others. And he decided to take the punishment himself. And I don't know for whatever reason it was. And no one knows. And he didn't know. Maybe because he was tall, light, with blue eyes. And they did not like the fact that he was Jewish. 

He was handsome, tall, and not like in the caricatures as they would like them to seem. He was a sportsman. He was involved in sports prior to the war, before the war. And they-- 

INTERVIEWER: How old was he? 

SUBJECT: He was about seventeen. And they have taken him there. And my mother, after he left, she ran there. And as she came there, she heard screaming behind the door. And she knocked on the door, beat on the door with her fists, not realizing that they could shoot her. But she couldn't-- a mother does things instinctively. I guess. 

And he came out with his-- he did not know that Mother was standing behind the door. He was-- as soon as my mother started to hit on the-- knock on the doors with her fists, they did not know who, really. It wasn't-- did not realize it was my mother, mother. And they let him go. But he stayed for three days, laying on his stomach. And I have seen his wounds on his back. And he couldn't lay or change his position. His back was open like, cuts, lines. 

And, um, my, um-- God. (SIGH) Um, and he, um, said, I must revenge for that. I cannot let it go defenseless. I did not reply, he said, because they would have shot me. And that would defeat my purpose, because I have to do something before I die. I have not done all the things I would like to do. 

And I don't know, for whatever reason, he suffered from our family. He took the punishment. Another day, when he was giving-- working in the kitchen for the soldiers, he gave a piece of bread to another working boy outdoors from the kitchen. And for that, they threw him into a ditch and covered up the ditch with boards, boarded it up. I don't know what else they did to him. But after that, he said he wanted to die. Um, he said, if he would not worry about my mother, he would have, um, done-- he had seen-- I have seen-- we have all seen-- but he could not have-- he could not go on with all this punishment that they were always-- at him. If he went to work, they would-- he would come back beaten up. 

Um, that was still 1941. I'm going into '42, 1942, the winter. It was harsh, but we managed. We used together with my mother, my grandmother. We were together. And, um, they prepared food. I really don't know how they got it. 

They did exchange-- we did have good relationship with our neighbors, who were non-Jewish. They were white Russian, White Russian in the sense of Belorussian, not the opposite of red, if you know, during-- Belorussia is a territory there which borders between, actually lies between Russia and Poland, always occupied with someone else. And the people are really nice, and friendly, and neighborly. (SIGH) 

We survived that winter. Oh, I'm skipping the parts where they have taken out many people, and they have, uh, hung them and shoot them. But this is not what you-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: I have seen that. They have taken out my music teacher. And he was an organist in church. He was not Jewish. And he did nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: How did-- 

SUBJECT: I mean, I don't know. I have seen him-- all of a sudden, they dragged him on their wagon. And he was standing. And they dragged him-- maybe someone said that he said-- hear say something, and if someone says-- or he was angry at someone, and they said that he does not like the way the occupation forces are behaving, they will get shot. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you happen to see your music teacher being dragged out? 

SUBJECT: Carried on the wagon, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- why were you there? 

SUBJECT: Well, i was in my street. You see, in a small town-- I was a curious child. I loved-- as I said, I was curious about everything, about learning, and loved to learn. I loved to sing, I loved to dance. I loved the arts. I loved physics and mathematics. I could get by with that. 

But we-- I have seen-- I mean, I have seen-- also, they have carried many prisoners of war from Russians. And we had, like, a transit camp for them in 1941, like, 5,000, 10,000 at a time, and dying on the streets. And we used to prepare-- share our potatoes, boiled potatoes, and whatever we took out from our garden. My grandmother had a beautiful garden, vegetable garden, that she had, that we took off the cucumbers, carrots. 

And we used to put it on the road, pieces of dry bread. We prepared bread, baked bread, dried it, and prepared it so it should be, in case we needed more than we need now, for later. We always prepared for later. Later may have never come, but we prepared. 

And, um, we used to put it out for them so they could go and pick up. But then, we saw that they were hitting them over the heads for picking up pieces of bread, and pieces of potatoes, the guards, the German guards. And they have, um-- but they were hungry, the soldiers. And I have seen them dying in the gutters, and the sidewalks. 

They were giving them to eat salty soup of dried salted fish. And the water was taken from the river that flew by-- a river. And the working people, the people that worked, carried the water to the camp, and cooked the fish in the water in the basins. Then after they ate this food, they have, many have gotten sick. And they were really, literally, holding, screaming for water, just water. And we used to bring them water. 

And I was not afraid. I was not afraid. I don't know why. Like I said, I'll repeat it again, because maybe youth is not afraid to do those things. At 19-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother afraid? 

SUBJECT: My mother was worried and she was panicky. She was telling all the neighbor girls and boys, run for your life. Leave your homes. 

INTERVIEWER: But you didn't leave. She didn't tell you to-- 

SUBJECT: She didn't tell me to leave. The Germans, the Wehrmacht soldiers, did not believe that I was Jewish. And they came into my house to check if I'm really, it's-- that I'm telling the truth. And, uh, they said, then why-- some of the soldiers said, why don't you get, go away from here? Just walk away. Keep walking westward. 

Well, I did not do that because I could not do it alone on my own. Not because I did not want to leave my parents. I just couldn't see myself walking away. I could not beg. I could not steal. I could not take from anyone anything. I could not go under a false name, or anything else. Maybe if I was not able to do that. 

And I stayed home. And my brothers were all intact yet. Then, in 1942, in the spring of 1942, it was cold, snow, and Europe was late with snow, it was cold, bitter cold. Or maybe it seemed colder because the clothing was getting thinner. 

But we heard that in this town, it was Schlachtung. Schlachtung means "a slaughter." And I only use this word because those were the words we used. There was Schlachtung here. 

There was a woman who came running all the way from Vilma and telling us about how she lost all her family in Vilma on the Panari. But this is where they have killed most of the Jewish population, in the Panari, And in Vilnius, as it's called now. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the Panari? 

SUBJECT: Panari is a territory. That's the name of it, like, it's outskirts of town. And we looked at her, see if she had lost her mind, not only her family, and her everything else. And my grandmother took her in. And she was telling us those horror stories. And we looked at her. 

And my-- and I said, you know what, I will not let them decide when I will die. I'll resist that. I refuse to die on their timing. And I'll keep on running. If I die, I'll die as if in war. War-- in war, people do-- if civilians get hurt, and-- but I could not see myself being put up against a wall and shot, which I have seen and witnessed many people down to, put against the wall, with projectus facing them so they did not see who did it to them, as if they could not be witnesses, anyway. 

And I decided that I am not going to die. This was my own thought. And I said, and if I die, I die, but I will on my own terms, so to speak, if at all possible. And if they shoot me in the back, so be it. 

And I was finally running, in 1942, at the end of March, towards the last week in March, the last days in March, my mother said, you know what? I think you'd better go to the village. We have excellent friends in the village next door, about 10 miles away from our city. And the people are very friendly there. And you'll stay with Grandmother. 

Grandmother-- I said, I don't know how to go there. I will not leave you. I'm not going. They said, but you must. And my grandmother took me, and they gave me a change of clothing. And I walked away with my grandmother to the village. 

And the people were very nice. I came into the very first village. And Natasha was her name. She gave us food. Her husband was the head man. He was a fine man, a white Russian, and gave us bread and milk, which was a luxury in those days. And we were not that hungry. I did not care about my food. I, you know, was not-- I was hungry, but I was not that hungry. 

And I didn't know the purpose of my going. My mother knew the purpose of my going away to the village, because she was afraid of me, that I will get lost, that I will die. And from this village, we went to the, uh, village or destination that we were supposed to go, originally. 

And we came in the-- we stayed. And they really handled us with care, these people. They-- my grandmother they remembered because they lived in the village before the revolution, my grandmother. And I spoke the language well. And there was an immediate chemistry reaction of liking one another my first time in the village. 

And then on Palm Sunday, one Palm Sunday, 1942, when they came from church, I heard them whispering among themselves and to my grandmother, And they didn't want to hurt me to tell me that an order came out through the church that it's very dangerous to hide Jewish people, a man, woman, or anyone. And the order said that, if you know of anyone, please do not give any, uh, refuge to these people. Lock your doors, lock everything you have, your barns. 

On the same day, on the same Sunday, that man, Julius Grienovich was his name, came to my father's house in the city of Dolhinov and said-- and brought him bread and honey, and said, I'll tell you what, I think is going to be trouble tonight. Be alert and on guard. And I'll leave my barn door open. You know how to get there. Don't ask me any more questions. I can't tell you anymore. 

And my father understood his message. And then he-- the night, he did not sleep. It was March 29, Saturday-- Sunday, Sunday, was March 29, 1942, because that same Sunday, while I was in the village going through this, my parents were in the city. They were told that they should be alert for that night. And then, they took the change. My grandmother comes over to me, says, let's go home. And it was dark, Sunday night, it was dark. 

I said, I-- I'm not going home. No, I'll wait until tomorrow morning. And she said, we are going home now. And it was back and forth for about half an hour longer. And it was-- and she said, why don't you want to go home? 

And I said, because why should we walk in the dark? I don't know my way. I'll get lost. I gave her all excuses. I did not-- for whatever reason it was, I did refuse to go back to the city at night with my grandmother. And she was really upset with me that I refused to go with her, because I always was a very obedient, and sort of good girl. I listened to what my grandmother-- I was told to listen to my grandmother. 

And I did, but this time, I did not. And this was how I did not enter the city where they-- they have surrounded the city. If I would have gone that night from Sunday to Monday, about 4:00 o'clock in the morning Monday morning, the machine guns started shooting all around. My mother was alert. We woke everyone up and gave them-- my mother had prepared packages like bread, dried bread, and said, run for your life. And if and when, whoever survives, we shall meet in the village. Run for your life. 

And she ran. And I was in the village, alone. My grandmother was in someone else's house. And, um-- but the people were very nice in the village. They didn't tell me what was happening. I hear shooting going on out-- but it was like a distance. And they said, it's nothing, it is-- that is going on. We'll tell you later. You just-- why don't you go there behind in the room up there, and relax? We'll talk to you later. Maybe your mother will come, or your father will come. Someone will come. And don't worry about anything. 

And then the night came. And it was a full moon, because it was two days before Passover. It was 12 days in the month of Nisan on the Jewish calendar. And, um, they have-- they told me what was happening, that they have killed the Jews of our city. 

And I was longing for my mother and my father. (CRYING) And I didn't know, and I didn't want to die. I was not ready to die. You see, I didn't read all the poetry I wanted to. I did not sing the songs I wanted to. I did not live yet, and here, they want to kill me, but why? Excuse me. 

And I, uh, have, uh-- they have special food for me, the people there in the village, hoping to sort of, the food would satisfy, or appease, or do something good for me. Finally, I-- well, they walked me outside. And the moon was a full moon that night, March the 30th at night, on Monday night, 1942. And it was as if a red ring around the moon, as if the blood was going up into the heavens, surrounding the moon. 