INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned of the ghetto, the convoys coming out of there. Your glimpse of Ghetto Warsaw. 

CREW: It's better. 

SUBJECT: OK? Yeah, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your glimpse of Ghetto Warsaw. 

SUBJECT: Uh, I don't-- don't remember where we were at-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Convoys coming out-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, coming out to work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, to work. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The wall. 

SUBJECT: Would-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Around it. 

SUBJECT: Very vividly, I remember a convoy of teenagers-- more or less my contemporaries-- on the streets. And that, more or less, like a emaciated look on their faces. And they were being pushed. They were being told to do something-- hurry up or something. 

And I remember once, very vividly, uh, there was a big place in Warsaw, where, uh, I guess it was prepared to be, uh, an airport or something. And during the war, it was cut up into, like a-- what here in America was called victory gardens, but for gardens for survival. And I remember very vividly, I was coming home once with, um, with a bag of-- of fresh vegetables-- tomatoes or cucumbers-- when those-- when the convoy of this-- my contemporaries, with the yellow band-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Children of-- 

SUBJECT: --on the arm-- children-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What age? 

SUBJECT: --really. I would say 14, 15-- young boys-- somebody whom I would play volleyball with were going by. And this terrible urge to take out those few tomatoes and try to give it to them. But I knew if I ever, ever tried, I would be in trouble. And they would be in trouble. 

It was a constant sort of scare on a lookout. Don't do it. Yes, you might help with one tomato. But maybe he will lose life because of one tomato. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He'll be shot? 

SUBJECT: I suppose or beaten, because this-- those things were happening. I remember, uh, very vividly, my best girlfriend and her absolute terror in her eyes when she came and said that she was walking with her mother when all of a sudden a patrol came and grabbed her mother and took her someplace. She didn't know where. She didn't know why and what for-- what's going to happen to her. 

This story had, at that moment, a very happy ending because the mother, after being somewhere for two days, interrogated for something that she really honestly didn't do, they let her free. And she appeared after two days. But the absolute horror and terror, uh-- I guess I am jumping a little bit as far as the times are concerned. 

But this certain, uh, this, uh, amount of uncertainty, what is happening to people that were here today and disappeared tomorrow, whether they are really only in a prisoner-- prison. Maybe they are only somewhere and being interrogated. There was a very hated street, where the SS-- a street by the name of Szucha. It was named after somebody's name-- uh, somebody-- I don't know who. 

SS had their headquarters. And if you appear-- if you were taken there, you certainly didn't come out all in one piece. Something terrible did happen to you there during the interrogations. Or something terrible will happen to you after they took you out of there and send you someplace. 

And someplace, uh, was a very, uh, was a very bad prison of Pawiak in Warsaw or some concentration camps. And it was-- the concentration camps were so real that even during the war, we already knew of quite a few of them. We already knew quite a few names. 

As a matter of fact, it was really even a known fact where the people-- what people did in some of them. Like, they would send to some stone quarries in some of them. And it was a known fact. It wasn't only that-- that we heard rumors about. It was real. 

And as far as 1943, uh, I remember the, uh, ghetto uprising because things, all of a sudden you could hear shots. You could hear something. And then all of a sudden, people that lived not too far from it, including my own uncle, came and said, can I spend a few days with you? Because I cannot take this anymore. 

It is too close. It's only a few streets away. Or even maybe closer. I don't recall exactly how far it was. 

But he couldn't take it. He couldn't take the screams. And, uh, I didn't see it. But he did. 

And I remember him being absolutely broken up when he came and said how he saw a German soldier take a small child by their feet and bang the child against a wall. Terrible. The child didn't live after that. It was terrible. 

And then not only sort of like daily unrest, what was happening there. But then it was actual burning of apartment building after an apartment building, a house after house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you seem them? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you see the flames or the light? 

SUBJECT: And as I said, our uncle came to live with us because he couldn't take this. And he couldn't take the smoke anymore. There were some, uh, uh, firemen were supposed to patrol some streets around that to make sure that the other homes didn't burn on the-- on the other side of the walls. But even from where I lived, which was a good many blocks away, you could see the dark brown smoke billowing over. And it was a terrible sight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Day and night? 

SUBJECT: And how helpless you were, because what else can you do? At this point, there was absolutely nothing anybody could do because the Germans had, uh, really, the army there, with all the heavy machine-- heavy tanks and everything. They just stood guard there. And-- and you couldn't really do-- help much. 

There were a few escapes from the German ghetto. Uh, all this I know by hearsay. But, uh, but it must have been true, because similar things were happening a year later, where people would escape from one house that was surrounded by the Germans-- would escape through the underground tunnels or through some sewer lines or something like that into other parts. 

And this, I was told, was happening also at that time. I did not see anybody, any survive-- uh, survivor of that or any person, I did-- I wasn't in contact with. But from the people that were around it, and from the billowing smoke, it was more than real. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When the ghetto was burning, uh, was there some talk about what could be done? 

SUBJECT: Well, many things were done before, as such, like I know that some underground was helping to supply food. Hm. They were starving. They were not getting the supplies there. 

And I know that some of the food that was stored in our house was supposed to go there. Somebody came and took a jar of some kind of a fat prepared for it. This, I remember. This, I know. Whether it ever reached the right people, or whether it was really helped or not-- what could be done? 

Anything was really suicidal at that point because of the terrible, uh, because of the soldiers that surrounded and the German ghetto at the-- the Jewish ghetto at the time. The tanks, the machine guns-- machine guns were set up also on some surrounding, uh, apartment buildings, I was told. I didn't see it. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yet what, uh, did people say about the fight that was going on? You know, it was, after all, the-- uh, the first armed fighting in Warsaw. 

SUBJECT: I really don't know. This-- I mean, this was a very gruesome picture and a very scary experience to go through, uh, for, I think, everybody, even for those that couldn't do much and, uh, and help. I mean, there was-- I know that there was a talk about some arms to smuggle. And I guess they were smuggled. 

But before-- before, really, the-- the burning, the actual last few days or last couple of weeks of existence of ghetto had been this-- this was going on, because I know there was talk about smuggling firearms maybe to let the gates open somehow or another, let the people go out. But where? This was absolutely surrounded. 

They were absolutely surrounded, just like, to a certain degree, uh, the same thing was happening in 1944, after the so-called Warsaw Uprising 'cause we didn't get any help from anybody. And people were just like-- the group, uh, from the section of the-- of the city where I lived, like, we were-- we were not actually killed right on the spot. But we were taken in-- out of-- out of Warsaw. 

I know some people have escaped from the convoys between their own homes and the railroad stations. But, uh, there were not too many of them. And after go-- going again to 1944, to the Warsaw Uprising, uh, once we found ourselves in the-- in the-- on the railroad station, we were put into a big convoy of railroad cars-- um, those cars that transport usually, uh, animals-- cattle. 

Quite a few of us. Not everybody could sit down. There was absolutely no room for it. We were really packed in there. 

And without any food or any kind of a-- any water to drink, we were in this, uh, railroad-- we were in those railroad tack-- tracks for two, uh, for two days. I remember once, the railroad slowed down. And some farmers working in the field, they tried to give us some food. They tried to hand something over to us. Very few have succeeded be-- before they were told or they were really warned not to do it because they would be killed themselves. 

And after two days of this traveling, we were-- we found ourselves somewhere in, uh, in Berlin area, uh, somewhere because, I mean, among the people that were packed in this one car, quite a few have known geography enough that they know in which directions we were going. So that's the best we could probably describe where we were. And we were left on the side, like a side track, uh, from late at night until early in the morning, even though we heard some commotions near the tracks, near the railroad. 

As the dawn came, all of a sudden, we saw in-- almost in front of each and every car-- maybe this is exaggeration; maybe one for two cars-- there were machine guns set up. And, uh, the German soldiers were around us. And we knew this is the end. 

Everybody said a prayer that could. Everybody cheered everybody up. But what else can happen to you when you're more or less in a closed surrounding, and a machine gun is facing you? 

Well, as it turned out, all of a sudden, there was a terrible confusion. And, uh, later on we were told-- I did not hear it myself. But we were told that, uh, they described this convoy as extremely dangerous convicts coming, whereabouts when Germans opened the-- the cars, they found old, old grandmas and babies in mother's arms. So there-- they themselves were confused who is coming and what to do with them. 

Well, uh, they let us, somewhere in mid-morning, they let us walk into, like, army barracks-- a big field, probably a training field near the army barracks. They let us there. And, uh, to our big surprise, we were even served warm coffee, which was, after two days of not having any food, was-- was rather pleasant. 

Unfortunately, this is the place where the men were separated into one group. The men went into Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg concentration camp. Able women were separated again. And they went into the concentration camp of Ravensbruck. And mothers with small children and older ladies were put again into, uh, a convoy of cars. And for two days, we traveled, only to find ourselves in Bergen-Belsen. 

Uh, Bergen-Belsen had already, to our knowledge already in Warsaw, had, uh, a reputation of a camp that is, well, if I may use a German word for it, it is a Vernichtungslager. It is a place where it is-- you just simply end the lives of many in that camp. So as we approached Bergen-Belsen, there was strange thoughts. I was still with my-- some of my neighbors. Uh, my mother was with me. My little sister was with me. Uh, we knew. Even though we were spared two days ago at the-- at the barracks, this is it. 

And for the next weeks and month-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see coming up to-- 

SUBJECT: What did I see? 

INTERVIEWER 1: --Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: Uh, first of all, it-- after you left the train station, there was a long walk to some rather white and at other times maybe a beautiful, sandy area. It was like side streets, side roads that we had to walk on. And then all of a sudden, there were gates and a lot of barb wires-- a lot of barb wires. And again, some short distance later, again, some barb wires. 

And we were pushed and pulled, more or less, into-- in-- during the convoy. We were not-- guided in not in a very friendly manner there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The energy changed from Warsaw? 

SUBJECT: I beg your pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The behavior of the guards was different now? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I don't think so because even when we were told to leave our house, uh, they were not-- we were just one more nuisance of this world that they had to take care of and push and pull and-- and guide and whatever the-- the hate was there. Maybe my hate I saw maybe reflected because I hated it so much. I simply hated everybody that had the-- this uniform on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you express your hate in any way? 

SUBJECT: No, you couldn't. What can you do? Just maybe talking with your friends, you could express your hate. But you couldn't show. You couldn't do anything. 

Uh, you were really, at this point, like, numb. You were told to do it. And you went 'cause any kind of a resistance-- anything-- you knew that friends of yours before you have paid for it with their own lives. 

So in a way, without probably thinking even too much, you just didn't rock the boat. You were told to do left, you went left. You were told to do right, you went right. 

Uh, and then within the Bergen-Belsen camp, as such, they were like-- like camps, I would say, even within a camp, like separations, uh, with barb wire and not the-- the big, round sort of rolls of barb wire but just like, uh, like fences almost. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was there a difference in these camps? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: A difference between one section and another? 

SUBJECT: Yes, definitely. Uh, they were-- camps were-- had, like, small, uh, tents. There was a section that had, like, actual barracks, like wooden houses, I would say-- long-- big, long houses. And there was a section-- there were sections different were-- in this-- and there was another section was enormous-- big, big tents. 

And that's where I find myself, in the section where they would simply pile thousands of people into this section. Uh, The tents were supposed to be a shelter for us. But certainly, you didn't have enough room during the night to stretch out. If you were sitting, then the neighbors could stretch out your-- your legs. You were just one next to another, like. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: --have your clothes? 

SUBJECT: All I had is my school bag, with few mementos at the moment, uh, with few pictures of my family, with few treasures that I thought were my treasures. And, uh, just the jacket and what I left-- what I had on as-- as they told us to leave, uh, Warsaw at the time. That's all I had. 

The nights were cold at times. And we would more or less like try to sit back to back with somebody to warm up from each other. As far as food was concerned, one of the first days-- I wouldn't even-- I don't recall it even eating the first couple days at all. 

All of a sudden, trucks would come in. A truck would come in, and in the back of the truck, it had a lot of empty, rusty, rusted cans. And you were lucky if you grabbed one and used it for your next portion of soup, whenever it came. It was awful. It was awful. 

And the truck, when it came, it just simply came. You had to run away like a chicken, more or less, from it, because if-- if they wanted to go, they wanted to go. Who was on a truck? It looked to me like also inmates-- like also somebody who was there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were they wearing-- 

SUBJECT: I don't blame them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were they wearing uniforms or-- or-- 

SUBJECT: No, there wasn't-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --prison clothes? 

SUBJECT: No, no. And this was-- I don't blame him for-- they were not friendly at all. I really don't blame them. They were probably-- I don't know-- told what they were supposed to do. And that's it. 

They were kicking those cans, throwing them at people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the other camps in Bergen-Belsen, did the inmates wear uniforms-- not in your camp? 

SUBJECT: I didn't see too many of them in uniforms. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm. How did you-- 

SUBJECT: As a matter of fact, I-- the place that I will refer to, uh, I-- one section was such a grayish-looking barracks, we were told afterwards that those were Jewish people from-- from Holland. And they had, uh, they had, uh, baby carriages. They had, like, uh, bedclothes. I saw pillows. 

So apparently, they were told to take all their belongings. They-- I don't know when they came or who they really were. There was no communication really between us. Or I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said a Vernichtungslager. What did you know about extermination at Bergen-Belsen while you were there? 

SUBJECT: What did I know? I saw the chimney. And I knew the chimney was connected to the gas chamber. 

I saw it. And as a matter of fact, just like how I have a picture of the ghetto burning and the brown, billowing smoke, just like I see the woman on the mattress, just like I see some of the homes burning, I see the chimney. It wasn't tall. I was there. 

And during the time, uh, we were there, more or less, we would say, oh, why wait for tomorrow? Why not today? Please. 

Uh, I know, uh, some of the children were shivering. I remember a few nuns taking off their habits or clothes or whatever and-- and giving it to younger mothers, uh, for the children-- for the children to-- to keep warm. But more or less, the absolute, uh, impossible wait-- why not today? 

Why wait for tomorrow? Why should we wait for tomorrow? Please, if there is ever dear Lord, let it end today. 

Um, those were rather desperate hours. No matter how much a few people tried to cheer up one another, it was rather a desperate time of the year. And as a matter of fact, through loudspeakers, they would call sometimes and ask for 50 people-- 50 volunteers, 100 volunteers. 

Uh, we were really cautious. And was-- were-- there was talk about it. What do they need the 50 people for? Why do they ask for a 100 today and 150 tomorrow and not just, like, come on, 500, come on 200, or something like that? Well, we thought this was more or less the amount that the gas chamber could take on that given day. And, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever find that that was true? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, I don't know if it was true. But I did find it because some, in desperation, didn't want to volunteer as the number asked for on that day. However, a friend of mine, uh, volunteered one day. 

And I saw her and the other 49 that they asked for a 50 on that given day-- she went in the direction of the chimney, as I will refer to. I have never seen the gas chamber. I just saw the chimney there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They walked? 

SUBJECT: They walked. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did they-- 

SUBJECT: They-- from the surroundings where we were from, you could see through the gate-- through the gate, they walked sort of, like, left like towards the chimney that was there. Many times, uh, they would ask, uh, for volunteers. And, uh, you don't know-- we didn't know what-- what was happening with, uh, with them. 

Many times, they would be sort of like housed or told to wait until it became dark. Usually, it was-- I mean, the few times I remember, it was late in the day when they asked. And you didn't know what was happening to the people. Nobody knew. I mean, I didn't know. 

And, uh, well, after weeks and weeks and months like this, this was-- this was enough. And, uh, one day, my mother and few friends and I decided that this is it. If they should call for volunteers on that day, we shall go. 

And we went. At that point, it was almost a struggle to get in. People just-- I mean, the sooner the better. That's probably the only, uh, explanation I have for the people who really wanted to volunteer. 

And, uh, however, after they let us through the first gates of this little compound-- little big-- uh, we didn't go left. We were told to go right. And I really and truly to this day, I cannot remember when we were told that we shall go and help, uh, some neighborhood farmers to do something. And we were actually behind the, uh, barb wire, too. 

And we were told-- we were put on trucks. And we were brought to a, like, another compound-- a different, separate-- separate one. And from there, uh, they took some people to work at different farmers. And, uh, we didn't know what was going to happen to us, whether they're going to ship us back, what going to happen tomorrow. 

But at least for a day or so, there was a ray of hope. And, uh, many time-- well, from then on, until the actual Anglo-American, uh, front that liberated us, many times, we were-- we were, uh, shipped from one place to another to work in the forest, to work at farmers, to clear some woods or something. Uh, needless to say, the guards were not pleasant, even at that moment. The only time the guards started to be pleasant is when the actual Anglo-American, uh, front came near, when you could hear the cannons, which you could hear those booms of approaching, uh, front. Then all of a sudden, some guards who had-- who were mean-- absolutely mean to us-- would come and ask us to sign a slip of paper that they were good to us. 

Actually, they actually were scared. I never forget one forester who came by foot, uh, and asked us, please, uh, I was trying to be good to you or something like this. Please sign the paper, so I won't have any, uh-- they won't do anything to me, because I did something good to somebody. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you sign? 

SUBJECT: No. However, I have to admit that among the 20-some people that were with, uh-- were in this last group where I worked, uh, we had a chance to tell the Anglo-American forces, execute him because he was mean to us. None of us could. Absolutely none of us could because when the first, uh, Anglo-American soldiers came, they were full of-- ready to-- to fight. 

They didn't know who we were. They came with their guns drawn and-- and so forth when to the little house that we were housed at. And we introduced ourselves who we were. 

And then one of them said, anybody was mean to you? And we said-- who? OK, where does he live? We shall get even with him. 

And we couldn't. This is something probably in a human nature that even though somebody is mean to you, yet it takes somebody very sort of bloodthirsty to point the finger-- you will be killed because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were these guards German guards? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you feel about Germans? 

SUBJECT: I have to, uh, distinguished between two things-- the Nazis and the Germans, because you have to remember that as a child, I played with some children that were of German descent. And they were friends of mine. So I don't-- at this point, I don't think that anybody who has German blood is mean. But Nazis, definitely. Anybody who had-- who wore this SS uniform, I absolutely hate. That-- that's a hate I cannot, uh, part with. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you couldn't have said, he was mean, and he should be killed? 

SUBJECT: We could've. He would've. He would've been killed [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you didn't. 

SUBJECT: But we didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: He had-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even with the SS guards? 

SUBJECT: We-- well, those were not SS anymore. The SS was-- was the elite. They didn't really take care of us. Those were, uh, the older sort of second-grade German guards. 

This was towards the end of the war. Those were older, that probably tried to live up to-- to Hitler's ideals or something, just by being mean. Or maybe somehow or another, they had a mean streak in their blood. 

However, one guard-- one German woman-- she was displaced from the Belgian border. Do you know that during the night, one day she went out because there was a hunt in the forest. And she knew of a deer being-- being killed. 

And nobody took the deer. Whoever was the higher echelons who were hunting in that forest were not interested in the meat itself. They just had the hunt for fun. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 1945? 

SUBJECT: In 1945. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were hunting in-- for fun? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And the matter of fact-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who was hunting? 

SUBJECT: --I was once-- some SS echelon? Some high-ups? I don't know, because I-- we were told to-- uh, there was a forest near, well, at the-- uh, where I was there, near the, mm, River Weser 

And we were taken, scared as can be, to help round up some boars because they actually had some wild boars in the forests. And they were-- some high echelons came. And they wanted some fun and hunting in 1945. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that woman that what? 

SUBJECT: Oh, referring to this woman-- she was our sort of like first guard. But she could not show her emotions or something or sympathize with us or anything like this. However, in a way, she, uh, uh, she felt that she is just as displaced because they told her to leave her house. They told her what she should or shouldn't do. 

Even though there was blood-- German blood in her, uh, in her veins, she went at night. And she dragged for about two miles this dead deer to bring it into hiding somewhere close to us so that, uh, she could get some meat to put in our soup. This was definitely far beyond her call of duty, definitely. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know her name? 

SUBJECT: So that's why I said anybody-- pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know her name? 

SUBJECT: I don't recall. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know-- 

SUBJECT: I remember the one that we wanted to kill. His name was Schtinder that we had a chance to kill, I would say, or told to be killed. But I don't recall her name. 

I can still see her-- a big, rather husky-looking woman. She was very matter-of-fact with us. And, uh, she never came to us to ask us for a slip of paper how well she took care of us. We offered this to her. 

But I'd never forget this forester who came. He was actually trembling, he was so scared about his-- himself, about his life, his welfare. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And after the liberation? 

SUBJECT: Well, after the liberation, uh, there was-- this was a little, like a cottage, where 20-- 20-some probably, close to 30, people were housed. And after the liberation, we really-- we didn't know where to turn. Uh, so we stayed there a little bit on the safe side. 

And, uh, some Anglo-American forces would bring us some food. Some K-rations they would give us. And, uh, well, probably within weeks, within months, somehow or another, uh, there were camps for the refugees from-- being formed. For a change, uh, Germans were asked to leave some nice estates or something. 

And some, uh, French or Polish people or whoever was from which country was taken into Germany and-- and start and-- and work there were housed. And it took me a very long time-- probably a year-- before I had a-- a really and really-- oh, this was the time where you had to-- where you looked for your next of kin, for your loved ones, where you looked for your friends. You were wondering, what has happened to them in different camps? 

I mean, after all, I had a cousin in, uh, Sachsenhausen. My aunt and other-- other members of the family were in, uh, Ravensbruck. My best friend was somewhere near Weimar in the-- also in the concentration camp there. 

So you were looking for your-- everybody. And it was a constant sort of movement of, uh, ask if somebody knows of this ones. Ask if somebody knows of that one. 

And seeing that so many of my friends were left behind or were separated from me at the time-- at the place where Bergen-Belsen camp was, I finally decided to go there. It was shocking. Actually, where the barb wires were torn, were sort of like pushed away, I saw a few of the guard-- guard post or guards that were standing. But seems to me like most of them were simply leveled by that time. 

It was just mass graves with numbers. 2,000 buried here. 10,000 buried here. 

Or unknown amount buried here. There were like mass graves there. And it probably was '46-- late '46-- 1946 that I went back to see. 

Needless to say, nobody had many names to refer to. Just like during the time I was in, uh, in Germany as a-- as a prisoner, probably only in one of the working camps that I was-- or in the working sort of groups that I was towards the end of the war, anybody has asked for my name. Before that, I didn't. 

It's like I was asked once, you were in a concentration camp. Where is your number? Well, not too many concentration camps had numbers. And this-- I mean, after a while, the routine and the order even in the concentration camp was gone. 

I have a friend who has the number from, uh, Auschwitz-- Oswiecim. But she was there rather early in-- during the war-- taken during the war, where they still tattooed the numbers. Later on, you were just one in a huge mass, huge number of unknown nuisances. 

And as I mentioned to you, what your-- what your religion was and what your-- what kind of a blood went through your veins was all of a sudden important just before the war, when-- when the war was breaking up. This was my first encounter with differences like this. After that, no matter who you were, nobody really asked for your religion in-- in any kind of a concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Didn't you have a color, though, that signified which you were? 

SUBJECT: No. This-- I was-- this was 19-- not in Bergen-Belsen at that time, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did it make you think about when you realized people were being separated because of religion or-- or blood, as you said, that ran through the veins? 

SUBJECT: Well, for an 11-year-old girl who just had friends with different names and had a very comfortable life, this was rather shocking. This is surprises, she was such. What's the difference? She is just as nice as I am. 

And after the war, I conducted a search. And, uh, I know of many who have entered some concentration camps and have not been found. So they probably are dead by now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you were 11, do you remember talking about this shocking thing to your friends, to your parents? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you say? And what did they say? 

SUBJECT: So many hap-- things were-- has-- have happened since that I cannot really recollect the exact words or something. It's also so many years went by. But I remember, uh, especially my father explaining, uh, going back into history and more or less like hate among nations and explaining this to me, uh, that no matter what year or how civilized the country, and whether this was in ancient times or Middle Ages or even in the 20th century, the hate between countries, between nations does exist. And nothing you can do about it. But just be nice to the human person. 

Don't ask him who he was-- who he is. Just be good to them. Whether this has paid off in many respects, I don't know. Just-- just be tolerant. Just-- just be good. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you talk to your friends? What did they say, or do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Well, with friends, I can tell you was once I recollected very rather light conversation, because there was a mixed marriage of, uh, a Polish fellow and a German-descent woman. And they had twins. 

This was-- I knew them very well at the time. They were a little bit younger than I. A little bit-- they were-- they were probably about 7 on the out-- outset on the war-- of the war. 

And, uh, to me, it was first comical. But then a few weeks later, it's-- it, uh, it was in a way a tragedy. They raised one of the twins as a Lutheran German and the other twin as a Catholic Pole. 

Well, when in 1939 in, uh, July and August, the imminent-- the war was really near. And the hate among nations was really into the open. Those two brothers nearly killed themselves. 

They had-- their family had to separate them because they were accusing, you are no good. You are no good. Or, uh, well, they were really fighting. They were really at each other. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 7 years old? 

SUBJECT: 7 years old-- twins. I remember them. And then I remember my-- my father, probably, and my mother talking about it, that this family, uh, had to separate their twins because they couldn't get along in their family. 

And that's where all of a sudden, to an 11-year-old, um, it's food for thought. Why should it happen like this? Why does it-- why did it happen? 

But still, at the time, the atrocities of what that have happened during the war were absolutely-- didn't nobody-- it didn't enter anybody's mind at that time. This was simply something that wouldn't happen to us, or something you were probably too optimistic, or you didn't know what might happen, even in the 20th century, how gruesome it can be. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hm. Were there any other things like the story of the twins that you remember from that time-- things you noticed? People talking about the Jews? 

SUBJECT: I have mentioned, uh, that before, about, uh, not as-- at that time, I don't think anything about Jewish people, because they were friends of ours at the time. They were friends. Then some enter, uh, some mixed marriages. There were friends of our parents. We associated with them. 

And, I mean, this is something-- it just probably-- the only thing I can remember is to be cautious of anybody who had German blood, whether he will turn and be pro-Nazi, pro-Hitler, whether he is going to be the one who is going to squeal, whether he's going to bring some news to the other hated side, or whether he will really-- even though the blood is in him, of German parentage-- whether he will still be true to the nation that he was born in and lived in all his-- all the-- all the time. I remember parents talking about, be careful about this one. Be careful about that one. 

But, all this was rather new to a-- to a child. I mean, all of a sudden, here they were at the Sunday dinner. And then you say, well, be careful. Don't tell him too much. 

Or don't-- don't say too much there. It might not be good. Or all of a sudden, like a strained relationships-- strained friendships. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What does a little girl remember about the moment that father left-- his last words or a look? 

SUBJECT: I would rather say terrible, or whether even my father-- I mean many times, I think that he, in a way, somehow or another deep in his heart knew that this will be our last time. And even-- even I think it was something so very final in his last goodbye. And I have-- I can tell you that some friends of his and my mother's were telling him, don't be foolish. You cannot appear according to the orders that you have gotten. 

The city where you were supposed to register for draft, uh, is already under German occupation. The Germans are already there. You cannot go there. Just simply forget it, and don't do anything. 

Many times, I think how, uh, our lives would be different if he at least were with us during the war. But I guess this was-- the call of duty was above everything else. And my father registered in Warsaw for a change instead of, uh, sort of go into hiding or avoid the draft completely. 

We were told that they set up some kind of a field hospital, uh, not-- somewhere in the Lublin area. This is southeast of Warsaw. But no news, no letter ever came from them, because this entire hospital, uh, was by surprise taken by the, uh, Russian army, who at-- also in 1939 invaded Poland from the east. And I guess they did not expect to find themselves in a prisoner of war camp at the time. 

What was terrible to a young girl, uh, were the time of, uh, the actual, uh, Warsaw bombing in 1939, where many times my mother would leave me with the two-year-old. And I was scared. I was so afraid that she might never come back, that something might happen to her on the street, and that she will never come back. 

Um, I mentioned to you that probably the war made us much more grown up as-- as youngsters, as I see youngsters in peace time. It was like a terrible sense of responsibility. All right, my father is gone-- is not with us, even though at that time I was hoping. And I-- it never entered my mind that he wouldn't ever come back. 

Uh, now something might happen to your mother, because it has happened to some friends who have gone in the street and were dead. So you are responsible for your sister, who is two years old-- tremendous, sort of like a moment of growing up, that, remember, no matter how old you are, you're responsible. You're going to do your best. 

And I think, well, many children-- or at least a few of my friends with whom I was talking who had younger siblings-- had, in a way, the sense of responsibility. If something happens to your father and mother, you're the only one. And you are responsible for your sibling-- for your sister or brother who was younger. 

Probably to an extent, depends on how sensitive you were and what moment you were thinking about it. But certainly, when shots are fired over your head, it's not a pleasant-- those were not pleasant moments. And, uh, you're being scared. The child is scared. 

However, probably the most scary moment-- scary by-- I don't mean horror movies but to the point of being numb-- is when you know, OK, maybe 5 minutes, maybe 10 minutes. But this is your end. You're sort of numb. You're, uh, drained, almost like of all emotions. 

This is it. And you cannot do anything about it. You're totally numb, drained, and rather frightened if it doesn't come because you expected it so much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was when? 

SUBJECT: This was when I found our, uh, when we came to, uh, on the railroad tracks, and I saw the, uh, machine guns. This was a first moment. And then when I actually entered Bergen-Belsen. 

Any questions? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What has it left you with? 

SUBJECT: It's hard to say what a-- did it leave me with, because it also depends on the time of my life that you're asking me. Uh, it certainly didn't leave me being alive was a great of joy, because the few years after the war were a constant search for members of the family, whether they survived or not. Um, for many years, I could not, uh, believe that my father was dead and that he meant-- met such a violent death himself. 

Uh, and right now, uh, well, I can tell you only that when I start thinking about it-- talking about it-- it certainly takes few days to start living a so-called normal life-- daily life-- to be happy with your children's achievements or something like this, because it's-- you're shook up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think about it when you don't expect to? Does it sometimes invade your thinking when you're not prepared? 

SUBJECT: Yes. As a matter of fact, sometimes I even wake during, uh, up during the night. And all of a sudden, whether something triggered during the day, and you all of a sudden wake up during the night and think about something. Or a letter from a relative might trigger some thoughts. 

And, uh, the only solution of it is to keep occupied. And don't just-- don't let yourself sit down and think, because many people around you, uh, don't understand what is biting your soul or your heart or something like that. 

But it does come back. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you feel-- 

SUBJECT: --sometimes it's powerful-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --different from the others? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you feel different? From-- 

SUBJECT: Different than what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Than people around you? 

SUBJECT: Mm, I don't think I am different or-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you feel-- 

SUBJECT: --I feel different. But, uh, definitely, I like to be in the company of people who have at least, uh, gone through, to some extent, or at least will understand what we went through. I feel more comfortable with. A plain, uh, cocktail party talk really doesn't interest me. And, uh, I think I prefer good friendships than a lot of acquaint-- 