[TONE] INTERVIEWER #1: OK. Rolling. OK. Your name. 

RENEE GLASSNER: My name is Rene Glassner, and I was born in Poland in a small town, the name of it which is Losice in eastern Poland near the Bug River. I come from a very happy family. Uh, I had two-- I had parents, two brothers. And the town consisted of about 8,000 Jews. About 90% of the town were Jewish. 

Uh, in the town, uh, the majority of the people, uh, were shopkeepers, uh, merchants, uh, and I also remember lots and lots of beggars. 

Uh, my immediate family, I was very happy because I lived in a-- an extended family situation in a big house that my grandfather built. Uh, this is the house, that consisted of three floors, uh, the bottom floor, the middle floor was my house, my apartment, and the top floor, another, uh, uncle and aunt and family. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Could you hold it just still? Could you just shoot it? We could use it as a cutaway maybe if we had to. You can't get to it? OK. All right. Go ahead. Sorry. 

RENEE GLASSNER: Um. My-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: Where was your bedroom? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Pardon? My bedroom was, uh, right over here, and I, throughout my early childhood and throughout the occu-- the German occupation. I watched, uh, everything that was going on through this window right here. 

And my-- before the war, I just remember, as I said, a-- a very happy childhood, with little cousins running all over the place and going to school and playing. Uh, the only time I was, at times, unhappy was when we used to go-- we, children, used to go-- try to go outside of town a little bit and sometimes Polish children would run after us and would yell, Jude, Jude, Judischka, which meant little Jewish boy or Jewish girl and would throw stones at us. 

Also, at times when we went to school, uh, I was an excellent student, and some of the other students were jealous of me. Uh, but, uh, also, the teacher uh, would occasionally hit the Jewish kids, and I remember being hit over my face because I didn't speak loud enough. But for some reason, all the Jewish children used to get hit more than the others. 

Uh, but these were all happy times, because my immediate family, I was a very happy child, until 1939 when war broke out. I remember, uh, at first, when, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: Can you say something about your father's occupation? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Oh, yes, my-- before the war, my dad occupied himself by being a-- a grain merchant. Actually, he-- he wanted to be a farmer, but Jews were not allowed to buy land at the time. So he became the next best thing and became a farm-- a grain merchant. He would buy the, uh, grains from the peasants all around and had lots of friends in-- in the countryside. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: So there was contact with Gentiles? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Yes, there were constant contact, and he had many friends in the small towns, in villages all around. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Polish farmers? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Polish farmers, yes. He came from a very large family with, uh, seven brothers and, uh, that-- that married and-- and big families. And I remember my grandparents, as well. And at age 13, he had to start working, because he had to help out the family. Uh, but, uh, I-- I remember, uh, we were, as a family, were quite well-off in town and were very happy. 

We spent most of our summers outside near a, uh, train station, where he used to ship the grains abroad. 

Uh, As I said, things were-- went very well for us. The town, uh, was a very happy Jewish community, even though it is quite a bit of poverty. And one Jewish family would always help out another one. Uh, Friday afternoons, for example, I remember lots and lots of beggars standing in front of the door, and I would run out and hand out bread and-- and, uh, change money. I remember my little cousin, even, who, uh, was very good-hearted and helped out a blind Jewish beggar, who couldn't walk on-- by himself. And he would lead him around, so he would-- wouldn't go, uh, hungry on a Saturday. 

But this was all very good until 1939, when, uh, we heard that war broke out. And we, as little children, didn't quite understand the whole impact of it. As a matter of fact, there was always some-- some sort of an excitement. All of a sudden, in this little dead town, which, uh, uh, nothing-- no-- the big-- the big adventure usually was to go to Warsaw for some excitement. And all of a sudden, we heard war. Oh, good. Uh, the kids were terribly excited to see new people, tanks. Uh, uh, until one day, we saw three planes overhead, and all of a sudden, this excitement started dying down. Fear took over. 

INTERVIEWER #1: About how old were you at this point? 

RENEE GLASSNER: I was about seven years old. Um, I remember my dad, just one morning said to my family, all of you have to get out. You go to a small village called [NON-ENGLISH], and you're going to hide there because, uh, there is danger of bombing. So my family and I, uh, got out. We walked to this little village, and, uh, about mid-afternoon, we saw three planes flying over. And, uh, before we knew it, we heard screaming, screeching, and explosions and fire and smoke. And, uh, the town was being bombed. 

My dad was still in town, and we were terribly afraid that he might have been hit. But he came in the afternoon and related that, yes, the town was bombed and that lots of people were killed. But the saddest thing of all was that the-- the beautiful synagogue that was built before the war and, uh, was completely leveled. 

Now, the interesting thing to me, I remember, at the time, thinking about why the Jewish synagogue? Why-- why not the church? Why not anything else in town? And right away, my parents explained to me that this is a war perhaps against the Jews. Maybe the Germans just wanted to kill Jews. 

Uh, and again, we came back the next day, and we were happy that my dad was alive. But I remember running-- the first thing I ran to see was the rubble of the beautiful synagogue. 

Again, we all-- we collected ourselves and went back into the house. And, uh, my grandfather that lived in that house, I remember him being very sad. And he-- he told me, as a child, and I remember, he told me, he says, you know, Germans are bad. He said, I don't want to live under Germans. And somehow, three days later, I saw him sick in bed. And he said-- my mother told me he didn't want to live under Germans and that he decided to die. And three days later, he was dead. 

All this, uh, I, as a child, could not quite comprehend and-- and I didn't know what was going on. But soon, when the Germans arrived, one of the Germans came up to our house and told us, uh, and I remember him very distinct-- very distinctly. My mother and I sat at a table, and he said to both of us, you know, you're not going to have a moment of peace. 

I remember, again, all the time I looked through that window, and I remember the night when the Germans started coming in, in full force, in tanks and started taking over the town. 

Uh, going back a little bit, uh, we weren't quite sure who is-- who was going to take over the town, whether the Soviets were going to take over the-- the town or the Germans. Uh, the Soviets did come in a few weeks after the bombing. Uh, I guess that was the time where they were-- couldn't decide where the demarcation line would be between the Germans and the Soviets. 

They-- they stayed only a few days, and then they left. At first, the Jews rejoiced that the Soviets going to be there. But then when they left, sadness start-- set in again, because nobody really knew which-- which was the better side, whether the Soviet side was better or the German side were-- was better. And people were running back and forth over the Bug River. 

And I remember at one point, I begged my dad, why don't we go over to the other side? Maybe the other side is better. But my dad finally decided to stay at home. 

Well, they returned-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: The Bug was the demarcation line between the Soviets-- 

RENEE GLASSNER: Yeah, the Bug River, finally, was the demarcation line, and that was only a few miles away from our town. The prophecy of this particular German came quite true, even though most people didn't want to believe what he said. 

1931 through 1941, these were-- things were getting bad but not as bad as after 1941. When the Germans first arrived, the first thing they did was-- it was a gradual process. First they took some of the blocks away where-- where some of the Jews lived, and threw them out of their homes, put them in with other families, and they took over for the-- for the German armies. 

Then, day-by-day there were various proclamations, proclamation after proclamation. I remember running down-- I learned languages very fast. We ran down to read. Some of them were in Polish. Some of them were in Yiddish. Some of them were in German. And one of the proclamations, soon after, maybe a week or two after they arrived, was that Jewish children were not allowed to go to school. 

Uh, school happened to be very-- this was posted on-- on a wall. To my parents, education was very important, and, uh, this was a big tragedy. So, uh, we-- my parents got us tutors to study at home. And, uh, one of my old teachers that was very sympathetic and was a friend of the family, used to send in books so we children could study at home. 

And the Germans not only didn't they allow us to go to school, to the public schools, but we weren't allowed to study, even at home. If they caught us, they would throw us into jail or-- or burn the books or punish in one way or another. 

I remember locking the doors when we studied at home. We studied everything from math to Hebrew to history, even Polish history. Uh, and, uh, we would lock the doors. And, uh, if we heard anybody coming, we would throw the books under the bed and hide them. And this-- this happened many times. 

Uh, another proclamation was-- as I say, that these were-- were daily proclamations. One was Jews had to handle all furs and coats and good clothes. And I remember collections, that somebody from the Jewish Council would come around and collect. And Jews would just give it away willingly. After all, our lives were spared, and we were still alive. So that-- that was better than-- than having furs or coats or shoes or whatever. 

The next day, they would collect our pots. The next day, they would collect something else, our furniture. One specific moment that I remember very distinctly is when the Germans came out to take our furniture away. My mother got hysterical and started crying. Little did she know how-- how unimportant that was at the time. 

But my little brother who was age five at the time, was so mad to see my mother that-- so upset, that he-- he grabbed an-- a-- a-- uh, an axe, and ran after the Germans and wanted to-- to-- to bang at the furniture and-- and smash it up. And just as I-- I ran after him, I saw the-- the German grabbing his-- his gun, and I pulled him away. If I hadn't pulled him away, he-- he probably would have been shot. 

INTERVIEWER #2: You were a child of eight or nine then? 

RENEE GLASSNER: And I-- I was about-- this was early and must have been still seven or eight, yes. And, uh, so little by little, things got worse and worse, but, uh, uh, this was still before the ghetto. And my dad, uh, had this grain business and he also had a mill outside of town, which the Germans needed. They needed his-- his flour. So he always had a little bit of extra privilege in town and was a little better off. 

But by '41, when the war with Russia, the Soviet Union, started, things started getting worse. Uh, that's when the ghetto was formed in my town. And I remember, uh, that about-- all the Jews were pushed into about three blocks of the-- of the town. And my own apartment was composed of three rooms, and there were-- five of us were living there before the war, at least up until 1940 or so. All of a sudden, we were 30 people living in-- in a three bed-- a three-room apartment. And it was, I remember, being very squeezed, but it didn't matter. It was still, we were all alive. And, uh, my own family had plenty to eat, because my dad had this special privilege and also a special-- a special pass to be able to get out of the ghetto and get extra food. 

Uh, my-- uh, but I remember also that little by little, people were getting sick in the ghetto, uh, because of lack of food and lack of sanitation facilities and lack of water. The Germans were very, very clever, because when they built the ghetto, uh, they-- they, uh, perhaps-- they probably purposely avoided a-- a well in the ghetto. The well, the water well was outside of the ghetto, and in order to get water, people had to go-- go out. 

Well, some people had special-- special passes or there were special water carriers that would bring in the water. And, uh, at times, when somebody got out to get water and didn't have a pass, the Germans would just shoot them. And sometimes even for no reason, the Germans felt like it, they would just shoot them even whether they had a pass or not. 

My brother, my little brother, the same one that was trying to smash up the furniture, uh, he was a very adventurous little kid. He was running around all over town, and, uh, uh, got into some areas, uh, that probably were not sanitary, or ran around with-- with some kids that were trying to pick, uh, out food out of garbage to eat. But he-- even though he didn't need it, but his own friends did need it. 

And he would-- and he came home one day with a very high fever. He contracted typhus. And there he was with 30-- 30 other members in the-- in the apartment, very sick. And my mother was sure that we were going to lose him. She was only trying to save the rest of the family. But one day, somehow, miraculously, he got up, and he says, Mommy, I'm well. And he recovered without-- without any medical care or anything. 

But typhus was a big killer in the ghetto. I remember, again, with my big eyes through the window, watching daily through the window, people being carried out into the cemetery, uh, sometimes, hundreds of people a day. They were usually the, uh-- the, uh, there was a smaller synagogue, that was not destroyed, was used as a morgue. And just daily, I would just stand there. And by that time, I think my emotions were-- were frozen, because it was just a daily occurrence, such a natural occurrence already. And day by day, I watched hundreds and hundreds of people being taken out dead. 

Another thing I used to watch was selections. And uh, the-- the-- my-- that window faced the square of the town. And, uh, every once in a while, maybe once a week or twice a week, the Germans would come around and say, all 18-year-old boys out on the square. And they would come around and pick, at random, people, to-- boys, particularly, and sometimes, they'd-- they'd say 25-year-olds or 60-year-old and they'd take them away, supposedly, for work. But somehow, we never saw those people again. 

One time, my older brother was taken away and selected to be taken away to work. And I remember at that time that I was looking out the window, and that's one time when I was crying. And my dad ran down and somehow, got him out. He talked to-- I saw him talking to a few people and told them that he made a mistake. That he wasn't really 18, and that he was very tall and mature, and they tried to take him as an 18-year-old, and my dad took him away, and he was saved. 

INTERVIEWER #2: How old was he really? 

RENEE GLASSNER: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER #2: How old was he really? 

RENEE GLASSNER: My brother must have been about 14 at the time. Uh, again, the final day, the-- the-- be-- because of these selections, one of my cousins, who lived upstairs in the house built a hiding place in the house. In-- right here, in this corner of the house, he built a hiding place. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Just hold it. 

RENEE GLASSNER: And he essentially built a wall in the room and covered it with wallpaper. And made a little opening on the bottom of the wall, and put a cot against the opening. So that in order to get into the hiding place, you had to crawl under the cot, open the opening and get inside. And it was very hard to tell that it was a-- a different room because of the wallpaper. 

As I said-- he originally built it be-- to-- for the men to avoid or to hide away from-- from the selections. He also was in touch of a-- with a cousin, who had survived a-- a-- a massacre of another town. So that he believed that something worse was coming. 

Generally, in the whole town, nobody wanted to believe that such horrible things-- by that time, things started coming through from other towns, all kinds of stories that Jews were being killed, that Jews were being taken away in trucks and shot. But nobody really wanted to believe it, except that this cousin that built this hiding place heard it from another cousin who ran away, who escaped from such a massacre, and he believed it. 

So by this time, he declared that if-- if anything happens, uh, if, uh, such a massacre should occur in this town, that there was no point in going with the crowd. That the best thing to try to do is to hide, and at least, we'd have a fighting chance for life, not just walk to your death. 

That day came in August 1942. Again, I remember waking up on a Saturday morning. I heard shots. Again, I quickly ran to my window, that was my-- my observation point. Like, my-- my eyes must have been three times as big as-- as they are now, because I remember spending lots of hours in that window. Uh, I ran to it, and I looked around, and I saw dead people all around in-- on the square. 

Uh, about-- nobody moved, and I couldn't understand it. I run-- I ran to my parents. I said, but these people are guards. They are-- some of them were Jewish guards. Some of them, uh, uh, had special passes, special privileges to be out on the street. Uh, Nobody knew what-- what was going to happen. About an hour later, um, I heard German voices. Aus! Aus! Aus! That was one word that I learned very quickly, that meant out, out, out! It was like a dog-- like dogs barking. 

And there were German voices telling everybody, all Jews out! All Jews out of the square! We heard people beginning to cry and chaos. Everybody was running up and down in my building. 

My-- my cousin, finally, started yelling to-- to my family and whoever. Because people started running into the hiding place and out. Nobody knew what-- quite what to do. Some of us who got into the hiding place, my cousin finally shut the door, and said, all right. Now, you're in, and nobody out. I, myself, started crying. And I-- I said I wanted to go with everybody else. My dad also wanted to go, but he closed the door. He closed it, the-- the-- the little door underneath, and he said, nobody's moving out of here. 

As a matter of fact, I remember him saying distinctly, he said, if you're going to die, you're going to die right here. You're not going to walk to your death, or you're not going to walk to a gas chamber. A gas chamber? We-- you know, that's-- that was probably the first time I ever heard of such a thing. But apparently, he had heard of-- of-- of-- of this. This was the first time I heard of it. 

Uh, we-- I started crying, and-- but then, he made me shut up. And, uh, then, I looked out through, there was-- the only opening for-- for air was-- there was like a porthole here, under the roof. And I looked out, and I saw lots of Jews with little packages walking towards the square. And I also saw my grandfather, my other grandfather, from my father's side, who lived in a different building, and his-- and my Grandma, coming over. And they were looking up and, uh, uh, deciding whether to come-- to come up and hide with us or to go away. And finally, I saw them walk-- walk away, and I never saw them again. 

I heard-- I heard people yelling, screaming, and crying and shooting. And a whole town crying. 

[SIGHS] 

[KNOCKING ON DOOR] 

INTERVIEWER #2: We have to change. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Oh, good time. I want to give her a Kleenex. The Kleenex, do we have the Kleenex? 