EDITH P.: You mean in a-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were talking in Salzwedel or whatever. 

EDITH P.: Well, at Salzwedel, we stayed, uh-- I think we were there about six months. Um, uh, the munition factory was bombed a few times. And, uh, we knew, by this time-- it was bombed by the Americans-- and we knew that the Americans must have known that there were prisoners there, because the fact that it was bombed but our quarters were not, which was very near to it. 

And, uh, one day-- I just have to laugh about it today, how compulsive the Germans are-- the fact that it was bombed and all the windows in the-- in that SS kitchen was broken. Within-- would you believe that within half an hour, those windows were fixed? They are so compulsive. And next day, the Americans came and bombed again, but they always fixed it. They didn't leave it. It had to be-- they are that compulsive. 

Anyhow, I just want to tell you about my liberation, which is a very beautiful story. Uh, we heard cannons-- if I can call it cannons-- but we did not know what was going on. And, uh, one day, this Kommandant came-- said, Appell! It's an emergency. Appell! "Appell" means that everybody goes out and stands in-- like soldiers. 

And he said, the enemy is near. I got orders from headquarters in Hamburg that I am supposed to burn this Lager with five liters of gasoline. Now, if you all sign it that I was a good man, you will be saved. Now, who wouldn't sign it? So we all signed it. 

Frankly, he was not a bad man. We had no contact with him. And maybe at the-- at the last analysis, at the last minute he had-- his conscience bothered him. He didn't kill us. He let us be liberated. 

But my boss, he was not that merciful. That morning-- it was the 14th of April, 1945. Early in the morning, evidently the Americans broke through, and broke the water lines, and we had no water. And he wanted to shave or needed water, and he said to me, come here, Edith. You are going to go with this Offizierin with two pails, and one mile-- or one kilometer-- you are going to bring some water from a well. We need water. 

So I did. And when I came back-- the water was very heavy. Two pails of water. So I just put it down. So she slapped me. This woman knew that it-- it's only minutes, only hours, that the Americans-- that their enemy will be-- but she still had the control over me. She slapped me. She says, don't you dare put this down. Let's go fast. 

So I did, and I brought in the water. And, uh, he came to me, and he said, well, you know I was a good boss to you, wasn't I? Oh, sure. Oh! How else? Of course. 

And so, you see? You survived the armies. He called the Americans "armies." I know the armies are here, he said, and within one hour, they they're going to be-- and I'm going to stay here. 

He did, because there was nowhere for them to go, not because he was so brave. Because as soon as he saw the first American, he started to run. And that first American has killed him. He was the first one to be killed. 

Anyhow, it was about 10 o'clock in the morning. We heard lots of commotion all over. There was tremendous pressure all over the-- the gates were closed. 

And I want to emphasize that Salzwedel did not have only Jewish prisoners. We had been with lots of Danish and Dutch prisoners, and Gypsies. And, um, the gates were closed, and everybody was standing in the yard like one man. 

And about 11 o'clock, we heard a tank stopping at the gate, and two shots fired, and the gates opened. And as we ran, there was a white and a black American standing side-by-side in the tank. That's the first time I saw a black man. I loved him for it all my life. And he stood that erect, maybe because he understood. 

And the boss was running, and he shot him. I still see him lying there with his beautiful, shiny boots that I was shining an hour before. And I had no pity on him. 

And we were liberated. He said, everybody goes. And everybody went crazy-- crazy! And there was a milk factory-- uh, not a factory, but a, uh, a Molkerei 

INTERVIEWER: A dairy. 

EDITH P.: A dairy. And we ran to the dairy, and we ate so much we all got sick. And I recall, the same afternoon, I sat down on a big stone, and I said, wh-- what's now? What's going to happen to us now? We are all free. And we're really free. Where's the family? I'm a young person with a sheltered, innocent life, and what am I going to do now? Who's going to take care of me? 

And it's just came back like an echo to me. Keep all your principles that you brought from home. Go and work. Sell your knowledge. 

I did. I worked two weeks later. I spoke German and English. For some crazy reason, I took English in school, in the Gymnasium. In the [INAUDIBLE] Gymnasium. When you're 13 years old, everybody took French and Latin, and I wanted to take English. 

And my-- my mother did not think it was elegant enough. You've got to learn French! No, I said, I want to learn English. Why? I don't know. I want to learn English. 

And I spoke English well enough that I became an interpreter. German, because my-- German was my second mother tongue, uh, and English. And years later, I have realized that maybe nothing has happened just by accident. Maybe I had to learn English to survive afterwards, so that I got a good job, a respectable job, that I had the respect for myself. And I did what I was supposed to do, not sponge around after I was liberated, but go and work and do something with your life and look ahead. 

And I did. I'm among the very lucky ones, because I have met a marvelous man that I live with 33 years who loves me exactly for what I am, by knowing me very well, and loves me also for my-- all my shortcomings. And I have three wonderful daughters, and we are very close. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your husband from Europe? Is your husband-- 

EDITH P.: No, my husband is a native American, and sometimes I feel that it's very-- it's very difficult for him vis-a-vis me, because he feels the pain, and he almost feels, um, guilty that he has not gone through what I did. And I am very thankful to him that he hasn't. 

And, uh, I'm thankful also-- huh. I don't know what I should thank for that. Maybe I went in with a healthy mind, and also came out with a healthy mind-- that I was able to, um, put the pieces together after we had been really uprooted. 

It's difficult to start when you don't have a past, when you cannot prove who your mother and father was, where you went to school, what you wore. Who were your friends? How did you behave? What are you proud of, and what can you be ashamed of? 

You can never prove it. People have to know you, just what you are today. And, uh, I have accom-- I think I have accomplished. I'm proud of myself, that I have accomplished a great deal. 

And, of course, my husband was tremendously, uh, instrumental in this, with his infinite patience. And mostly, he's the most loyal person that I have ever met, the most loyal. And with love, of course. Love can do mira-- miracles. 

I would like to tell you how I found-- if I can remember-- how Auschwitz looked to me. Confusion. I think that when the Bible talks about Babel, it must have been the most, um, organized place, vis-a-vis Auschwitz. 

Everything went fast. They did not give you a chance to think or to contemplate where you are going, what you are going to be doing. They brought us there to destroy our bodies and soul. We did not work. 

We stood in line for six hours-- three-- three-- six hours daily-- three hours in the morning, and three hours in the afternoon. And it's very difficult to stand when you are a healthy person, but when you are hungry, and you haven't eaten for two, three days, it's very difficult. And many a times, we didn't stand, we just fell. 

Uh, our morale-- I don't know how to call it. I-- I am not talented enough to give you an expression, what the morale was. But if I can just give you a lively picture, we stuck together. So the morale was good. 

There were people who stole from one another-- a piece of bread-- and today, I can understand it. A mother stole for her daughter. But we were six on the bunk, and nobody stole from anybody. So we were decent human being, even when we were supposed to be like animals. 

We were even singing sometimes. Would you believe? I remember I was talking about Hungarian goulash. I used to tell my-- my sister in law's, um, sister Esther, if only my mother would m-- make me one Hungarian goulash. I don't care if I die. 

We used to talk about our boyfriends. And there was something very interesting. We became very intimate with one another. I told people-- women-- things about myself which I would have never told in a normal circumstances-- never. 

We had not deep secrets, because we were supposed to be so-called decent girls. But we had secrets, like every human being. And we told that to one another. We had to. I don't know why. Maybe to console one another that we had a beautiful life, that we were loved, and we loved, and we were well-dressed, and we were smiling, and we were laughing, and we were joking-- that once, we were alive. 

And, uh, um, married women were telling us all about their marital problems. My sister-in-law told me about my brother things that she would never dare to tell me today. She's alive. She-- she most likely forgot about it. But maybe she had to. And, uh, I did not think that it was grotesque, at all. 

We were clean. We washed ourselves every day. There was a bathroom with, um, sinks, which were maybe 50 sinks. 

And every morning, I think of-- I don't remember. It was morning or afternoon. We washed ourselves very-- we washed each other. 

I remember washing my girlfriend's back with soap and water, and we were even laughing sometimes. We were washing our hair, which was maybe, uh, one millimeter, already, long. And, uh, we made fun of ourselves. Maybe it was good this way, that we were able to laugh at ourselves. 

The bunks where we lived were clean, absolutely spotless. Don't ask me how. I don't know. We cleaned it up every morning. 

My pillow was a pot. I still remember. I found the pot, somewhere, on the f-- on the yard in Auschwitz, and I put it under my neck. And that's the way I slept. 

So my sister-in-law said, oh, I can't sleep. So I gave her the pot. So one night, she had it, and one night, I had it. And, uh, it was beautiful. 

INTERVIEWER: The pot was metal? 

EDITH P.: The pot was metal, yes. Yes. I didn't feel any, uh, hardship. I think the worst of Auschwitz were two things-- hunger, no work. We were lying in those bunks all day long and talking about our past. That was-- and the humiliation of our souls-- that was the worst part of Auschwitz. 

And in the evening, when you dared to go out, and you saw the flames of the crematorium, that was disastrous. The smell of the human flesh, which we didn't know it was-- we were young kids, inexperienced of such horror. Who is experienced in such ways? And, um, we smelled something. We saw a few people commit suicide, run to the wires. They couldn't take it anymore. 

Auschwitz, if I would like to describe it, I would say that is-- there has not in-- there has not been-- uh, people did not invent an expression like Auschwitz was. It was hell on earth. And the silence of Auschwitz was hell. The nights were hell. 

And the days-- somehow, we-- we got up at 3 o'clock in the morning, and at 4 o'clock summertime, or 4:30, when the sun came up, it was not like the sun. I swear to you, it was not bright! It was always red to me. It was always black to me. 

It never said-- nev-- nev-- never was life to me. It was destruction. The sun was never beautiful. And when the, uh, moon was out, it meant only destruction. We almost forgot what life was all about. 

But we are supposed to be the chosen people. I never believed in that. But maybe we are chosen. We always stayed humanitarian, even there, took care of each other. I think we are chosen for that, that we didn't kill each other. 

I used to be so hungry that I thought if a dog would pass by, I wanted to eat the chair if I would have seen the chair It hurt me so that I wanted to run, and scream, and go mad-- just go mad. I was so hungry. 

And there was all my colleagues-- prisoners-- and I would have never done any harm to them, ever. And I don't-- I would be a fool to say it's-- it happened because I'm Jewish and I'm different-- by no means. 

But if we are chosen, then we are chosen for that, that we always understand the underdog. And we strive for a better life, not only for ourselves, but for our, uh, neighbors. 

And that's the way we all conducted ourselves in Auschwitz-- always. They wanted us to become animals, and I haven't seen one-- not one woman-- who died as an animal. We were all dignified. 

I just want to say I've been liberated 35 years-- going to be this month-- uh, April 14th. And as I get older, and my children are no longer all self-sufficient, no longer at home, and I am not busy being a mother and a wife, and I can be myself, I have given great enough thought how I should-- I should conduct myself with the-- with the Germans-- how I should feel. Should I hate them? Should I despise them? Should I go out with a banner and say, do something against them? 

I-- I don't know. I never found the answer in my own soul, and I have to go according to my own conscience. I cannot conduct myself what my husband does, not my children, or what the world has said. And the only thing I can say is that up until now, I ignore them, I don't hate them. I can't hate. I feel I would waste a lot of time in my life. 

But sometimes I wish, in my darkest hours, that they would feel what we feel, sometimes, when we are uprooted and bring up children. I'm talking as a mother and as a wife. 

And there is nobody to share your sorrow or your great happiness. There's nobody to call up and say, something good happened to me today. Oh, I have given birth to a beautiful daughter, or she got all A's, or she got into a good college. 

And mostly, when-- when, uh, holidays come, I have tried to, um, uh, preserve the holidays as I saw it at home, transfer it to my own children. We have beautiful Passovers, like I saw it at home, but the spirit is not there. It's beautiful. My friends tell me-- I invite them-- that it's beautiful, it's very spiritual, but I know it's not the same. 

It-- it-- I-- I-- there is something missing. I want to share it with somebody who knows me really. My children are all grown up, and there's nobody that Mom and Dad. There isn't even a grave to go and cry to. 

And I sometimes wish they would feel that. It's not easy to live this way. You don't live with it every day. I have lived 33 years for the future, and very happily. And every so often, I cry, because I'm a feeling human being. 

And I don't wish the German nation any harm, but I hope that those who have done it know what we have-- the loss of identity, the loss of communication with people that you really trusted. We had to build up everything ourselves, and I-- I am among the lucky ones, because I married a native American, and I came into a family. 

But what about those people who did not? They are still in exile. They love this country, and I do too. This country is my mother. I-- I mean it. 

I am-- now that we are talking about women going to the army, my oldest daughter asked me, Mom, would you volunteer? I said, any time. I'll give my life to the United States, because I know what it is. I know both worlds, and with all its shortcomings, it's paradise, for the simple reason I'm able to express what's in my soul, and nobody will harm me for it. 

And I can also say-- and I'm very proud to be Jewish. There is nothing to be ashamed of. Maybe we did not give the greatest musician in this world, nor the greatest sculptors, but surely we are the most literary people in the world. And that's why we survived-- I believe in that. 

We had better generals than Joshua. The world had better ge-- generals then Diane and wiser men than Solomon, and better kings than King David. But we are a literary people, and that's the only way to survive. 

I'm very devoted to our people, without really hating anybody or saying that we are the chosen-- no, we are not. We are just like everybody else. If only they would let us be ourselves. 

And that's the way I brought up my children, which brought me a lot of dilemma in my life, because I said every-- every person is born equal. And then, sometimes I ha-- have to swallow my own words. What else can I tell you? 

INTERVIEWER: One last question. Um, how do you feel today with, um, seeing, um, destruction-- man-- people treating other people with disrespect? 

EDITH P.: Terrible! When I heard about Cambodia, I went through a depression, because the world has not learned. I felt guilty that I'm living in a beautiful home with all the comforts, and I'm impotent. I do nothing. It pains me terribly that the world has not learned that don't kill your brother or sister, no matter what the reason is. And I share the guilt today, I do. 

INTERVIEWER: The guilt? 

EDITH P.: The guilt of the world, that we just sit and do nothing about the Cambodians, or the Vietnamese, or what we hear about Africa. Nobody stands up and be counted. I don't consider myself a coward person. 

And many a times, I say, why am I so busy that I cannot be counted? I don't stand up. I don't take a banner in Wallingford, Connecticut, where I live, and say, do something! That the Cambodians, in two years, will not exist-- it's the same thing. 

Why don't I do something? Why am I so busy? Or did I really forget everything already? Am I that comfortable, that I don't want to leave? Or am I just plain tired? I don't know. I have no answer. 

But it pains me terribly, and I'm restless. That's the truth. And my family knows it, and they feel the same way. But we are all engaged in our own, um, private lives and busy lives. 

And there's no time for it, and it's wrong. I don't have the answer. I feel we should be the ones who stand up. And I don't. 

INTERVIEWER: Jesus. I told him. He knows. 