[TEST SOUND] INTERVIEWER: Start. I would like to interrupt you not at all, if I possibly can, because I don't want waste time with my questions. But I'd like you to start by giving your name, your place of birth, your family life, reconstruct your-- your-- the atmosphere in Poland, as best you can. OK. Go ahead. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: My name is Israel Arbeiter. I was born in Plock, Poland, April 25th, 1925. I came from a family of five boys. My parents and two of my brothers perished during the war. I myself and two of my brothers are alive. One is here in Boston with me, and one lives in Los Angeles. 

1939, when the war broke out, I was 15 years old. Plock is located near the eastern Prussian border. The place was allocated by the Germans and called German territory, and thereby, it became what they called Judenrein, free of Jews, in 1940. The Jews were evacuated from Poland-- or deported from Plock to Starachowice in 1940. And so I and my family were deported to Starachowice. 

And to the ghetto of Starachowice, we were there assigned to a family of six, plus the five from our family, into a two room apartment with no water, with no toilet facilities, so forth. But we were working. We were assigned to work. I, my brothers were assigned to work in the ammunition factory, which was called the Hermann Goring Werke. And we worked there until 1942, when the final solution of the Jewish problem was declared. 

In October-- October 27, 1942, my parent-- my parents and my brother were deported to-- we were told, to Treblinka. We never saw them again. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember the day they were asked to report? What were they doing? What were you doing? Describe so we could see that. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Uh, it was-- almost were around already for a few days, that the final solution of the Jewish problem is in action, that other cities are being emptied of Jews by the Einsatzkommando. There were all kinds of rumors that the people are being sent to relocation centers, to Eastern Europe, that are being sent to work. There were rumors that they're being sent to-- to be killed in concentration camps. Some people did believe, some people did not believe. 

There was not much that anyone can do for any preparations. We just had to be ready, pack whatever we can, and just waiting for that day and hoping that the day will only be relocation to another area, and that they will-- that we will live there until the war is over. We knew that the war will be over and that Germany will be defeated, and hoping that we will remain and be alive. 

But that day came one day, in the morning, we just were alarmed by the coming to Starachowice by the Einsatzkommando, which was consisted of German troops, Lithuanians, and Ukrainians. All the people were ordered to leave their homes and to assemble at the marketplace in Starachowice. Over there we were, in a terrible way, rushed, pushed, beaten, and chased to the marketplace. Once all the Jews were there, they were selecting the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who was rushing and pushing? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: The Einsatzkommando. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they-- what did they look like? What did they sound like? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: They were in German uniforms. They were all wearing German uniforms. The sound was-- they all had whips and guns, of course, and they were just, in a horrifying way, chasing everybody out from the houses into the streets. There was no walking. Everybody was just running, because while we were running out of the houses, they were beating with the whips, shooting and killing people. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they shouting? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Just to get to the market place, simply. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they saying? How did it sound? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Um-- terrible. You, into the marketplace. Everybody out. Everybody assemble at the marketplace. Everybody run to the marketplace. Schnell, make it fast. Hurry up, schnell, schnell. 

And once we got up to the marketplace the selection took place there. And that was the most horrible way, where they selected-- they took away the children of those that were able to-- able-bodied people to work. They put us on one side. The elderly and the younger people on one side-- on the other side. 

It is-- it is, uh-- it is just un-- describable, the-- the-- the horrifying day that took place in that marketplace, where families are being separated, where children are being taken away from their mothers, as families separated, husbands taken away from their wives. How can one describe a scene on a marketplace like that? The horror, the screaming, the beating, the shooting, it just pandemonium. It just-- it's very hard to describe it. It's horror, it's hell. 

INTERVIEWER: Who is taken from you? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: My parents and my younger brother. 

INTERVIEWER: How old was he? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Seven. 

INTERVIEWER: He was with them. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: He was with-- he went with my parents. My-- I was, at that time, in 1940, I was 17. My younger brother was 15, and my older brother-- we were two years apart, and my younger brother-- my older brother was two years older. 

They took us away first, ordered us to run from the marketplace. We didn't know where we going, but they-- we were running, and they were chasing us and beating with bibs-- with whips, and shooting into the audience-- I mean to the people that were running. Many were dying, falling in the street, one dead. And we just kept on the rest-- we kept on running. 

INTERVIEWER: Running where? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Into-- until we arrived onto a-- the factory, which was, before the war, a Polish ammunition factory. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't know where you were running? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: We didn't know where we were running. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know which way to go? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: The front was leading. There were some people-- the front was leading, and the rest were just running after them. We didn't know where we're running, but we're just running, the rest we're following the-- the front runners. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any-- any belongings with you? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: No. Nothing. Everything was-- whatever we took out from the house was left in the market place. So from there on, it was nothing, just what we had an on our bodies. 

When we arrived at the place that was then known as the Hermann Goring Werke, which was ammunition factory, we assembled at the place-- at an open field. There we were ordered by the chief of the Gestapo the name of Becker, who I was later-- who I had the honor to be at his trial in Hamburg. Chief of the Gestapo of Starachowice. He was in charge of the [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that how you know his name? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know his name then? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: I did know his name in Starachowice. I happened to work in the-- there, and so I know his name. After the war, I was invited to-- to his trial. 

We were ordered there to give up every possession, everything that we have, rings, jewelry, any valuable things. We were given 15 minutes to deliver everything that we have. If not, anybody that will be caught afterwards-- having any valuables, any jewelry, or watches-- will be shot. Becker and another-- the-- who we later know was the camp commandant, by the name of Althoff, took out one man, put him up against the wall, and they shot him as an example to show us what will happen to all of us if we don't deliver whatever we have, all in the-- our-- all our possessions. 

INTERVIEWER: They shot the man before he refused to give up any? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Before. Just as an example to show us what will happen to the rest of us. 

So of course, in fear everybody give up whatever we have. We were then lead into prepared barracks, fenced in. This was our first day at Starachowice concentration camp, Starachowice. 

The man that was assigned as the camp commandant, Althoff, was a sadist. A sadist in the worst way that can be imagined. This man's day wouldn't start on the right way until he shot a few people by himself. He appeared every day in the camp with the little submachine gun hanging on his neck, and his thing was that-- the only question was, how many people-- who and how many people will he shoot this day, to day? Um-- and this was going on in December of 1942. 

Being there-- I was working the ammunition factory-- we had an epidemic of typhoid. They emptied one block, which called block five, and made this a quarantine for the sick people that were, and the sick of typhoid. There was no medical facilities, there were no doctors, and there was no medicine. 

You know, in the concentration camps a Jew was allowed to live for as long as he could, for as long as he was able to work. Once he was weak and couldn't work anymore, he was either destroyed on the place, or he was sent to a-- a concentration camp where there were gas chambers and crematoriums. There was none of that in Starachowice. 

INTERVIEWER: Starachowice wasn't a concentration camp, it-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: It was a-- 

INTERVIEWER: Work camp. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Work camp. Yeah. Yeah. We called it a concentration camp, because it probably served the same purpose. So I was one of the people that contracted typhoid, and I was put in block five. 

That evening-- one of the evenings, Althoff and Becker, and a few more SS men, came up to the door-- and the camp commandant, who's name was Wilczek. And they ordered everybody out from block five, all the sick people to come out through the door. Althoff and Becker was staying at the door, and everybody that was coming out was shot on the scene. I was the only one that had survived that massacre of 86 people. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: This is a very good question. I've been asked that thing many, many times. It's a long story. My answer to it is that there had to be a God that saved me, that wanted me to be alive, to be probably here today, and to tell the story of the Holocaust. Because, by myself, I don't think I would have been able to save myself from that. 

If you want to know how it happened, they were coming into the door. Like I said, they were staying at the door and ordered all the prisoners, everybody, to run out the door. Everybody that came out from the door was shot. 

In the back of the barrack were windows. The windows were nailed. And believe me, that same day, I was so sick that I couldn't come down from the bunk. 

But when they ordered for everybody to get out, just like everybody else, I jumped off the bunks, and coming down, I looked in the direction of the door and I noticed what's going on there, that everybody else they coming out are being shot. And I said to myself, no, I'm not going there. I'm going to wait and see what happens. Let them come in, and let them shoot me here. 

And then, as I saw the people were-- as they were running to the door, and there were more and more being shot, and I noticed the window in back of me, I said, let me try the window and let me try and get out. Maybe I can get out through the window. And a little on the other side were the block-- were blocks where the people were in the camp. And I said to myself, if I can gather enough strength to open up that window, jump out through the window, and run to the other blocks where the people are that are well, I might have a chance. 

Where I got the strength to open up that window, I don't know, but I forced it up and I got it open. And as I was trying to get out, there was a SS man near the door-- near the window. And he said to me, get back or I'll shoot. I says, don't shoot. I'm getting back. 

I backed in through the window. And they were still staying there. I didn't go to the front, to the door. The other people were running to the door, and they were all being shot. 

I was staying near the window, and then as I saw that it's quieting down, it's getting already slower. I looked out the window again, and I didn't see the SS men. So I jumped out through the window. 

In the middle of the camp was a ditch that was served before, I think, as an anti-aircraft battery location. And the strength that I got at that moment and the clear thinking-- again, I don't know how that got to me, at the moment. But I jumped out through the window, and ran across and jumped into that ditch. 

In the middle of the camp was a tower with a watchman with a search light. He got me with the searchlight and he started to yell down, get back or I'll shoot. Again, I yelled back to him, don't shoot, I'm going back, I'm going back. But then he started circling around with the searchlight looking for other people. What happens is when I ran, other people noticed that I ran, and they did run after me. 

While this guard from the tower went away with the searchlight from me, instead of climbing up the ditch this way, I went up the other way. And about 10 or 20 feet away on the other side of the ditch were the barracks of the other people. I said, now, this is my chance. If I can make it over to the other side, I might be safe. 

The other people that were coming-- then I heard already shooting. The other people that came out after me, as I was coming up the ditch and running toward the closest barracks, the people came out after me through the window they were shot. They were shooting already those people, because they noticed. One of them got shot through the head and through the eye, run into a block, and they followed the marks of the blood, got him out from the other block and shot him. 

I was lucky. I ran to the block that I was actually been located before I got sick. Again, the clear thinking of me not to go through the door, but to circle around the barracks in the back and knocked on the door-- in the window. And I-- and they ask, who is it? And I told my friends who I am, and they opened up the window and let me in. One of my friends, by the name of Jack Kleinman, put me under a straw sack. He put himself on top of the straw sack, and covered himself. 

After the SS men and Althoff killed everybody in that barrack, they started to go around. They knew that people ran out through the back window. They started to go around in the other barracks, and ask whether there is anybody that survived that came out from the sick block, from block five. Wherever they found somebody, they took them out and shot them. 

They came to my block, and they know what was going on. You know, every block had a block elders there. And they came to every block, and ask for the-- whether anybody came out of-- you know, to deliver them. 

In my block, this friend of mine that did hide me, went down and we were-- it was a three deck bunks, and he was on the third deck and I was laying underneath the straw sack. He went down from the straw sack, and went over to the block elders, who, at this moment, demanded that I be delivered before the camp commandant comes there because he might be punished. He was afraid for his own life. 

This friend of mine, Jack Kleinman, put the knife to his throat, and he says, look-- he says, Izzy Arbeiter is here. We're hiding him. If you mention one word, I'm going to cut your throat. So you're going to be dead. If they find him, they're going to shoot you. If you'll deliver him, we're going to kill you afterwards. So heavy choice. You're going to be dead one way or another. 

Well, it didn't take long. And they came in and knocked on the door, and they came into this block. And I could hear them. I was laying under that straw sack, this friend of mine on top of me. And they asked, is-- are there any people here from block five? And he says, we're giving you two minutes to deliver them. If not, we will take out and shoot you. You can imagine, not only me, but the people, number one, the block elders there, and the people that were there that were hiding me, how they felt when they been given two minutes to either deliver, if there is anybody hiding, or they will be shot. 

Well, the block elder was staying, and he-- he was froze. He didn't say anything. But this friend of mine yelled out-- he was the first one-- he says, there's nobody here, nobody came into this block. 

He said, we're going to search the block. If we find anybody that is hiding, and the one that's hiding him, and the block elders, they will be shot. They started to look around in a few bunks. Fortunate, I was in a corner on the third top bunk. They left, and I was there. 

I fell asleep, and the next thing I remember, my brother-- my two brothers were with me at the same camp. They were working night shift. And the next thing I do remember, my brothers staying behind the window and crying. He came home from the night shift, and he asked-- and he knew what was going on, what happened during the night in the camp, that there was a execution of all those that were sick of typhoid, in block five. 

And he asked for me. And the other, you know, people that were burying afterwards, the bodies, says, your brother is shot, and we buried him. He was buried during the night. And I just remember my brother staying there and crying. And then I, just in a very weak voice, yelled out to him, I'm all right, I'm alive, I'm alive. And I was very sick, still very sick. 

After two days, the camp police came and said, you have to go back to block five, because you're still sick. There is new people. They were locating new people that got typhoid again. And they says, you got to go back. You're sick. Because if you don't go back, other people might catch typhoid from you. 

I resisted with all my might. And I says, look what I went just through. I'm the only one that survived-- is alive from that group. If you're going to put me back, Althoff will come back and shoot me, for sure. I won't be that lucky for the second time. 

Well, they put me back, and it was to the fortune of my present wife, a girl that I knew in the camp, and she was working in the kitchen and she was bringing me food. And once I went through the-- the crisis, I was getting a little stronger. But believe it or not, being there three days in the block five, in that sick camp, a new selection was going to take place in the camp. There were rumors that there's going to be selection. Selection was that the camp commandant and the other SS men were staying and ordering all the prisoners to run. Those that couldn't run, that weren't strong enough, were taken out on the side, taken out, which was called the Bugaj Forest, and they were shot there. 

Believe me, I couldn't even walk, never mind run. I couldn't walk. But hearing the rumors that there is going to be a selection, I went over to the man that was in charge of the work kommando, Abraham Wilczek. And I cried and I begged them. I says, let me get out from here. Let me go to work. I want to go into the factory, go to work. 

He says, how can you go to work? You can't even walk. I says, well, you know what's going to happen. There's rumors there's going to be selection tonight, and if I stay here, I definitely will not be alive. You know they're going to shoot me, because I can't run and I can't hardly walk. 

So knowing what I went through-- and this friend of mine that saved my life before went over and he says, Abram, please. They we're begging with him, let him go to work. We will carry him. He can't walk, we'll carry him. And they carried me for two kilometers to the work, to work in the factory, the ammunition factory. 

Now, in the ammunition factory, everybody had on the site a-- a amount of work, what's called a quota, how much work you had to produce. When we came into the factory, I couldn't walk. I couldn't even stand. That's how weak I was. 

They went over to the foreman, which was a Pol, a civilian Pol, and they said, look, this man is sick, he's been working here before, he's a friend of ours. Let them just sit. Please, let them sit. We will all together do his quota, his work. Let him sit, and don't force him to work. 

And they told him what happened to me before. And he had pity on me, and he let me do that. And they, combined, did my work. 

When we came back the morning from the night shift and the morning to work, over 200 people were taken out and shot, those that were weak and that could not work. So if my friends wouldn't have helped me, at that night, I would have been with the selection. Now again, like I said before, I wasn't smarter, I wasn't stronger. There had to be something that were guarding, watching over me that wanted me to be alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you get your number? On your arm. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: In Auschwitz. That was after Starachowice was evacuated. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't put numbers on your arm in Starachowice? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: The only place where they put numbers was in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you go to Auschwitz? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: In 1944, when the camp of Starachowice was closed. 

[SNIFFLING] 

I was telling you about 1942. Then I got well enough to go to work. And like I said, this girl that was working in the kitchen was practically stealing food, bringing me, illegally, food so that I can get stronger, more than the normal ration. 

INTERVIEWER: Did she know you? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes, we met in the ghetto before we get in Starachowice, in the ghetto. And she was bringing me food, stealing food in the kitchen, bringing me, because the ration, what we were getting in the camp, I could never get strong enough to be well. And I continued to work and I got well, and I was in Starachowice and that camp until the camp of Starachowice was evacuated and we were sent to Auschwitz. So if hell in Starachowice was not enough, we-- now we came into the real hell in concentration camp of Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: You were two years in Starachowice. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: '42 to '44, right. 

INTERVIEWER: And daily life was just what you describe? You went to work at night, and you came back-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: 12 hours a day-- in a shift of 12 hours a day working. We came home, and got a little food and got a little clothing. We slept in barracks on a straw sack if you had one. Most of them slept without straw sacks, on straw sacks, just on the wooden benches, wooden bunks. 

INTERVIEWER: No variation? Summer, Winters? Nothing. Same thing. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: No. Same thing. We worked in the ammunition factory, Hermann Goring Werke, producing ammunition for the German war machine. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any attempt made by you or others to, I don't know, have any kind of other experience? Singing, reading, or anything-- learning. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: We did. We did try to keep our spirits high, and to survive. To live that day that we will be liberated. But in all honesty, nobody did believe inside that we will survive, that we will ever be-- 

Our prime-- what we were saying-- our daily saying was, I hope to live that day when I'll be able to slice bread and eat as much of bread as I want. There was no dream of anything else. Bread is what we were hoping. To be able to slice up enough bread, and to eat as much bread as you want. 

Family, of course, we didn't know. We knew that our parents were dead, because rumors now were coming in. And not only this, but clothing was coming in from the various concentration camps, from the people that were destroyed for us, the prisoners, those that were working. Daily selections were taking place of those that could not work, those that were not able, those that got weaker. 

It's-- again, Jews were able-- were allowed to live only for as long as they were able to work. Once they got weak, they were sent to their death. Selections were taking place quite often. It was-- the population kept on getting smaller, but then they were bringing in people from other camps, from other ghettos. 

INTERVIEWER: So after two years of this day-by-day existence, which is there was no cultural life, no organization life, no political life, nothing. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: No, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Just getting through the day. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Survival. Struggle for survival. 

INTERVIEWER: You were taken to Auschwitz. Do you remember the trip to Auschwitz? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Very well, yes. We left from Starachowice, evacuated from Starachowice in August, in one of the hottest day probably compared to what we have here now. We were put between 100 and 120 people in cattle trains. No water, no food. In fact, we didn't know where we're going. We were just put in those cattle trains, and departed. 

We thought for sure that we're going to be shot that we're going to there, because this was two days after we tried revolt in Starachowice. The only thing is we started a revolt against a company of German and Ukrainians with machine guns, with one pistol that we luckily got someplace. We managed to kill two Ukrainians. Our aim was to get to the towers, the guards at the towers, kill them, get the guns from them, break the fence, and for as many people-- hold off the Germans for as long as we can, and get as many people as possible out from the camp into the forest. 

INTERVIEWER: So Mr. Arbeiter, at the risk of contradicting you, you were doing other things when you were in those two years. You were plotting, you were scheming, you were trying to break out. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Well, this was part of survival. When you mentioned-- you said the political activities or other activities, no. Of course, everyone was thinking of how do you survive and how do you get out. 

This fellow by the name of Abraham Wilczek, who was my foreman at work, he was the leader in this group. He's the one that got the pistol. Of course, not everybody knew. There were very small group that knew about the revolt, because, you know, you had to be very restrict and worrying of what's going to happen, that the Germans don't know about it. 

But we succeeded in killing a couple of Ukrainians. Got their guns and broke the fence open, and let the people escape into the forest. But how much of a revolt can you start with one pistol against the German-- a company of Germans? 

INTERVIEWER: How did he get the pistol? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: My friend-- this friend of mine, Abraham Wilczek, got it through the-- from the Polish underground, I believe. We bought it from the Polish underground. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they get it into the camp? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: We were working outside the ammunition factory, and so we smuggled it into the camp. See, the factory, the ammunition factory was outside the camp. And we used to go out to work every day, and we smuggled that gun in. 

INTERVIEWER: So-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: When-- 

INTERVIEWER: So how long were you working on this plan of revolt? How many-- days? Weeks? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Well, the leadership was working, evidently, quite a while. I-- we were brought in, the people, just about the day before it started. In the morning, we were told that there is going to be a revolt today, and to be ready to fight and we-- if necessary, to die here, because for the past two days, we didn't go out to work anymore. We were told-- I mean, there were rumors that we will be-- that the camp will be evacuated. And so we figured, we might as well die here. 

And so in the morning, the revolt started. We shot the first guard, got his gun. Then we got the second guard. We broke the fence open, and people started to run through the opening into the woods. 

But within 15 minutes, within a half an hour, the Germans arrived with machine guns, with hand grenades, and there was just a massacre. They were shooting and killing everybody in sight. Everybody that was caught outside the fence, everybody that got out of the fence, was shot on the spot wherever they caught them. 

The ones that were in the camp-- and me being with the group that were in charge of the fence, of keeping the fence open and allowing the others to get out-- we just remained inside in the camp, and the next morning we were put into cattle trains, sealed up 

INTERVIEWER: How did they get you to the cattle trains? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Um, the cattle trains, there were a railroad station not far from the camp. We were marching there under guard, guards around. You know, they just ordered us, march to the trains. They ordered us, march. We didn't know where we going. They never told you where we going. 

They just ordered us, assemble in the place in the center of the camp, and we marched from there. And they were leaving us, and then we came to the railroad station and they-- we got into the cattle trains. And they sealed the trains, and the trains took off. 

Two days and two nights later, we wind up on the ramp in-- which we know was Auschwitz. But at that time, we didn't even know where we going, where we're arriving. We know that we're arriving in Auschwitz. And when we knew that we were in Auschwitz, and after the revolt, we knew definitely that we're all going into the gas chambers. 

[SNIFFLING] 

And there we met-- the first time we knew about Dr. Mengele, who performed the selection on the railroad station. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people survived that cattle car ride in that heat? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Uh, let me see. There was about-- about 400 died on the way. We left about 2000 of us. I understand about 400 died on the way through the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Anyone die in your box car? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. Yeah. There were many deaths in every boxcar, because there was-- people were choking to death. Those that were near the doors, near the walls could try and breath in a little air. Those that were in the middle of the train were suffocating, because there was no air there. So we-- those being near the walls, if there was a crack in the wall, you just kept your mouth to that crack and trying to inhale some air, whatever came, especially at night. 

When we arrived in Auschwitz, we were met there by Dr. Mengele, who performed the selection, as he did many others. Doctor Mengele, as you know, was with the-- pointing with one fingers, was decided who was to live and who was to die. 

INTERVIEWER: How? How was he pointing? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: He was staying in one side, and coming up from the cattle trains. We lined up, and he was just staying like this and he was pointing, left, right. We didn't-- at that time, you didn't know which one's-- which one left to live, which one left to die. He knew, and it was just the SS men was staying there. 

So let's say a father and a mother, or brother and sister, or brother and brother were walking together. And here, one was pointed this way, and one, he was pointed the other way. And if you tried to jump over the other way and be together with them, although you didn't know whether it was to live or to die, you weren't allowed. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear any whistling? Some people say he whistled when he did this. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Very possible. I don't remember that, but I just know that this finger just walking by and he pointed directions. And then the column that I was directed to, we didn't know which is going to be which. 

After my column was assembled, we were ordered to march, and those were the longest-- we took us only about 15 minutes to march from the ramp to the camp, but those were probably the longest 15 minutes of my life, because we were marching between two lines of high voltage wires, and then direction of the crematoriums [INAUDIBLE] of the gas chambers. I mean, you could see the chimney, the gas chamber, and the smoke coming off from the gas chambers. And we were marching in that direction. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know what that-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Oh yes. Yes. Yes, I knew. I mean, we-- we were told before, and there were rumors. And we knew when we arrived there, and we knew that people were being gassed and burned in Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: That people are just being-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say about that smoke that you were seeing? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: In Auschwitz? Well, the Germans on the ramp didn't tell us anything. Afterwards, we find out what it is. The only thing is they told us, the only way out from here is through the chimney. 

On arrival in Auschwitz, on the door, on the main entrance was a word which says, arbeit macht frei, which means work makes free. But then we were told that the only way to be free, the only way you can come out of here is through the chimney. And they say, see the smoke coming out there? This is the only way you can come out from here. 

And so, like I said, when we're walking, and you walking in the direction of the gas chambers and saw that smoke and flames come out, the only thing you were thinking of that it's only a matter of time, and you will wind up there. And we were walking in that direction and into the place known-- which we again heard about-- the shower rooms, where you were to wash, you know, wash up and clean up. 

We did there. But fortunate-- and again, I don't know why. Nobody knows. I mean, you couldn't tell why. Our group was ordered after washing up-- where most of the groups were ordered after going through the shower, they were ordered into the gas chambers, our group was ordered out through the other side. We were given striped uniforms and ordered to the-- what was called that time Zigeunerlager, a gypsy camp or quarantine camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it a real shower? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. It was a real shower, and we-- although we didn't have any hair, but the hair were cut, and we're given uniforms. And-- and giving-- putting into the quarantine or the gypsy camp. 

We were put into blocks. There was nothing there, no beds, nothing. Was just stone floors, and that's where we were laying. 

The second night-- now, in the gypsy camp, there was another experience. In the camp that was called the gypsy camp, over there were gypsies living with the whole families, men, women, and children. And they were treated pretty good. They were given good food, and they were all together. 

The second night that we were there, in the middle of the night, we heard roaring trucks and yelling of the Sonderkommando, and the yelling and screaming of children. Well, I-- I just don't know how to describe this, the horror and the feeling. The only thing that I could grab to was the cement floor that I was laying on, because we just looking at the direction of the door, when our door was open, open up, we knew that this is something, that they're taking the people into the gas chambers. But of course, we didn't know who, whether it's the gypsies or us. 

The screaming and yelling, and the shooting outside, was beyond imagination. Like I said, I was just holding onto the cement floor, and looking whether our door doesn't open up and-- and they don't come for us. 

This was going on practically through-- through the whole night, screaming of children, and women, and men. And then-- this was going on practically the whole night, and then it's quiet down until it was quiet completely. You didn't hear the roaring of the trucks and the screaming of the people anymore. So we understood that they took the gypsies, and hoping that we will be spared, at least for the time being. And so it was. 

At daybreak, in the morning-- in the night, nobody was supposed to walk in the camp. Anybody found outside the barrack was automatically shot. We come out in the morning from our barracks into the camp, and we had saw that all the gypsies were taken away to the gas chambers, gassed, and cremated. And so we were now the occupants of the gypsy camp, what was called the gypsy camp, the quarantine camp. 

But we knew it's only a matter of time. Today they took the gypsies, tomorrow they might come and take us. But it took us quite a while to get over the shock and that horror. 

I'm trying to, but it's just-- just unbelievable how can one describe a horror night, a night of that, when they taking away thousands of people, men, women, and children in the most horrified way, putting them on trucks and taking them into the gas chambers. 

We were there on that quarantine camp for about a week, doing nothing, until-- and given very little food. Then one day, they came over from another field, which called Day camp, D camp, and taking out people that could work, that were able to work. And they took me and my two brothers over to the day camp, and assigned to a kommando called the Seligebetrebe] which was taking apart airplanes which were brought into to the camp from the battlefield. There were all kinds of airplanes, English, German, American planes shot down. And we were working there 12 hours a day, with very little food. It was horrible. 

INTERVIEWER: You were always with your brothers? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: In Auschwitz, I was with my brothers. Yes. I was then assigned to a different kommando, but until-- uh-- September-- October of 1944, I was with my brothers. And then, as the Russian army was approaching, we were taken out. 

I was assigned to a kommando was called-- which called Rovargen or Canalrangis We were cleaning the, excuse my expression, the toilets. And so I had the fortune or misfortune of coming into the gas chambers, the crematorium, and seeing what was happening there. When we came in, you saw the mountains of bones of people off a transport that just came in that arrived before. A mountain of clothing, a mountain of shoes. 

They were bringing us into the camp-- into the crematoriums to clean out the gas chambers after a-- after a transport was gassed. You see, the gas chambers there, unless you get somebody from the Sonderkommando, very few people ever came into the-- or are alive that were in the gas chambers or in the crematoriums. 

I was in the gas chamber, in the crematorium, after a transport was liquidated or killed, after the people were exterminated there. They were putting in the gas chambers-- there were four crematoriums and gas chambers in Birkenau, Auschwitz. They were putting in about 2,000 people at once in the gas chambers, locking the doors. And Sergeant Moll, Scharführer Moll, was in charge of throwing the gas in, Cyclone B. Took about seven minutes, and the people were dead. 

But the thing is, when they were putting the people into the gas chambers, the people, the 2000 people were pressed like sardines, one against the other, and then the doors were locked. When they opened up the gas chambers, after the 15 minutes-- after seven minutes of killing process, of 15 minutes of airing out the gas chambers, the gas chambers were only 1/3 full and 2/3 empty. What happened is that in one corner of the gas chambers, all the bodies were piled up. The floor was full of blood. That's what we came in to clean up the floors afterwards. 

What that-- which meant that the people were fighting in there for their lives, struggling. Those that were closer to the places where the gas would come in died much sooner, but the ones that were further away from it, took them longer. And so for them to trying to gasp for air or to save themselves, one was climbing the top of the other. And so therefore, you could see, after opening the gas chambers, that only 1/3 of the gas chambers was with bodies and 2/3 of it was empty. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have to remove the bodies? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: The Sonderkommander did that. There was a special commander for that, that removed the bodies to the crematoriums, which were upstairs, on special-- on a special conveyor. The bodies were burned there, and the ashes put outside, which we saw the bones and the ashes outside in the yard. We were taken into the gas chambers to clean out the floors, to wash up the blood, and everything else. 

[CLEARING THROAT] 

And so we saw everything, from a transport from people that were alive just a while ago, we saw the bones, and the ashes, and the clothing, and the blood on the floor. And-- this is-- this is what I was working in Auschwitz, until October 1944. 

And then as the Russian army was getting closer, we were-- Auschwitz was evacuated. I was probably among the first ones-- my kommando was among the first ones that was evacuated and sent to Stutthof, near Danzig. Another horror camp. 

This is where I had to part with my brothers. My older brother contacted a disease in Auschwitz. And he was put in the Krankenbau, and I never thought I'll see him again. Fortunate, I'm-- he is alive, and I saw him after the war. 

We were sent from there to Stutthof. Stutthof was probably even a worse camp than Auschwitz. We arrived there in October-- November, in the fall. This is near the seaport of Danzig, in Poland. 

The weather is very cold there, and raw. We didn't have any winter clothing, and you were not allowed in the barracks during the day. Only at night you could come in to sleep. During the day, we were staying outside in the yard, and very little of work, and very little food. People were dying there like flies. 

I was there till, uh-- uh, November, I believe, or December of 1944. From there, I was sent to a-- into Germany, to a airfield-- to work on an airfield in Kaufungen, not far from Stuttgart. There was an out on the airfield, which had, um-- uh, night fighters placed on it, to protect the city of Stuttgart. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your other brother with you? Your younger-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: No. I was-- there were-- I didn't know about my brothers. I was separated from them there. 

And we were-- our job was maintenance of the airfield, in Stuttgart. 

INTERVIEWER: What condition were you in, at this point? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Uh, very bad condition. I was struggling and waiting-- but the only good thing about that was that it was '44 and we saw, for the first time, we saw the war already being carried to Germany. 

One night-- this is one night that I think add more strength to me and to my friends than all the food that we received in the previous years in Germany. That was the night of bombing of Germany. I think there's a special name for it in the history of bombing of Germany. 5,000 bombers-- we learned about it later-- were bombing Germany. And Stuttgart was one of them-- in one of their path, and so we saw that the city of Stuttgart was in flames. From there, everything was burning. 

And that added strength to us, because we did see that the war is getting closer to Germany, and that there is hope. That if we came out of Auschwitz, that there is hope and a chance. This is was, for the first time, we're thinking that there is hope and a chance that we might be alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know where your brothers were? Were you worried about that? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: I was worried about them very much, but I did not know, and there was no way of knowing. There was no communication. The only thing he knows about the people that you were with in that camp, and again, there, people were dying like flies. 

Uh-- every day, they was so weak, and their bodies were-- you just woke up in the morning, and your next friend that was laying next to you in the bunk was dead. You pushed him, wanting to get up. He was dead. Um-- there wasn't even a place or enough time to bury the bodies. We just piled them up in back, near the fans in the camp, and that's where they were laying. 

INTERVIEWER: You cleaned out the crematoria, the-- 

BOTH: Gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER: What did-- what has that left you with? How did you absorb that experience? How did you handle it? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: In the most sickening way-- it's-- again, it's something of an emotion, something of a feeling that you can't even describe, that you can't put in-- on film or on paper. You know, I-- I was speaking-- being a past president, founder of an organization in Boston of the survivors, I did many speaking on the Holocaust, and I still do. And I say one thing, there is-- and I've seen films and I've seen books about the Holocaust, and things that I have seen myself. And I keep saying that there is not a writer, a producer, a director that can put the actual happenings of the Holocaust, either on paper or on film. 

We have all seen the film Holocaust. In fact, I was invited by a local station, by station 4, to comment, and I was on channel 4 after the Holocaust. And I said, there-- there is no-- you just can't describe it. The film Holocaust has shown a very small fragment of what actually happened. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you-- what did you feel when you were doing this duty? Why did you-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: I-- I know what I'm doing. I know that I'm cleaning up after maybe my parents, or my close friends, or my neighbors. The only thing that sticked in my mind is to fight on, to survive, to carry on the life, Jewish life, and the life of my family. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think that then? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes 

INTERVIEWER: That's what you thought. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. Those were the last words of my father before they took him away. He said, children, you go on and try to do everything possible to survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever experience people-- as they were-- you were so close to these gas chambers, to these transports. Did you ever experience people singing or praying on their way to their death? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. Yes. There were people that were singing, that were praying. 

[SNIFFLING] 

In all honesty-- uh, you or maybe other people might not agree with me-- I am not of that-- I didn't believe in that. I did not believe in dying of Kiddush hashem My belief was to die-- I believed in what Churchill said. If you have to go, take one with you. 

My feeling was always that nobody should have died just of Kiddush hashem or to go with a song. This was a matter of dying for the only reason, for the only crimes that we have committed, is because we were born Jews. We have committed no other crimes. 

INTERVIEWER: How would you have taken someone? Did you have a plan? Did you have a thought of how you-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: I always had a thought in my life, in my mind, that if it'll come to the minute, the moment of anybody taking my life, that I will try, with whatever I can-- either with my bare hand, or whatever I can-- to take the life of the one that is taking my life. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think that you would be strong enough? After all, you were very weak now. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: I was hoping. I was hoping that I will be. I knew that this is not going to change the course of the war, or the course of the German extermination of the Jews, but this was my-- my way of thinking. And I did not agree with those that were singing on the way to death. They were-- I've seen in Auschwitz, I've seen group go on to their death, to the crematoriums, with songs on their lips. 

INTERVIEWER: What kind of song? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Uh, especially I saw a Greek group singing Greek songs. I saw a group going singing Hebrew songs. Uh-- I suppose everyone has their own way of thinking, their own way of feeling, their own way of living, their own way of dying. My way of living and dying was different. 

INTERVIEWER: I-- we have-- I wanted to ask you-- I only have one more minute, I guess. I wanted to ask you about young men, strong young men-- they may have been weakened, but strong young men-- not wanting to break out, doing anything to escape, risking-- because young men in good circumstances do rambunctious things. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Well, this is a chapter by itself. You can't say-- you can't talk about this in one minute. If you will ask me, in general, about the resistance and the will of resist, and why there wasn't more resistance, then-- then we have to go in-- in the-- into a little deeper Jewish life in Europe. Uh, Jewish preparedness, the young people's preparedness. 

INTERVIEWER: I meant to escape. Not even resistance, escape. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes. There-- there again, this is the chapter-- we-- many people did escape. But the chances of success was so small, not only by escaping the Germans, but escaping the Pols, the Polish population, which was out hunting-- head hunting for Jews. Any Jews, you know, that-- you know, there was a-- in Poland, there was a prize for a Jewish head, a pound of sugar and a bottle of vodka. So any Pol that did catch a Jew escaping from a concentration camp and delivered them to the Germans, he got a prize of a pound of sugar and a bottle of vodka. And this was a big prize for them, for a life, for human life. So now if somebody escaped from the camp, if he was successful to escape the Germans, so now we had to cope with the Polish population, which by and large, and I would say 90% of them were out hunting Jews. 

Secondly, now if you were successful enough and succeeded in escaping the population, the hunters, the head hunters, and got into the forest, where could you go? You couldn't take a chance hiding in a private home. So you aim was to get to the forest and join the partisans. Now here, if you get to the forest, you will-- you have to be again lucky and join the partisans, which were favorable to the Jews. 

You know, were two groups of partisans. There was the-- the Armia Krajowa and the Armia Ludowa, which was called. The-- the Armia Ludowa accepted those-- that was the socialist partisans, which accepted Jews. The others, the Armia Krajowa, or the Republicans, if they caught a Jew, they shot him right there. So now if you were successful in escaping the Germans, in escaping the headhunters, and you came into the forest and you were lucky joining one of the partisans, and you figured here I can get a gun and go back and fight against the Germans, you were shot, because they said you are an enemy of theirs, just like the Germans are. So your odds of escaping were very, very slim. 

INTERVIEWER: [SIGHS] Are we out of time? No. One last question, quickly. The New Americans, the reason you chose that name. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: All right. We came-- most of us came to the United States-- let's say those that settled in Boston in 1949 and in 1950, we came under the Truman Act of the 100,000 DP's allowed in the United States. When we arrived here, we had nobody. Most of us didn't have anybody, and we were strange to the country. We were grateful to the country, to the United States for giving us the opportunity, for letting us in, and giving us a new life. But we were strange, everything was strange to us. We didn't know the language, we didn't have jobs, and here, we need something to help one another. We were like blind people and leading the blind, or lame people not being able to walk. And here, we got together and we decided, how can we work together and help one another? And so we decided to form a society, an association. I was the founder, or a founder of the organization. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you pick the name, New Americans? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: This is what I'm getting to. We were new Americans. We came to the country, to America, and we were new. We were new Americans. We were thinking of different names, and so we said, why not name it New Americans Association. Some people were thinking that we call it New America, that we want to cause a revolution here and change America. It is new-- the New Americans Association. 

INTERVIEWER: But you never thought of identifying yourself as survivors? Of the holocaust? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: Yes, we did, in our charter, in our constitution. 

INTERVIEWER: But your name, the name. 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: The name was New Americans, new-- new arrivers, newcomers. 

We had many things under consideration, yes. Holocaust survivors, it was a very unpopular name at that time. It was something to be ashamed of, I don't know. 

After organization was founded and being the president, and I was the representative and delegate to the Jewish Community Council, I had many a fights here in Boston and the Jewish Community Council, because the word of the Holocaust, sadly to say, was a no-no. You were not supposed to mention that name. I have fights with those people on many occasion. I was called a bad boy at the Jewish Community Council, because my prime interest was representing the survivors, and the mentioned the name of the Holocaust. But it was a very unpopular thing. You wasn't supposed to talk about this. 

You had a man here before this morning, which I met, Cantor Shalken He was one of the people that I contacted to form a-- to organize a Yom HaShoah, a remembrance day, which the community didn't want to have anything to do with. We ourselves organized a Remembrance Day for the survivors of the Holocaust. We hired a temple, we had the rabbi, the rabbi that was in Germany with the survivors, that was helping survivors, Rabbi Shubov 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't people-- why did the mention of the name turn? 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: They just said, you survived. You're an American now. Forget your past. Forget it, what happened. Let's not speak about it. 

Somehow we couldn't get it through their-- through to them that it is of great importance, that should be remembered, that should be spoken about. That this is something that should be going from generation to generation for the purpose that it must never happen again. It must never happen, not only to Jews, it must never happen to anybody. 

The Holocaust must be a teaching for the world, that it should never happen again. And this is what we're trying to say from the very first day that we came here, but nobody wanted to listen. And so we ourselves, the small group that we were, we were growing and growing with the new arrivals of new people, and we kept the Holocaust teaching and the speaking of the Holocaust alive due to the many obstacles in the community. We had many obstacles in the community, but we carried through the fight. And I'm happy to say that, today, the Holocaust is popular, the teaching of the Holocaust, the speaking of the Holocaust is popular. 

I was told at many meetings of the Jewish Commander Council, if the survivors, if the New Americans want to speak about their past of the Holocaust, let them do it. We don't have to get involved with them. That was by presidents of the various organizations, by presidents of presidents. They wanted us to forget about things, and we were fighting to carry this on, to remember, to bring it to the world's attention, not to let anybody forget about us. 

INTERVIEWER: Did it make you angry to think-- 

ISRAEL ARBEITER: It did make us-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. I'm sorry we're out of tape, but I am so grateful for you to say all of what you just said. 

