ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: It just, all I know, blood was coming on my-- uh, my neck. And I just was tied down and looking and looking. And I feeling weaker and weaker and weaker. And I just, I didn't even want to talk, just tried to hold on, what-- uh, uh, whatever will happen to me, just hold on and try to force my two hand, tighten it. And, and, uh, just waiting. And all of a sudden, I felt dizzy and dizzier. And when I came to myself-- 

DORI LAUB: Tell me, did you feel pain? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: No, that knife cut, I felt like, you know, sharp knife cut. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where did they cut you? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: On my neck. 

LAUREL VLOCK: They cut your neck? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Cut my neck. And when I came to myself, I was with white stuff bandaged up here and weak. I hardly could move. I m-- moved on. And a couple haftling and they call it, uh, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: But there was no anesthesia? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: No. No, I didn't feel any-- there-- there-- I saw everything, what happened. 

DORI LAUB: Did you scream? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: No, I was afraid to scream. I was a strong, very strong boy and I, I could take but-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: How old were you? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Uh, f-- before 1940-- four is four-- about 18, 19, or 20, something like that. And, uh-- 

DORI LAUB: In such a moment, a person usually thinks of something. What did you think of while they were doing that to you? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I just was praying. I, I, I had a-- a little bit, you know, I-- came to me, uh, uh, what we used to say, always learning in Hebrew school, chazak, you know. It's a word means strength and courage. And I, I kept that to myself. And I just, eh, praying to myself and hoping everything will be all right. And I stayed like this. He came to see me. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: The, uh, this Oberstumbann-- Dr. Klein. After that, once or twice, I don't exactly remember, all I know, one day, this has happened exactly era of Rosh Hashanah. I know because I was praying. I had a little book, a little siddur, which I was hidden. Somebody gave it to me. That today is era of Rosh Hashanah and was a selektion 

They took 95% or maybe more, away everybody. They put 'em on a truck. I got scared and I-- there was three bunk beds there. And I was so skinny. And I crawl-- crawl under that bunk bed. And I stayed there until everybody-- they took every-- you know, the selektion, everybody took, they took out. And when it qui-- everything quiet down. 

Because there's a lot of commotion and screaming, yelling. When it's everything was over, I put-- I crawled out of that, uh, bunk bed and I looked around. It's-- practically every-- almost everybody's gone. They took them with their big trucks. And you could, at half an hour or an hour later, you could really see the chimney is burning. And that terrible odor, that greasy burning odor and that smell, that blue and red fire, you could see from the chimney. I don't know how I came to myself and I stayed there for a few more days. 

DORI LAUB: Did they bring back anything? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: They brought back, I s-- there, the trucks came back with the shoes and clothing and they dumped it back. They brought it back. And I recognized a couple people's-- the shoes. Their name was Polacks. They come from around from that area where I come from. That was their name, Polack. Pola-- two cousins, was it? Brothers? I don't know exactly. But these people went with this group. 

And then I stayed a coup-- uh, a few more days, I don't know if it was four, five days or maybe more there. And they let me out to my coun-- to my group, to my barrack where I stayed, I think it was 16. My barrack was 16, which was facing the kitchen. You could see when we stayed in zahlappell, we could see the kitchen in front of us. 

One day, I witnessed-- I don't know exactly when was that-- but this was there after the operation-- hanging. They brought in, I don't know, five, six, or seven, they caught. And they hanged them in the front of us. And they was telling us, if any one of us will want to even-- we'll exec-- try to run away or escape, that exactly what will happened to us. We'll be hanged like those over here. 

But as the days was, uh, all cooler, got cooler and I was start to feel the cold. I went a few more day, a few more times into-- with Muhlfuhrer Kommando to work. But I start to freeze cold. And one day, I said to my friend, I'm freezing. I can't take it. What shall I do? Because this is outside work. 

He says, you know what? I work in a factory they call DRV. We work inside in this factory. We're making Red Cross bunk beds for the rail cars. Maybe you will work there, you will feel warm. I said, OK. And I stepped in in that group to march-- to march out from that-- from the camp. As I was marching out, they counted, each group, how many goes out. And with one, was more. 

So the c-- uh, the f-- commander of the, uh, f-- the group commander said, the one who stepped in this group should step out. And the SS man stayed right there. And first I didn't want to get out. I, I, didn't know what I should do. I looked at my friend. And my friend looked at me. 

And then he says, if you don't-- the one who stepped in wouldn't get out-- uh, wouldn't step out, everything tenth will be shot. So again, we looked at each other and my friend says, I'm sorry, you have to get out. And I know, I'm sorry, but you-- uh, I know what you're going to get for this. 

And right away came, you know, that I'm going to get the hanging for this. Because anyone considered-- uh, that's what came to my mind as, uh, that I went to the escape. So I, I, stepped in aside. And immediately they put me between the-- on the left-hand side, between the double barbed wire, uh, which I will show. Uh, I have a picture or I sh-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Yes, you have a-- [INAUDIBLE] 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: From the New York Times. 

LAUREL VLOCK: So, it's, I think it's the next other picture. 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: The New Y-- I took out from The New York Times. 

LAUREL VLOCK: No, it's the other p-- 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: What d-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: No, the other page next to it. 

DORI LAUB: Carefully. Why don't you tell us what-- what you happened when you saw the-- 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: [INAUDIBLE] 

DORI LAUB: --The New York Times. 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Yes. I went in-- in June 8th I went to services in the synagogue. And then when I came out, I went to a nearest supermarket to buy something. And I happened to look on the paper, newspaper, and I noticed a picture which I immediately recognized. And my blood run through my system. I freezed in that moment. And a terrible, uh, terrible feeling. 

I f-- I felt the whole world is-- the whole sky is falling down on me. I was speechless. I didn't know, just staring at that picture, that I recognized that picture immediately. And this picture, I recognized where I was exactly when I was marching out that morning. And I was put between the barbed wires on the left-hand side. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Could you hold the picture up for the camera and explain what it is? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: This is the gate from Auschwitz Arbeitslager, which it said in the top "arbeit macht frei." And that's exactly what I was doing, staring at it for an hour or two in that snow, tiny, s-- thin uniform, freezing, But I'd hold myself together until the, uh, the whole group marched out. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What was that picture of? What is that picture of? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: This picture is the gate from Auschwitz. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Right, but who's there? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Right now the, as you could see, the Pope-- the Pope went to visit this place in June 8. And I rec-- as I said, I recognized, uh, immediately this gate. 

DORI LAUB: The place where the Pope was praying-- 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Where he was praying-- 

DORI LAUB: --or the place where you were punished? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: --and came to visit. And I, from-- when this-- when the group mar-- uh, marched out to work, they took me in to the guard house, on the right-hand side was a room where the guards used to stay at post. And they told me, undress myself completely. They laid me down on a-- on a table. And the SS officers said in German, 

Fuenf und zwanzig, [German] 

And they laid me down. They had that rubber, uh, stick, uh, and I got three or four or five, excuse me, I passed out. They-- I was bruised from my head all the way-- All I know, when I came to myself, they poured cold water on me and I came to myself. I just didn't know what happened to me. I was dizzy, weak, and two other haftling and hold me both side carried me to another room until the rest of the kommandos came back from work. They took me back to my, uh, for, uh, s-- for zahlappell to my barrack. And then came-- 

DORI LAUB: What did you think, seeing the Pope praying in that place? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Uh-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: The other picture. 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: The Pope-- 

DORI LAUB: No, what did you think, seeing the photo? 

LAUREL VLOCK: What did you think when you saw that picture? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: When I s-- uh, s-- I, when I saw the Pope there, it was-- I f-- I felt, in that moment when I looked to read this, I felt good about that. Uh, at least they finally, they recognized that there was such a terrible thing happened. There is a lot of people didn't want to believe what happening, what did really took place. But now, at-- at-- at least somebody came and showed the world that there was a terri-- what a terrible thing happened there. 

And this should never, never, never should happen again. Uh, and I'm very glad that a Pope in a high office like that came and s-- saw and prayed and uh, where that six million our kaddishim died with my own parents, my sister, and my-- about nine of my immediate family. 

LAUREL VLOCK: You said-- 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I have-- I live a terrible life since this. Since I was liberated, I haven't got a formal-- one moment of rest at night, terrible, terrible dreams. Awful, that terrible odor. I, after this operation, I lost my sense of smell, my taste. I have instantly trouble since that. I, many times, I can't speak. My nerves close up. And I, I don't want anybody should bother me or I don't want to bother anybody. I, the, my whole nervous system is-- 

DORI LAUB: You're frightened? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: --completely frightened and shut, from here on, from my hip on, I'm ice cold, I'm freezing, summer, winter, all that time. My two legs, I can't, uh, pick up-- many times, my legs are stiff. I don't know how I got-- but I have this and my stomach, terrible, terrible, uh, pain, cramps, heartburn. And this-- my-- uh, the nerves in my neck, I feel like I would-- a lock would c-- locks up on me and I can't talk. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you know what they did to you when they-- What did they do? What were they doing? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I, I don't know. I wanted to-- after the war, I wanted to go for a witness. They ask any witnesses from the-- World Jewish Congress was calling people to go for, uh, testify against, uh, the criminals. And I went there. And they asked the name who did it. And I tell them, it was Dr. Klein. He was an Oberstumbannfuhrer and they looked up the, uh, record and they told me that he was executed by the-- by the British High Command and his first name was F-- Fritz Kl-- Dr. Fritz Klein, Dr. Fritz Klein. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you know why he cut you there? Did he tell you? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I don't know, honestly. I don't know. All I know, I was a healthy, strong boy before I went. I was home. I was very athletic, any kind of sports. I was a soccer player. All k-- I was in everything. I don't know, after that I lost all my-- I was 68, I think, 68 pounds for the liberation. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What happened to your finger? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: This, uh, no, it's nothing. It didn't happen there. And all I-- 

DORI LAUB: How were you liberated? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I had a very terrible liberation. In January 18, 1945, the Russians was approaching Auschwitz. My trouble just begin at that time. We had to start marching in the front line, two days, two nights. And the one who couldn't march, didn't have the strength, they were shooting them, both sides. From Auschwitz-- from Auschwitz through Breslau, it was a graveyard. 

People crying, screaming, yelling, please don't shoot me, in German, in Yiddish, in all kind of languages, I want to live. Please help me. Crying out for God, help me. It was-- there was no-- there was no, uh, uh, the Germans, they was-- instantly, they shoot them in the back and they left them right in that snow. When we arrived in Breslau, they put us in the cattle cars. In that cattle cars, they pushed us about 130. We went in. They pushed us, they push the g-- they put the lock on it. 

And we went from there to Gross-Rosen. We stayed in Gross-Rosen, I think for two days. One day they took me into the-- there was a stone, uh, dig big rocks in the mines. We worked that day. We hardly-- we didn't eat. We came back. And again, they put us in the railroad cars. And we went to Dachau. As we arrived in Dachau, I was sitting there on the top of the dead. There was people dying from bruises and from hunger. Or-- and when we arrived in Dachau, I slide down. 

And the rest of the people, you see how tall-- how tall the death was in that c-- car, in the railroad cars. As we was marching in to Dachau concentration camp, I was on the left-hand side marching. And an SS-- somehow I turned my face, I'm looking, uh, in what's ha-- what's-- what's hap-- you know, what kind of camp it is. He stretched his hand out. He gave me a s-- a, a slap in the face, such a slap in the face, my chin went out of co-- my-- I couldn't talk. The whole chin went out of the joint. 

I went into-- they took us into Dachau. The people was lying all over, all over was laying dead, full of louse crawling all over. And sure enough, next morning I get up, I was full of thousands of louse, uh, you know, uh, uh, uh, on me. And my friend of mine next to me, I said get up. We have st-- get up for zahlappell. He was dead. I look under the other bed. That one was dead. 

I don't know how-- where I took that strength. I went in the wash-- wash-- in a wash room where they had those, you know, the, uh, water come through the shower, uh, the cold shower. And I tried to scrape off all the-- all the louse from my body. And I keep going back and washing myself. I stayed there I don't know exactly how long or it-- it must be a short period of time because the American side was so close by already. 

They took us from there to a place, uh, from Dachau-- from Dachau was around Landsberg. Lansberg m-- uh, they claim there was a few, uh, uh, more than one, two, and three l-- lager. But anyway, I don't know exactly-- I know I was there. But I can't remember. I can't remember exactly the detail. But I know I was there. And the list came, I was-- it was Kaufering. Kauf-- uh, oh, I'm sorry, I forgot, I was in Muhldorf. From Au-- from Dachau they took me-- I forgot it, they took us to Muhldorf. In Muhldorf-- 

DORI LAUB: What about the liberation? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: It was before the liberation. 

DORI LAUB: What happened in the foll-- during the liberation? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: During the liber-- uh, liberation? Well, they put us in, uh, railroad cars. But I have to tell you this, uh, uh, uh, Kaufering. Because this is a terrible thing happened there. In Kaufer-- from Muhldorf, they took us to Kaufering. I mean, at Landsberg, from Landsberg to-- and Kaufering was the last. And from Kaufering, over there I saw the worst kind of thing you could possibly see. 

Human beings eating from dead people. The m-- from this part of the hip part was eating. There was no food. And I ate this-- the grass I was eating. And some-- I got a hold of some-- from the tree, the skin from the tree, instead to eat that flesh. And people was flying, the dead are all over the place. And I felt already I'm getting weak, weaker and weaker. And I keep going back in the wash room in, uh, Kaufering, wash myself in cold water. 

And one early morning, they put us be-- Kaufering was between two big, uh, woods, uh, forest, like a forest. And, uh, anyone who was alive, they wanted to put in, they wanted to take us somewhere, they claim to the Die Rhon mountains somewhere to sh-- machine gun us down in a lake, something, I don't know. Uh, that's what, uh, was the rumors. 

Anyway, when all-- all the haftling that was in-- in that-- in the-- in the rail-- in the-- in the cattle cars, they locked the doors on us. And four jets arrived that early morning. And they knocked out the locomotive. They couldn't take us nowhere. So what happened? Somehow one of the cattle cars, they broke out. First they, when this flieger-- uh, --alarm was-- all the SS men run into the woods. There was no SS men. 

So one of the, uh, cars, somehow they broke out. And they helped to open up the rest of it, uh, railroad cars, too. And happened to be, I went out, I g-- jumped out from there, too. I was so weak. Anyway, next to-- it was the-- next to the, uh, the-- the locomotive was a supply, uh, wagon where the conserves was. 

And anyway, we run into the woods. And as you'd be run to the woods, everybody run into the woods. I, somehow, I cl-- God gave me brains, I should try to-- because the branches was so low and those, you know, like Christmas trees. I climbed up or I crawled up and I stayed under tree holding on with my arm. The whole tree was-- 

And that day on, I stayed there for an hour or so. I was very comfortable. Branch next to the main-- uh, next to the tree branch, you know, holding on. And stayed there. And all of a sudden, I'd say a couple hours, maybe an hour or an hour and a half later, uh, machine gun is, uh, working under the tree. You could hear the machine gun fire. 

And there I see under my tree, SS soldiers with the, uh, sh-- the shepherd-- German shepherd dogs going around and circling around the-- the whole woods, circled around anyone who they could catch up that could be al-- alive and tried to take them back to the-- to the railroad. I stayed on that tree all night long. Uh, the-- there was such a big, uh, uh, uh, fight went on between the Americans and the Germans. 

I was caught in the crossfire between the two, uh, battle, between the two, uh, uh, armies. The whole sky was red and-- and blue. And the whole tree was shaking with me, under me, the machine guns over my head. The bullets, you could hear whispering, psh, psh, all left and right, the bullets. And I just hold on to that tree and, and saying the Shema, uh, you know, praying and praying until about day break. 

Then I somehow, I don't know, I-- where I took the strength. I fall down of I crawled down and I tried to get out from that, uh, under the tree and I see a pasture. And I see people running. I even see soldiers running and throwing their guns away. So I went through that from this wood and through a pasture to another pasture and then a woods and entered the woods. 

I stayed there for a while until I looked out, I saw a barn there. And this barn, I went into that barn. There was hay, uh, bales of hay. And I laid down. I don't know what happened. I passed out. And I stayed there. I don't know, what was a-- what time it was. All I know, I just stayed there until I get up. I came to myself. I look outside. I looked back in the pasture. There was a little brook there. And I see two haftling in both in stripe uniform walking. 

LAUREL VLOCK: What's a haftling? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Uh, prisoners. Oh, I forgot that, uh-- of something else. I forgot already. But, all right, when I saw these two men. I said, uh, yelled after them, wait for me. I went after them. And they waited for me. I said are we free? He says, one was from Vienna, one boy, and that one was from Hosty, Czechoslovakia. He says, I think so, because everything is quiet and no shooting. 

So we went to a town, the nearest town. They call a Schwabhausen. And we came to a outside town there. Ah, uh, we went to a--- into a farmer to give us something to eat. And he was frightened. He says, get out of here! If they catch you here, they're going to not just kill-- shoot you, they shoot me too. Get out of here. You get out here. And we had to-- we went out. We run out. 

And we ran around his far-- farm and we went-- we went back to the-- where the cows stayed, you know. And we laid down where the cows was eating. You know, they had that, uh, I don't know how they call that, where they feed the cows. And we stayed there. We covered ourself with hay and straw, whatever it was, and stayed there. And about, uh, in the morning, we heard a lot of commotion, yelling and noise. 

So we did get up. And we look outside, we went, what's going on? And that's the time, we saw the first time, a, a tank who had five stars on it. And this German who chased us out. He right away run to this American soldier telling that he was hiding us, he was helping us. But we was speechless. We couldn't speak English. We didn't under-- uh, you know, we couldn't help. We was just thankful to see somebody. 

Well, at first I thought it's Russians. I never knew the Americans have also five star. That's the symbol as-- and then we went back in that barn, laid down in the straw, on the floor there. We laid there. Then later on, uh, the American soldiers came. They throw some-- I think they was throwing us some candy bars or whatever it is. And the American soldiers start screaming, yelling at the Germans. 

This happened to-- uh, eh, you-- how did, eh, you people-- what kind of people you are? Animals. And this and that, yelling, telling the Germans, why don't you go and take them to the, uh, to the Red Cross house and do something. Give them something. So they brought us some, uh, eggs. We didn't-- uh, we couldn't eat them. We have no-- no appetite, no nothing. I was full of louse, both of us are. 

DORI LAUB: At that moment did you want to kill the Germans? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: In that moment, I just wanted to get to feel-- to get to myself. I was so weak, like a kitten. I didn't have no strength. In that moment I didn't know what wh-- wh-- h-- how I, I imagine I, uh, I just wanted to live in that moment, you know. And the-- the soldiers or the Germans, I don't know exac-- exactly remember. They took us to a krankenbau, they call it. 

And they gave us, I think, some clothes. They w-- they washed us off from the louse. And they took us, they gave us some clothes. Then I stayed there a day or two, uh, went into Landsberg. In Landsberg, I was the pr-- the first ones in Landsburg in the-- uh, in a camp they ca-- there was s SS cas-- a SS barracks. 

And two days later, I took sick. I became in the typh-- I was in typhus. They took us. They took me, uh, into a, uh, in a home. They call it, um, Holzhausen Magnusheim. And over there the International Red Cross gave me transfusion. That's when I was in the-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Tell me, Mr. Frohlinger, you said you were angry that no one has asked you about this before. No one has ever spoken to you about this before? 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: No one, uh, except I been treated by a doctor. That's all. Only doctor treated me because of my-- I took, uh, I was sick right away, s-- right after the liberation. 

LAUREL VLOCK: But you said that no one for tw-- you-- you said that you wanted-- wondered why 20 years ago people didn't ask you-- 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: Right. I'm so-- I-- I angry, uh, I'm angry because that got 34 years-- took the, uh, took 34 years to-- to-- to-- ent-- to get from people, you know, what happened to the Holocau-- to all those people. Because that is of this thir-- past 32 years, so many people died. And probably they would, you know, to interview them, they should tell their-- their, uh-- what happened to them. 

And they should-- that the future, the next generation should know. I would want that my children should know of my-- that this should never happen, something like this, again. Because the whole world, uh, stand by and did nothing about this to try to, uh, uh-- because 6 million-- just 6 million Jews alone, how about other people? How many other people got ki-- was murdered in the concentration camps? 

And the whole world stand, uh, idle. They didn't do nothing about it. I-- I want the whole world should know about this. And that should never happen. And I-- it makes me sick any time I just sit to think of it. I have terrible, uh, nightmares, like I said and-- 

DORI LAUB: I hope you have a decent night tonight. 

ALEXANDER FROHLINGER: I am sure I wouldn't be able to sleep. Because I didn't sleep last night either. And I took a couple of pills. And it just-- I feel I'm-- I'm just sick in my stomach. And, uh, these things, why this happened, I hope never, never again. And let the future generation be a j-- a judge of this, that what happened in the 20th century. The well-civilized Germany with 80 million Germans didn't know what happening. This I cannot believe. 