INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

SUBJECT: So my duties outside the ghetto were to-- it was not permitted to between ghettos to communicate. The Germans did everything to separate the Jews from the non-Jewish population, to separate the Jews from one ghetto to the other ghetto, to enable them to all the people and to trick them, to-- or to-- to not to tell them the truth, to lie to them and to-- and they were not interested at all that Jews communicate one place with the other to know what happened. So my-- my duty was to communicate with other ghettos. So I was sent from Bialystok to other places to tell them what is going on. It was the first thing. 

The second was the underground movement in Bialystok, and especially Mordechai Tenenbaum. He had-- he had a very rare awareness of history. He was very much concerned with what, in the future, people will know about what is going on now. He knew that the Germans, by exterminating, destroying the Jews, they are destroying also archives and everything belonging to Jews. So he was very much concerned with keeping writing himself and asking people to write from other places where, at this time, at the beginning of '42, there were already the-- the villages were liquidated. And people came to-- some people succeeded to came to Bialystok. And so he organized all the people from the ghetto to go and interview these people, to tell them like you ask me now my story, so to tell them their story-- stories. 

And he keep this all as underground archives. And he looked for a place outside the ghetto to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Hide them. 

SUBJECT: To hide them. And though I was asked to find a place, a hiding place, for the archives, which I did. And these archives are now at Yad Vashem. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find a place? Where? 

SUBJECT: This was-- we-- I had contacts with non-Jewish people too, and was a Polish man, I had this contact with him through another Jew who knew-- knew him from before the war. And so we find, I saw this place. I made a plane of this place to hide this documentation. 

INTERVIEWER: How big a box? 

SUBJECT: There were three box. Three box were sent outside from the ghetto and was hidden by this-- outside the house of this Polish man. 

INTERVIEWER: How were they taken out of the ghetto, and by whom? 

SUBJECT: There were Jews working when the ghetto was in February '43. There were the first Aktion. And Aktion means that people were-- were catched by the Germans in the ghetto and sent to death, to the camp of Treblinka. And then in the ghetto, there were many factories. After this Aktion, the Germans cut the ghetto and put-- made them smaller. And a factory which was before, inside the ghetto was now outside. And there were Jewish men working at this factory. So one of them was the man between me and Mordechai Tenenbaum, who was-- I was-- I was coming and giving him letters to Mordechai Tenenbaum or Mordechai to me, giving me instructions, and the one-- and also, this man took a box a time out of the ghetto, because it was safely to do it this way. 

This was the second thing I had to do. And then, when-- one of the problems of the resistance movement was how to get arms. Because if you have to fight, you can't fight without arms. So to get arms, there were several ways to do it. One of them were arms stole by our boys in German magazines of arms. 

INTERVIEWER: Munitions places? 

SUBJECT: There were ammunition places. They were-- we were doing in the ghetto but ourselves some Molotov-- 

INTERVIEWER: Cocktails. 

SUBJECT: Yes, cocktails. But we were very inexperienced. It is not like today, where everyone knows how to make it. But at these times, we always, when we spoke to get our say, we were brought up in too humanistic way. We learned how to love people but not how to kill. And now we have to learn how to kill, how to fight. And it was very difficult to do it without any help from the outside. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? What did you feel about having to kill? Besides it was difficult and you didn't know, what did you think inside? 

SUBJECT: I didn't know. I think it is necessary to-- to defend us, ourselves, that when the Germans will come to do, to take us to death, we have to fight. We have to do everything to not to make it easy for the Germans. We realize that we will not be able to fight against the Germans who were strong at this time. But what we wanted is to take some revenge, to-- to-- to do something to make them this terrible work more difficult. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you afraid? 

SUBJECT: No. No. I can say I was not afraid. We were determinated to do something, to take revenge. And this, t I revenge for what the German did to us, to our people, this gave us so much strength and really, I can't tell that I was afraid. It was not important to me if-- if I will remain alive or not. It was not important at all. And I never thought I will survive, because I am-- I was surprised myself that what I did and how I behave toward the Germans. But I didn't do anything. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- did you kill anyone? 

SUBJECT: No, I didn't. I never-- I never killed a German. Even I wanted to do it, but I never did it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you make or use Molotov cocktails? 

SUBJECT: No. No. I-- I smuggled arms into the ghetto. I was several time by smuggling these arms from-- from the country. Because one of the ways to get arms was to-- to find out peasants, you know, because during the War, '33-- '39 and '41, there was the defeated armies, the Polish or the Soviet, there were many soldiers who were-- 

INTERVIEWER: Leaving. Kept the guns. 

SUBJECT: Leaving. No, they were-- 

INTERVIEWER: Then they threw away their arms. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they threw their arms. And peasants took them and hide them. So one of the ways to get these arms were to buy, to buy these arms. I went to these patients as non-Jewish. They thought I am a member of the Polish resistance movement. And because they sympathized with the Polish underground movement, so I was very good received, and they were very nice dealing with me about. 

And so I bought arms, and I had to smuggle these to Bialystok. And was not an easy thing to do. So more than one time, I went to-- there were always on the stations, on the railway stations, there were always Germans looking for smugglers. Not of arms, because they didn't realize that there could be girls smuggling arms, but there were smuggler of food, because food were scarce in Bialystok. So there were many, many Poles who were smuggling food from-- from the countryside. So I had some valise, and there some arms. And when I saw the German, and I noticed, because you have to notice everything. There were some things you-- you could succeed only when you had this instinct, you know, to-- to-- to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Be aware. 

SUBJECT: To be-- not to be aware, but to know what to do. And so when I came to the station in one of these cases, with arms in my valise, and I saw the German guard with a dog, a very big dog, looking there, the first things when I-- when I noticed him was I have to go back. Because he can arrest me. But you know, I noticed he noticed me. So I had no choice. And I went through toward him. And I came to him and asked him very politely, maybe he knew-- he knows when the train will come to the station. Because it was not-- I tried always to be in the station the last moment when the train will be not to-- because it was dangerous to stay there. 

But the trains, even the Germans, you know, everyone thinks the Germans are so much in time all the time. But it is a legend. It is not true. Like it was also a legend which the Jews believed very much that the Germans are so honnete. They are so-- their word is a word, and they are so-- 

INTERVIEWER: Honorable? Honorable? 

SUBJECT: That is not the right word, honorable, but they are so-- 

INTERVIEWER: Dependable? You believe them? 

SUBJECT: No, they believed them, you know, when they-- they don't lie. They are very-- this, of course, it is-- it is a legend, because the Germans, they lie to themselves by doing what they are doing. They are lying to they too when they say they didn't know anything about. 

So because I saw he noticed me, I went through to him, and I asked him when the-- and so he looked at my valise and at me. And he asked me what I have inside. And so I told him, oh, you know, I have lard and eggs and butter. All these things who were-- it was not permitted to bring it to the town, you know? To smuggle it. Oh, and I asked him very with a smile, with a nice smile, I suppose. I asked him if he wants me to open. Said oh no, no, thank you very much. Of course it was no need to open, because I told him I have all these things it was not permitted to have. So if I told him the truth, there's no need to open. And it finished so that he went with me to the station, and he asked when the train arrived. He asked the-- what is the name for the man who is in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Station master. 

SUBJECT: The station master. No, not the station master, but the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Conductor. 

SUBJECT: He was the conductor of the train. He asked him to look at me, to give me a place to sit, what was not easy to find, and then to look at my valise, that nobody should bother me. And so I came safely to Bialystok. It was one of such-- 

INTERVIEWER: One last question, because I know that-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to know what you felt after the war. You were still in Poland. You must have gone home, looked for your family. What did you find? What did you think? What happened? 

SUBJECT: Only one word to finish the story what I did on this later. After, in Bialystok, they were fighting in the ghetto. In August '43, there were a revolt in the ghetto. I was not in the ghetto when the revolt broke out. I was outside. And so when the ghetto was liquidated, I was-- and I was not alone on the-- on the Aryan side, as we named it. We were six girls, six girls from different movements. We were from Hashomer Hatzair, from Dror as I was, and was two girls from the communist movement, who were all together walking, march to ghetto two. And then after the liquidation of the ghetto, we became the liaison officers of the partisans in the ghetto. And this is another story, how and what we did there. 

You asked me what I felt after the war, after the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel as an Israeli, becoming part of Israel after such an experience? 

SUBJECT: Well, this is another question. 

INTERVIEWER: Both. 

SUBJECT: Both. You know, the first day of liberation was-- I can't describe the joy we felt. We-- we kissed the first tankists who came in the town. We went to greet the army coming in. We didn't know what to do. But after these first days of joy, of course we realized that we are very, very few, that we have nobody. And it was-- there were no joy in our heart, because I was alone. I had nobody. I went to Grodno, to see, to look, and to-- to see maybe. But I found nobody. And I heard many stories what happened there. And this was the end. 

Later on, in '45-- no, later at the end of '44, I met my husband, who was later my husband. He was himself a parachutist in the partisan, and he came from Vienna. He was from Vienna. And he came to Bialystok. He was in the Polish army. 

INTERVIEWER: He wasn't Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes, he was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: In the Polish army? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. There was many, many Jews in the Polish army. He fled from Vienna to the Soviet Union in '41. He volunteered to the Polish army in the Soviet Union. He was choosed because he knew German and very well Polish and was not-- they said-- I said he looked very much Jewish in my eyes, but he was choosed as not looking very much Jewish or not behaving very much as a Jew. He was choosed to a special parachute group, and they were parachuted in winter '43 to the-- 