[SIDE CONVERSATION] INTERVIEWER: And then begin with Ospel Vienna. OK? 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

SUBJECT: My name is Oscar Roth, R-O-T-H. I was born on the 16th of November, 1910 in Vienna, being one of three sons of Hungarian parents who had immigrated to Vienna. I attended all the schools in Vienna and studied medicine there. My mother had died a natural death. My two brothers-- 

INTERVIEWER: So you were how old? 

SUBJECT: I was 20. My father was unemployed, because it was very difficult to find at that time a job. So my two brothers who were older than I am. I-- besides studying medicine, I was teaching there physiology. I had large classes and among all the pupils were many Nazi students. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, you grew up in Vienna? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like? 

SUBJECT: It was a constant fight between the Nazis, who were already strong at all times-- 

INTERVIEWER: But much earlier. 

SUBJECT: Earlier. Christian socialists and the Social Democrats. I belonged to the group of the Social Democrats, which can be compared with the group in Sweden or in Norway. And they were at that time ruling in Vienna, but the Christian socialists were ruling in the country. There was a constant fight, constant problems. Being a Jew meant being excluded from any government job at that time already. 

INTERVIEWER: What year are we talking? 

SUBJECT: I am speaking about 1935, '38. 

INTERVIEWER: What about before that? 

SUBJECT: Before that was the war, World War I, which I remember vividly. My father was in the Army. And in the high school, there where already bitter fights between so-called Grossdeutsche Studenten and Jewish students on the university were fights. I have a big hole here in my head from it. I think I caused a few holes myself. 

And-- but all in all, it was an interesting life, only in that respect, uninteresting and frightening that you couldn't expect a job. And as a physician, particularly not. You could go into practice, but you could not go to hospitals already at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1920? 

SUBJECT: No, I am speaking of my time, when I was a medical student and became a young doctor. That was in 1936 and 1937. 

INTERVIEWER: Because of your Jewishness? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. At that time, however, Jewishness didn't mean extraction. It meant religion. At that time if you wanted to give up your Jewishness and convert to Catholicism, you could become one of them and have all the advantages of anybody else. That privilege, or whatever you want to call it, disappeared when the Nazis became more powerful, particularly after they entered Austria in March '38. 

INTERVIEWER: Your-- your mother died in 1930. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: At that time, you were beg-- you were just entering medical school? 

SUBJECT: Correct. I was a first year medical student. 

INTERVIEWER: And you left as a medical student, and with two unemployed brothers, and father was unemployed, what was home like when mother just died. 

SUBJECT: There was no home life. We lived from day to day, from hour to hour, often starving, sometimes eating, and hoping for the best with the logical knowledge that there won't be any good thing to come. That time, it started already. We started to hear rumors from Germany that something was going on there. The Jews were persecuted. And Germans entered Austria and told horror stories. 

And we, I must admit, didn't believe it. We thought they were exaggerated, and we thought it was the hysteria of certain people, and we didn't do anything to prevent-- that our faith became the same. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. eh- from your account of Vienna, it doesn't sound like a happy go lucky Vienna-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, far from that. It was at that time, the economy was miserable, and whatever economy was left was preserved for non-Jews in official positions. Jews still could make a living as merchants, as salespeople, and so on. But it was almost impossible, for instance, to get a government job as a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: As a medical student, was there-- was there fun? 

SUBJECT: Fun. Yes, I always wanted to become a doctor, and I forgot what was waiting for me, and I enjoyed every moment that I studied. But studying was often interrupted by Nazi demonstrations, which always ended with fights, with bones, and with chains, and with sticks, and serious injuries. Sometimes death was caused by those Nazi fights. 

But despite of all, we still enjoyed being young. We enjoyed being young and being able to study. And at that time, interestingly, you were allowed freely to study. Anybody who passed the gymnasium, or the realgymnasium with a degree of maturity was allowed to go to the government medical school, or any other university department. 

It went even so far that I received a government stipend throughout my whole study. I didn't pay anything. I even was a little bit supported for my food. But nevertheless, I knew that I never could get a job. So there was the contrast between being allowed to study, but not to make anything of what you achieved. 

INTERVIEWER: I assume from your appointment as a teacher of physiology, you must have been an excellent student. 

SUBJECT: I had to have always hundred in order to get it as soon as you were. Once you had to take at least two exams every half year or semester. And the only if you passed it with 100-- excellent wasn't enough, it had to be superb-- you could continue with your student stipend. But there, interestingly, they didn't make any difference between Jews and non-Jews. I don't understand the logic, but that's how I was. 

INTERVIEWER: And in those political activities in a medical school, Nazis, Nazi students, became violent? 

SUBJECT: Oh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember an incident? 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe one particular clash? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I was in chemistry, and our school was very big. We had only one big school in Vienna and two small schools in Graz and Linz. So our class was about a thousand pupils. And in the mor-- and it was very crowded. 

And in the morning one day-- but it happened often at that span of two days. One day, the Nazis suddenly got up and sang to "Deutschland, Deutschland über alles", and the Horst-Wessel song, which was at that time outlawed. And they forced everybody to stand up, which I didn't do. 

So the next thing, they jumped on me and yelled, "Where's the Jew? Where's the Jew?" And I had on me about four or five people, hitting, trying to hit me. But actually, they hit me only at the beginning. After a while, they hit eachother thinking that one of them was the Jew. And, uh, finally, I-- it broke up and I had a hole in my head. One of the Nazis had a broken arm. 

And at that time, the university was holy ground for the police. They couldn't enter unless the dean or the rector called them. And it was so bad that the-- the police was called. Instead of arresting the Nazi who attacked me, I was arrested because I injured the Nazi who had attacked me. 

So I had to go to the police. Stood there-- had to stay there all day long, and finally was released with a threat that it should never happen again. Those were the days of studentry. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was 1930? 

SUBJECT: That began in 1930 and lasted the-- 

INTERVIEWER: This event was in what year? 

SUBJECT: That was in chemistry, which is the first year. In '31. 

INTERVIEWER: '31. That was way before the-- Hitler came to power in Germany. 

SUBJECT: It was called the Nazi unruhen, studenten unruhen, unrest of students. It was very powerful at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened as the years went by? 

SUBJECT: My family, as I said, was unemployed. Didn't get any unemployment insurance, even after a few weeks. So I was the only one who supported the family. I did it by teaching physiology to medical students. And my last class was in March '38, when the Nazis came to Austria. And I remember vividly the class on that day, instead of being in the civil clothing, suddenly my whole class-- Jews didn't appear anymore on that day. 

So there were nothing but SR and SS officers, because the Nazis were high up in the rank of-- the students were high up in the ranks of Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER: Your student class? 

SUBJECT: And that day was all Nazis. 

INTERVIEWER: Appeared in uniform, in Nazi uniform, after the Anschluss. 

SUBJECT: The next morning, everything was openly Nazi. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. You were at that time already a physician? 

SUBJECT: Right. At that time, I was a physician. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: You graduated in '38? You graduated in what year? 

SUBJECT: '37, beginning of 37. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm-hm. 

SUBJECT: And I was forced-- first, I thought they would throw me out, but the contrary happened. Under threat, I was forced to finish the course because they needed it, but then I was forbidden to continue. 

INTERVIEWER: To continue teaching? 

But But that one course, I finished. But I actually might owe my life to those, uh, Nazi students because-- it was a thing in May a couple of months after the-- my brother had been arrested. And I was walking on the street at that time trying all day to leave Austria. I had gone to the Brazilian consulate because my aunt lived in Brazil, and I tried to get a visa there. 

INTERVIEWER: For whom? 

SUBJECT: For me and my wife. 

INTERVIEWER: You were married. 

SUBJECT: In '37, I was already married to a doctor. Also, we were studying together. And I came to the Brazilian consulate and tried to apply and was told I could immigrate to Brazil if I would change my religion and become a Catholic, which I refused. At that time, they didn't insist that you are not Jewish by ancestry, but just by religion in Brazil. 

So I left the consulate, and while I was in the process of leaving, a mob surrounded us, forced us to-- spit at us, and threatened us, and where ready to arrest us, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

SUBJECT: Because you are Jewish. No reason. Simply being Jewish was enough. 

INTERVIEWER: Hold it for a second. Somebody is calling from downstairs, I want to-- 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

SUBJECT: So when I came out of the embassy-- 

INTERVIEWER: The Brazilian embassy? 

SUBJECT: Brazilian embassy, I was with my wife, who-- we was surrounded by a mob and attacked as Jews. And the Austrian had a good sense of recognizing Jews. They were good anti-Semites for many centuries, and they had an in-built instinct, I think. 

But I think another reason how they recognized us was that at that time, everybody wore a hakenkreuz. 

INTERVIEWER: Swastika. 

SUBJECT: Swastika. My wife, who doesn't look Jewish at all, was also attacked for being with a Jew. She's a Jewish girl. 

INTERVIEWER: And it was your appearance and not wearing a swastika, which-- 

SUBJECT: Which I think-- 

INTERVIEWER: Identified you to-- 

SUBJECT: And their blood instinct. Blood hound instinct to find Jews. So they first molested us, and then they intended to arrest us. And arrest at that time meant to be deported to a concentration camp from the police station. But I was fortunate enough that one of my students with a friend of his walked by and noticed me, got me out of crowd, being a high officer-- 

INTERVIEWER: High SS? 

SUBJECT: SS officer. 

INTERVIEWER: And warning me that I should make all intentions to leave the country because he felt it would get much worse. So I was fortunate enough, and my wife, to stay free, but it was a terrible life. You didn't dare to go in the street much. I stayed at home. And then every knock at the door wasn't the postman, but possible arrest, or worse. 

And it was frightening thing. Things started to happen all around us. People became arrested, deported. Some got killed without reason, purely for being Jewish. And we-- I was-- 