SUBJECT: Oh, it's so hot. My God. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Keep our level down, John. Linda's and mine, if she comes in here. 

SUBJECT: Shall I start? 

LAUREL VLOCK: You start by giving your name and where you are from. 

SUBJECT: I am Shirley Wettreich. Now with the name or before-- my maiden name? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Before. Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: I am Shirley Wettreich. I am from Poland. I am born in Poland. I was 15 years old when the Germans occupied our little town. When they occupied the-- our town, we was living with them for three months. After three months, this was before-- three days before Pesach-- before Passover. They make, um, you see, I don't know how to-- shechita. They'd-- they kill. They kill people. They was coming very early in the morning. We didn't know about anything. And then they sh-- they start to shoot from the machine guns. And I came from a family. 

Three children was in our family. Father, mother, three girls, and our grandmother was living with us, too. So the mother said to us, go where you want to go. Hide somewhere. Go hide and-- and-- and try to escape. I had girlfriends, and I was going to my girlfriend. And her father was a specialist. He was a working man, and they need these men because they needed the-- the material from him. So the Germans said, who is a specialist? In the jobs, what they needed-- they're going to live. And the rest, they're going to kill. So-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who told you this? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who told you this? 

SUBJECT: Who told me this? The Germans said so. 

LAUREL VLOCK: How? 

SUBJECT: Um-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: On loudspeaker? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: They announced it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Do you remember how they said it? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember too much, but my mother told me that. And then why she said to me, you go to-- to this girl, and the father is a specialist. And maybe you're going to be alive. So my-- my older sister was going on the street and they catch her. They took her right away away. 

My father was hiding by, um-- by a non-Jewish family. But they didn't know that he's there. Otherwise, they would give him up, you know, to the Germans. 

My younger sister was going to my father's sister, and they have, like, a shelter over there. They took her in in the shelter. So my mother and my older sister and my grandma-- they took them away right away. They catched them on the way. They was going to hide somewhere, but they catch them and they took them away right away. In this-- in this house where I was with my girlfriend, so the father said, you-- we was 20 people. We was men, children, and the woman. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Were you afraid? 

SUBJECT: I was scared to death. I was alone. But he said to us, you're going in this room. I'm going to close up this room, and me and my wife, we're going to be, because we are-- eh-- uh-- we have a good job. We are specialist, so they are not going to do to us anything for a little while, I hope. And they was in the house and we was hiding 20 people, like I say. Then they-- they came, the Germans, and they took them away. They took them away and they was looking, you know, but they couldn't find us. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you hear them looking? 

SUBJECT: We was hearing everything. The screaming from the father and mother. And from the Germans, you know, they was beating them up. And we were so scared to death they shouldn't find ous-- us. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where were you hiding? 

SUBJECT: But thank God-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where were you hiding? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Where? 

SUBJECT: Uh, in a little room, but the room was not in the center from the house, you know. Was in a corner. So thank God they didn't find us. They was looking everywhere, but they didn't find us. We were so quiet. We didn't-- we didn't breathe, even. And they took them away. And we were sitting the whole day. We didn't know anything. What is going on? What is with everybody? This was very cold. Was-- snow. You know, in winter time. We were sitting the whole day. We didn't eat. We didn't drink. We didn't have anything. 

Then in the nighttime-- late in the nighttime, our member's going out, and he said to us, we have to find out what is going on. Where-- where we are, you know. What-- what should we do? So he came out and-- was our neighbor. Not our Jewish neighbor, and he knew that we are over there. But he was quiet. He didn't tell anybody nothing, you know. Then he said, they killed-- they didn't kill, but they burnt 1,000 people. They catch 1,000 people in center of our town, you know. And then they took them in a barn. And they closed the barn and they-- this is-- they put, like, gasoline, you know. And they burned everybody. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Did you see that? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. When he came, this man, and he told us what was going on, you know, and what happened to the people. We was going out-- outside. It was raining. It was snowing, you know. A mixture. And the smell. The burn from the people, you now. So the man said to us, we have to see it and wait until morning. And in the morning, we'll try to go out. And this man-- the man Jew-- Jewish man. They-- what they told us-- that they left already. They did them job, and they left-- the SS mens. 

So we wait until early in the morning and we came out. The man said, what's going to be is going to be. But we have to go out. We are hungry. We don't eat the whole day, the whole night. We have to do something about it. So I knew where my mother's-- my-- brother was. And I was running to my mother's brother. And they had a shelter, and there was 25 people over there in this shelter. But I start to cream-- scream, you know. And I said, is somebody alive? Come out. 

They hear me and they c-- came out. And they took me in. They was afraid, maybe German's will be again, you know. So I said, don't be afraid. They told us that there's not going to be any more Germans here. We can come out. Then I came in this shelter. I said to my uncle, nobody's here from my family. He said, no. Nobody. So you know, I was very young, and I said, I am alone. I left alone. What I'm going to do now? Where shall I go? What shall I do? He said, you're going to be with us. There we're going to be, we-- you're going to be. 

So, OK. Then we were sitting about three hours, and then the uncle said, I'll go out. And I'll see if the Germans left already. So he came out from the shelter and he said we can come out. All right. We came out. We had a little to eat or what-- there was bread. You know, he gave us bread with water. And that's it. Then in three hours, my little sister came, and she told me where she was hiding. So thank God I had my sister, you know. And then in the-- in the nighttime, um, a woman came to me and she said, you know, your father is alive. But he's afraid to come out. This has take time. So I was very happy, you know. 

And then we-- the father came to us. And this woman said to my father that she saw how they took my mother and they took my sister and my grandma. Then there was two times in the ghettos. Was very little left from the Jewish people, you know. So they took them in the ghettos. Was three houses. Just three houses. And we was with wiring-- not to go out. They was afraid for us not to escape, you know. So we were went twice in the ghettos. 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who took you to the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: To who? 

LAUREL VLOCK: Who took you to the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: The Germans. The Germans took us. The leftovers. So they took us not to go away, you know. To stay over there. To kill us. All of them-- all of us. How much are left, you know. So they took us in the ghettos. So I was twice in the ghettos. We was two months, and they came again to kill us. And then we was in the ghettos in this house where there was five-- five families. Men, woman, and children. So we maked, um, a shelter. And that the-- on the ground, you know. And we was sitting in the shelter again. We were smart. 

After-- after the first killing, you know, we get smart. And the uncle and my father-- they make a shelter for us, and in case they'll come again, they'll go again in shelter. So we was twice like this, and they killed twice. And after the second time, my-- my father said to us, children, we have to go out. Life or death, we are not going to be any more in the-- in the ghettos. So in the-- in a nighttime, he took us out. My father. We turned out a few Jewish people. And he said, let lost our lives on the way somewhere, but not over here. 

It was a terrible thing. They was coming to us before they was going to kill us. They was playing on accordions, you know. They was laughing. We was worser than dogs. Worser, much worser. So my father said, I want to lose my life in the woods, but let's go out from these ghettos. And we went. My father had a lot of people-- not Jewish people, but very good ones. So we gave them money, and he should keep us in the woods for a little time. 

And then they took us and they put us in the woods. We was 10 people. And he brought us-- every single day, he brought us something to you. He said, don't go out from the woods because they are shouting for you. They are looking in the woods. So he-- he knew when they are coming, this man, you know. So when he had the-- the opportunity to come to us and to bring something to eat, you know. Something to wear-- we didn't have clothes. We didn't have nothing. And then one time he came to us. He said, you have to go out. You have to go somewhere, but-- but they going to catch you. Sooner or later, they going to catch you. 

So my father said, let's go in a little village. Over there was a few-- a few Jewish people. These man were hiding us in the woods. He was going to the-- to the villages-- to the towns, you know, to see if somebody is alive from the Jewish people to go to them. So he said, in one village you can go. Over there is a few Jewish people. And what's going to be-- I'm not responsible, but I'm telling you the truth. How is-- How is going on everything? So we was going to this village. The Jewish people told us that the Germans say every single day they'd come and kill you. 

And not far from this village was, um, a labor camp. And Jewish people was working over there. So-- so my father said, let's go again to the Germans. Let's go in this camp. We're going to work. And what's going to be, it's going to be. What can we do? We don't have another choice. And in this camp-- in the labor camp was 40 people. Men, children, woman. You know. We came again to the Germans in the hands. What can we do? So we was working very hard. 

The men was working in-- in camp. They didn't let them out from the camps. And the woman was going of hard labor of the fields. This was in summertime. We had a connection with the partisans. The partisans was looking for us to escape-- to go out from this camp. So every single week would come to us, the partisan, and tell us, we shouldn't sit over there. We should go out. And we was very, very afraid to go out because we was under guard night and day. It was closing up every single night, and we was wiring out-- the whole camp was wiring out, you know. 

So, um-- so it was young-- young boys who was working with the, um, Germans. They was going with them to take food from the people. Not from the Jewish people-- from the gentiles, you know. And they was working for 40 soldiers. And one said to us, stupid people. What are you sitting over here? They'll come-- every day they can come to kill us. Go out! But he didn't know that the partisan-- we have, you know, a connection with partisans. And he said, you know what? I'll give you grenades, he said. Other ammunition, and go out. We were so scared for him. We was thinking, he's not a-- he's not telling the truth, you know. He wants to-- 

LAUREL VLOCK: Get us in trouble? Get us killed? 

SUBJECT: To bring us in trouble, you know. So this-- this was going on for months, and then we find out that he means that. He said to us, if I would have, uh, um, the-- a wife with children and my mother, I would go with you, you know, and partisan. But the partisans came to us, and not to us, but they will burn, you know. Never going to. If they could burn the Germans, they would do it. So he-- he said to us, you see? They burned over here. They burned-- did you know that it's-- you got it around partisans over here. 

And we say, we don't know what is partisans, you know. We didn't tell him that we have connections with the-- we was afraid, you know. So he said, you know what? I'll take the cart and you'll tell me when you want to go out. I'll tell-- take the cart. I'll come to you and I'll close you up, and you, he said, take the-- the wiring away in a corner, he said, from the camp. And go out. Don't sit over here. So like I say, this took months until we find out that he's-- he's really a good man. He wants to save our lives. 

And being in the camps, like I say, the young boys-- they was going to the people with the Germans, so they knew the people and they say, you have to, um-- you have to give us ammunition. We'll pay you for the ammunition. Maybe some day we'll go out from the-- from camp. And this-- we bought it-- ammunition. We had. But the Germans didn't know it, you know. If they will-- would know, they would kill us. And-- and we was talking. We'll go out from-- from camp. Alive or not alive, we'll go out. 

And one day, we said to-- to the man, you stay over here and when I have work. We're going to go on the fields. From the fields, we'll go to the woods. Was not far away from the woods, so the woman will go right away to the woods, and the men-- somehow, they should go out one by one. I don't know. What happened was a miracle, really. So we didn't come this night. We didn't come in camp. And the men was going out one by one. 

They did like the Germans said, exactly. And thank God, they was coming to us in the woods. Every one of them. When they came out, they came to us to the woods, they opened fire. The Germans was unbelievable. The [NON-ENGLISH] was bombarding, you know, and everything. But thank God we was far away in the woods, and that's it. Then-- then starts the-- the bombarding on everything. This was by 4:00 or 5 o'clock in the morning, like I can remember. We went to the partisans. 

