CREW: Now, wait a minute, you have to put in that stuff for us. OK, we can just push this. 

CREW: When you say there's one-- when you say there's one minute, it's really two or three. 

CREW: Yeah, it's about two. But I always give you that leeway, just in case. 

SUBJECT: Then I cannot-- I'm going to cut this very short, because I really want to get in the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Are you taping? 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

SUBJECT: All right. I cannot-- we will have to do this, we will have to go into detail on my experiences in Blechhammer at another time. But let me say this very shortly. We were trying-- we were trying-- to actively, actively sabotage the things that we had been working on. 

A thermocouple-- a thermocouple is an item where two metals, two different metals are fused together at the very point. They are then insulated, with thin insulators, we would call them spaghetti. If heated, if this point of fusion is heated, then a very small amount of electric voltage is given off, and you can establish a curve by which you can determine the temperature from the millivolts that you-- that you read. 

The thermocouple can be made useless in a number of ways. One very obvious way, which was too obvious, which we did not do, would be to weld two metals of the same kind together rather than bimetals. Another way, which did not make it completely useless, but made it very inaccurate, was to destroy the insulation beyond the point of where the two metals were welded together, and have these two metals touch each other further down the line. So while some voltage would be recorded, the temperature, which would be determined from this voltage, would not be accurate any longer. 

We did break the insulant after it had been thoroughly tested and was ready for installation, and many times. And at one point, a commission came down from Berlin to determine why these cracking towers did not function properly. And the first thing they wanted to inspect, obviously, were the thermocouples. The thermocouples were pulled out from the cracking towers, and as they were pulled out, all the insulation was broken. So nobody could see anymore what was broken, what was not broken. I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you manage to have that sabotage go undetected for so long? 

SUBJECT: It did not go-- well, it was not a-- well, first of all, it didn't go undetected, since they did send somebody down to look, to look it up. And then it was not a total non-function, it was really a malfunction-- as far as I know-- of the system. I was involved at one time, I'm talking about resistance in the camp, and about spirits in the camp. 

We had Canadians, Canadian POWs with whom I got very well acquainted. As a matter of fact, I was told that one of these men was an officer who, when captured, switched his passports and uniform with an enlisted man, so that he should not be put into an officer's camp. Officers were segregated from enlisted men, and did not work. Enlisted men did work when they were POWs. 

And apparently, he went into the POW camp in order to be able to organize, and sustain morale of his prisoners. I was instrumental in securing a shortwave radio, which was difficult to convey-- it is difficult to convey that this was the most incredible feat, with the help of others, naturally. And to tell you in a minute, in a roundabout way, how we got this radio. 

One of the foreman was a Frenchman from Alsace-Lorraine who worked as an engineer, who worked there as a civilian, as a free civilian. He was an avid smoker, and cigarettes were the most important, most expensive commodity, impossible to obtain. French-- British, and Canadian POWs received Red Cross packages which contained cigarettes. 

This Frenchman went on vacation to France. He had an office not far from my workstation. I approached him, and I ask him, to-- when he comes back-- to bring back a small shortwave receiver, and we will swap him-- I think it was 1,000 cigarettes, an unheard number. I talked French with him, and he said to me, you are absolutely crazy, they will hang you. 

He came back, he was there, and he comes to me one day, and he says, the radio is in the left hand side of my desk. Put the cigarettes in the right hand side. I got in touch with the Canadians, who by this time had accumulated these cigarettes. There were two big bagfuls. They brought them in, and we took the radio out. 

Now, we could not give this radio to the POWs, because they were searched every night when they went into the camp. In the interim, the Germans expected a new influx of British prisoners, prisoners of war. And they employed free French workers to construct barracks, free French workers to construct barracks. The radio was handed over to a Frenchman who was in our area, who handed it over to another Frenchman who was constructing the barracks, who hid it in the barracks while he was constructing it. 

And then eventually, the British moved into these barracks and set up the shortwave receiver. And I received-- we received BBC News in 1943 and 1944. I don't believe that it is possible to understand today the importance of this in the camp. This almost cost me my life-- I don't want to go into this into detail now-- because I was denounced as carrying cigarettes, contraband. 

And I was threatened with being hanged, I was severely beaten, I was put into a chamber for a number of days. And I was saved by the most incredible circumstances. I want to tell another story of-- a short story of how important resistance and relations between prisoners had become. 

In the late-- in late 1943, the camp was almost regularly bombed by long-range bombers-- I think they were B-24s-- who came from England and then went across, and I think they landed in Russia. They did-- they did spot bombing, they did blanket bombing, they did bombing with delayed bombs. It was a very important installation, because it tried to produce gasoline. We had a group, we had a group that was a bomb disposal group, which dug out unexploded bombs, and obviously, the death rate was incredible. 

Soap was an item which was unobtainable in camp. And soap was very important, because you want to keep yourself clean, you want to keep the lice contained to a minimum. One day we were going back after a bombing raid-- let me intersperse first that it is needless to say that the bombing raids boosted our morale tremendously. And then, after the bombing raids, the SS did things to undo this boost of our morale-- by beatings, by hangings, by long roll calls, by severe punishment, by withholding of rations. I want to tell about one instance which I witnessed. 

We were going back to the camp after a bombing raid, and there was an unexploded bomb which had burst open on the street, on the road. The bomb powder looks like a grayish material, very similar to the soap powder that was being issued to us for washing once every so often. Ahead of me was a group which was going in, and a young fellow whom I knew-- he was Dutch, he was maybe 19 years old-- he was on the outside. He bent over, he did not know what it was. And he saw this material lying there which looked like the soap powder, and he picked up a handful and took it. 

The SS guard saw him, OK, and stopped him, and said to him, "What are you doing?" And he said to him in Dutch that he was picking up the soap powder. The kapo who saw what was going on intervened, and he said the poor guy didn't mean anything, he thought it was soap powder, it doesn't mean anything. The SS guard at the entrance to the camp pulled out the kapo, this young man, and one other man who had spoken up. 

The next day, we had a special roll call. Now everything is done-- everything was done in the concentration camp according to the law. Now, I'm not talking about the beatings by individual SS men. The camp commander came out, the gallows were strung-- we didn't have real gallows. What we had was a beam straight across, with the ropes on the beam, there was a table underneath, underneath it, and stools on the table. 

And he read that prisoner number so-and-so had picked up explosive at the work camp, that his kapo was in cahoots with him, and another one was involved too. And for this reason, these three men are condemned to death. And with this they were brought forward-- not handcuffed, nothing. They were put on the stool, and the noose was put around the neck, and the stools were pulled away. 

Now, these men did not die from hanging, they did not-- they were not hung. They were strangled to death. Hanging is a very quick death-- you break the man's neck, and he dies. This way, you had the noose, the stool was put away, and they were dangling there. And we had to stand on roll call for a time. 

I remember that the young Dutchman, in his struggle, his pants came off, his shoes came off, you know, until they finally died. And they were left hanging there for a number of days, for us to see-- at the main roll call place-- and to walk by, for us to know that the Germans are still the masters. 

In February, 1945, the Russians advanced very quickly on the Eastern-- in Eastern Europe. And we heard Russian guns-- physically heard, literally heard Russian guns. We were rounded up, we were about 4,000 men in Blechhammer we were rounded up. And we were walked out of the concentration camp. 

I remember that we walked for one day, and we came to a bridge which had been blown up, and we had to take a detour, and we spent the night in another camp. We were being evacuated from the Russians. We saw, at this bombed bridge, I remember seeing the Russian tanks. OK, saw the Russian tanks. 

We had our uniforms. Most of us had wooden shoes. They were, you know, shoes with a-- boots with a canvas top and a wooden sole. The snow was very deep, and when you walk with a wooden sole in snow, the snow sticks to it, and it builds up, and the walking becomes more and more difficult. We were evacuated in groups of five, in the standard group of five, with SS guards on both sides, and we walked for days. 

We walked for the first four days without any food, except the food that we took along. The only thing that you could do, you cup some snow in your hand, and you put your hand underneath your other hand, you waited for the snow to melt, and then you drank it. Everybody who fell out of line, everybody who stepped on the side, everybody who stumbled and fell down, everybody-- every straggler, everybody who fell behind was shot on the spot by the SS. Everybody. 

We had one SS man who had a special way. He stuck his luger into your pallet, and then blew your head off. We walked, and the men died. I believe that when we arrived in Gross-Rosen, there were 800 of us alive, out of about three and a half or four thousand. The others had been shot, killed. 

Some of them gave up, and laid down in the snow to die. Just stepped aside and laid down, and then the SS men came eventually and shot him in the head. He may have been dead by then, it didn't make much difference. The men just stepped out. Gross-Rosen-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did that option ever occur to you, when you were walking? 

SUBJECT: Not as long as I was able to walk. The op-- you've got to understand, it is important to understand two things. This was a constant option, which you would not take at this point. What is much more important, I think-- and again, this is my, my theme, if you want, of resistance and survival. We were desperate. We saw no end, we saw no solution. We did not know if this will not go on forever. 

We did not believe that we will ever come out of this alive. There was no way, there was no way for us to even hope that you might come out of it alive. And if you-- you've got to understand that in the face of this, you decided to resist, and to survive. This, I believe, is one of, was one of the great feats of survival, because there was no hope. 

It would be fine to say, fine, you're going to be in this for three years. At the end of three years, you're going to be liberated. No way, no way. What was-- what laid at the end? Almost certain death. I mean, it was-- you lived, you lived with this-- you didn't live with this. You survived death on the daily basis. You have, you had a continuity of living with this death, and surviving death. 

So once you had, once you learned this, consciously or subconsciously-- and I think a lot of it, or most of it must have been consciously-- then, then you did not consider this option. You may have considered this option under the same circumstances that I considered the option when I went from Trzebinia to Annaberg when I knew it was the end. And why go any further? 

And I'm sure that many of us who did not survive the death march did consider this option. They knew they couldn't walk anymore, so you might as well give up a half an hour earlier or an hour earlier. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have to change tapes again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, that's us? All right, well, look. We have a problem. 