INTERVIEWER: Pretend I was listening. There are moments which you might have thought something, like when you saw people going on the truck. Was there temptation? 

SUBJECT: Was what? 

INTERVIEWER: Was there temptation to go on the truck that took away the sick? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

CREW: Doesn't come out that way. 

INTERVIEWER: OK 

SUBJECT: OK? 

INTERVIEWER: Um hm. 

SUBJECT: Our guards at Trzebinia were extremely brutal, much more so than many of the guards that I saw in my-- in the later years. And the clubbing, and killing, and-- and putting your boots in the face of the man who was on the ground was a daily occurrence. Maybe we are-- we were not considered human beings any longer, very obviously, because one of the prime objectives of the Nazi system at this time was to dehumanize us. And by dehumanizing us, maybe the, uh, the behavior of our-- our-- our guards could be explained to some extent. 

I observed in Trzebinia what happened to the men who did not last any longer. The first thing that happened very obviously was that you lost a tremendous amount of weight, and you became very skinny. Then your-- your knees and your joints started to swell. With the swelling of your knees and your joints you lost the proper control. 

You could not walk well. You could not work well. You could not keep up with the group that was going to work. Don't forget, the people who had been killed, who had died, were replaced every three or four weeks so that the work force was a full complement. And the new arrivals were still relatively strong. 

And I observed that the-- the end was very bad, because most of the men were simply beaten to death. Going to work, being at the job, coming from work, they were clubbed. They were hit while they were on the ground until they were finally brought into the so-called sick bay and then picked up on the truck. 

This happened to me in March 1943. I had lost a tremendous amount of weight. My body could not stand it any longer. I could barely walk. I started to get hit by the guards going to work, at work, coming back from work. And I reeled under the tremendous impact of those blows. 

And we had one of those roll calls with a truck that came right to the area where the roll call was. And the selection was made, and the question was asked, is anybody very sick. And I stepped forward, knowing that this will be the end. But at this point, I felt, and I think that I was right in my-- in my feeling and my timing, that I might have another week to live. And within one week I will be dead. And I will be clubbed to death. 

So I felt at this point that I would rather prefer being gassed than clubbed. So I stepped forward. I was stripped of my shoes. I was stripped of my outer clothing. And I was put on the truck together with another group of men. Now something happened, which was one of the reasons that I am here. 

A new-- this was the beginning of 1943. And the Germans were running short of manpower, even short of concentration camp prisoners. They were running short of people they could round up. And they thought maybe that they were going a little bit too fast with the exploitation of human resources. And what they did, they opened another camp, which to the best of my knowledge had been opened only very recently. And to the best of my knowledge, this was the first transport from Trzebinia to this camp. The name of the camp was Annaberg. 

It was not very far from Trzebinia. All these camps were in a small perimeter and a small radius from Auschwitz. At Annaberg we arrived. There were doctors at Annaberg, both-- both Nazi doctors and doctors who were prisoners. 

We were checked in. We were given double rations of food. We had roll calls twice a day. We had to do certain exercises. We did not work. 

This lasted for a six-week period. At the end of the six-week period came a second selection by the SS doctors. The second selection was done to the group that had been brought in previously. And they separated, at this point, the ones who did not recuperate from the ones who did recuperate. 

The ones who did not recuperate were loaded on a truck and brought away. The ones who did recuperate were sent on to another working camp. In I think it was in either April, 1943, I left Annaberg with another group of men. And we were sent to Blechhammer. 

Blechhammer was a subcamp of Auschwitz, a working camp of Auschwitz. It was Auschwitz III. And it had a camp population of approximately 4,000 inmates, males, mostly Jewish, a small group of women, also prisoners, who worked in the kitchen. The camp itself was located outside the place, outside the workplace. 

The workplace, the factory, was a huge undertaking. Approximately 40,000 people worked at Blechhammer. The Germans produced, or tried to produce rather, gasoline out of coal. And it was a plant where-- which, a chemical plant, which had its own power station, a station where coal was ground, mixed with oil, and brought into cracking chambers, into cracking ovens, where under very high pressure, and then with the infusion of steam and a tremendous pressure, the carbon combined with oxygen to form a, a gasoline molecule, which was supposed to be subsequently refined. 

The plant-- in the plant were British POWs-- no, rather Canadian POWs; Russian POWs; as I said, about 4,000 from the concentration camp; a lot of Polish nationals, not prisoners, who worked there; a great number of people from France, who had come to work as free workers, who signed up to work as free workers, as volunteers; obviously Germans; Czechs; et cetera. I arrived at the camp. And by this time, you learned a lot. You learned a lot. 

You knew that you have to preserve your force. You knew that outside work is death. As we arrived, the prisoners were hanging, literally hanging, on the fence on the side. They're trying to get a glimpse of the people, of the new arrived, newly arrived men, to see if they know any anybody. They yelled names at you to see if you knew somebody, some of their relatives, their fathers, their brothers, or something like this. 

I walked in and I yelled, "what is good?" OK? And one fellow inside yelled back at me, "electrical engineer." 

INTERVIEWER: What language? 

SUBJECT: In German. We walked in. We were lined up. As you know, the camps had an infrastructure of prisoners themselves. They were-- we were the prisoners, then every group of prisoner had a kapo. Then there was somebody above the kapo. And there was finally the commander of the camp, who may have been a Jew or a German, who was a prisoner himself. And this infrastructure was responsible, basically, to the concentration camp guards and supervisors, which really permitted the Nazis to keep a, a large number of people in much easier control had they do this whole job, had they do to do this whole job themselves. 

We were lined up. The commander himself did not come out, but one of the SS officers came out and asked us if there are any doctors amongst us or any electrical engineers, for doctors and electrical engineers to step forward. And if they lie, they will be hanged. And I stepped forward. 

I have a very good educational background, though I was not an electrical engineer, which I thought permitted me to venture this. I was assigned, and this I think is maybe the single most important factor of my survival. I was assigned to a kommando, which is a group of working people, which was called the [GERMAN] controller, control of the works. 

We worked inside a building. I was not exposed to the elements, where we worked inside a building. Our function was to assemble thermocouples, which were used in the temperature control in the cracking process of the carbon and steam, in the big cracking towers, to assemble thermocouples-- couples-- to test these thermocouples. And then these thermocouples were given to another group to install into the cracking towers. 

I worked inside, inside, a-- I smile when I say this because this group, out of 4,000, we were maybe 20 or 25 or something like this, was the best group of the camp. We worked with-- our foreman was a German captain, an army captain. We went to work, obviously, with the SS guards. Then each group, each kommando, accompanied by its kapo and its SS guard, came to its place of work. At its place of work, it was handed over to the German who was in charge of this particular assignment. 

If you were mixing cement, then you went with a group that mixed cement and were turned over to, to the German contractor who was involved with the mixing of cement. And while you worked, the SS guards stood nearby. In our particular case, the SS guards were-- one was outside and one was inside of the building. It was a very sizable building. And we had relative freedom inside. 

We worked with-- the head of the department was a German, a German captain-- I do not remember his name-- who was very anti-Nazi, and who was born in Berlin. And obviously, it created a very favorable atmosphere for me, a working atmosphere. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know he was anti-Nazi? 

SUBJECT: He said so. 

INTERVIEWER: He would talk to you about his political ideas? 

SUBJECT: Yes, oh yes, yes, after a few weeks, he would talk to me very much about his politic-- as a matter of fact, I came to think at the time that the Germans did not consider him politically reliable enough to be at the front and put him where he was. There were-- the other prisoners whom I worked with-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was he usually speaking to you when you were alone or with another person around? 

SUBJECT: Well, the-- this, this particular workstation was a relatively small room, maybe 15 by 30 or so. And there was a bench for six or seven people in this particular room, who sat may-- who stood maybe, who were maybe three or four feet apart. And yes, you know, he was supervising the work that you had to do. And he spoke to you. 

The other people in my group from the concentration camp were all engineers. They were all Jews of Eastern European origin, from Poland and from Czechoslovakia. Other people who did work in this particular place in addition to the Germans were some Canadians, Canadian POWs, who did the outside installation work and had to come into the-- into this plant, into this factory itself. And there was a number of French, free French, Frenchmen, who had volunteered to come to work in Germany. And I had contact with those people, too. 

The-- at night obviously, after work, you assembled and you went back to the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Just the Jewish workers? Or did everybody go? 

SUBJECT: Well, everybody went back to the camp. In other words, the British POWs got assembled, and they left the gates of the plant and were marched back to their prison camp, which was-- the, the concentration camp prisoners were assembled by the kapos and by the SS group and were marched back in groups of five to the concentration camp. As we entered the concentration camp, an SS sergeant stood at the gate. The kapo yelled off his-- the number of his kommando, the number of men in his kommando, in-- and as we were-- and as we entered the, the camp, the fives were counted off by the, by the SS to be sure that the count was correct. 

So if 3,250 men left the camp in the morning, then 3,250 men had to enter the camp at night. If a man escaped, and men did escape, they we were kept up at roll call, sometimes during the night. And the kapo of this group was made responsible. 

INTERVIEWER: And-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I was in-- I was in Auschwitz III. 

INTERVIEWER: He was made responsible and what? 

SUBJECT: And beaten or hanged. And beaten or hanged. I was in Auschwitz III, in Blechhammer until February 1945. And I don't know if you have enough time to talk about this, because I experienced being-- here, let me say this. Firstly, being on the inside, my physical condition continued to improve. And I quickly made contact with the free French, with the Canadians. We bartered, and I was able to get food. 

INTERVIEWER: You were fluent in several languages. 

SUBJECT: I speak-- yes, I speak German. I speak-- I spoke then already English and French. And I speak Yiddish. And I am fluent in all these languages, very fluent. So my contacts permitted me to get food, which was indescribable, so much so that I was able to give some of the food that I received in the camp to others. 

After a time, it became-- once you were beyond the basic-- the basic need of survival, and the basic need of survival is food, and shelter. Food and clothing, the ability to live, once you had struggled beyond that basic need, and this was obviously the biggest struggle, then you went one step further. And as I said before, I still maintain that this basic-- and I do not consider this a-- how should I say? I do not consider this at this time, in this point, a normal rule of survival. I mean, a human being wants to live. 

It would have been much easier to give in and to die than to want to survive under these circumstances. So once you achieve that, then came the next step, or concurrently came the next step, which I consider very important, which-- and which I don't think has been talked about enough and has been documented enough-- the resistance, the resistance to the Nazis, the acts of sabotage, the acts of helping the prisoner, helping the other prisoners survive. 

You became very, very sensitive to the fellow who was next to you. You knew. You knew when this man was going to die, when this man was not going to make it any more. You knew that when you came back from work, and-- or you went out to roll call and it was a very cold day, and this man took his blanket and he draped his blanket over his head. And we called these men, in German, the Muselmann, which is equivalent to Muslim, that this man has only, had only a few days to live. OK? 

You knew that going from your barracks to wash up, because there was no water in your barracks where you could wash. The latrine and the wash barracks was quite a ways off your barracks where you slept. To get up at 5 o'clock in the morning and the ice, in the icy Polish cold and to wash up, OK, was a supreme act of, of asserting that you are a human being, that you have not been dehumanized. These things have not been brought out enough, I think. 

INTERVIEWER: We're going to have to stop and change tapes again. 