SUBJECT: When they shot you, so you had to go every day. They used to wake us up very early in the morning and count. There was the counting, the counting. The counting used to drive us crazy. And then when we got to the factory we were counted, and then when we came back we were counted. Constantly, the counting. 

If anybody tried to escape, we were-- we had, like, three shifts. We're going at different times. The factory was going day and night. So regardless what time we would come home, they, um, would make us go out. 

And, uh, there was somebody by the name of [INAUDIBLE]. When we know he's coming, we knew it won't be good. So every 10th person was shot, just like that. [INAUDIBLE], and the middle, and we had to stay there. 

And then at one time, it was-- we slept, like, um, was a very big, um, one room, a big room, whatever you call it. A barn of kind. And they had those beds like in four, four layers. No straw and no nothing. 

And then people were getting sick. And I had typhus, very bad. My hair came out completely. And there was no food, naturally. 

They gave us a piece of bread which wasn't bread. I don't know what it was, ersatz of some kind. It was one time-- once a day, and once a day we got, uh, some soup which was like dirty water. 

And, uh, my sister, I have one who is in St. Louis, and I was the youngest of the three sisters. Whenever she sees me, she still cries because I was growing, and my spine was completely curved out, and I had no hair on my head. 

And then one time there was-- um, on a Sunday, they were taking people-- [INAUDIBLE] and my sister found someplace a piece of red paper, so she put it on my cheeks, and she put some two pieces of rags on my head so I won't look so devastating, and-- or devastated. And then she-- um, somehow I made it to my sisters. 

And then in the middle-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I have to change the tape. 

SUBJECT: About the rabbi you wanted to find out more? Well, I don't know. As I said before, when the bombs were falling, and as we saw people, and even the Polish soldiers were running from west towards Russia. And the bombs fell on them too. So it didn't-- wasn't just because they were Jewish. It was just many people were getting killed from the bombs. 

But this was done because he was a Jew. And this isn't because he was a rabbi. I didn't know much about it. I was just a child myself. 

So when I saw it was done just to the rabbi, it's the first time where it just hit me. So that's why I always get very emotional whenever I think of him. 

And I suppose just, maybe because I was at a time, you know, you form your opinions. You are Jewish. And there are miracles, like I said before. There were all these miracles, and nothing happened. It just happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What miracle did you expect? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. Something like thunder or something, something, anything. Like they teach you. It's, after all. Well, we'll go back to the camp, because with this, you know, nobody's alive from his family anyways. 

So when we were sleeping, they would, um, they would woke us up one time-- no, we were walking from work to the gates. And they hung a person in the gate. So they hung-- we had to look at that person for three shifts. That means I saw him only once. 

Then, two weeks later, they took somebody out. They woke us up. And we saw-- I didn't even know what it was. They were building. It was a, um, for hanging. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Scaffold. 

SUBJECT: A scaffold. Now, they're hung. They took that boy, and now, at the time, I thought it was a man, because I was young. The older I get, the younger that face looks. It was a boy. I don't know if he was 18 or 19 years old. 

And to, to scare us, we shouldn't do anything or something, they, uh, read, like, uh, that he did something, he stole a belt, a leather belt of some kind, from the machines to fix his shoes. And therefore they put him and they hanged him. And we had to watch this. 

And, um, they had SS and the, um, [INAUDIBLE], which were the Ukrainians, with machine guns, standing from back of us, all around. And we had to watch that boy be hanged. And they left him there for a very long time, for-- it seems for days. And he was, he was hanging. 

And um, this wasn't too far from the, um, latrine that we had to go and we had to run every night, a few times from the night. And he was hanging there. And somebody took off his shoes. He had some shoes on. They took off his shoes. There must-- he must have been there for about three, four days or more, so nobody should miss him. So all they saw him. 

Now, where that camp was, there, um-- of course there were wires and all that. But there were also a train going by. The railroad was very close. And people actually were running to the windows to look at us. 

Now, I don't know. I always-- I always thought, after a while, I don't know if I was getting light-headed or something. I always thought I'm sitting on the fence and looking in. It just couldn't be me in there. 

There's no food and, uh, the beatings-- I still have a scar on my leg because we were standing and counting and [INAUDIBLE] decided to hit, hit us over the heads. And I figured I'm not going to get hit for nothing, and I just wanted to crawl by. So I ripped my leg with, uh, with the wire. And I was bleeding, and nobody, uh, they didn't have anything to put on my leg. And it started to spoil very bad. 

And, uh, so when we worked there, there were some Polish people coming in to work from the city. So one woman said, uh, to put sour milk on my leg. Maybe it will go away, because it started to swell, and, uh, it was bad. 

So we hid-- I managed to hid my mother's ring in my mouth when we went into the ghetto. Not the ghetto, to the camp. So we gave her the ring and she brought in a loaf of bread, and, um, a little cup of sour milk. So the three of us decided what to do, to put it on my leg or eat it. So we decide to half on my leg and half to eat it. 

Now, if we wouldn't be the three of us, we would, we would never survive. None of us would have made it, because we were watching out for one another. 

And then from that place, it was terrible. That place was the worst. I don't know if they had, uh, from the ten thousands, if, if two survived from that camp. And then when the Russians started to come closer, they were trying to put us on trains to go farther towards the west, so we went to Czestochowa another, uh, ammunition factory. So of course I almost was separated from my sisters, which was terrible. 

And, uh, then when they were still advancing, they, um, uh, separated us. They took some people to go on the trains and take them deep into Germany. And then some people were supposed to stay behind. And they had stationed guns to kill us, so nobody would see what they did, because everybody looked terrible. 

But somehow, the Russian armies came in too fast for them. And, uh, in '45, we were liberated. And the feeling, it's a terrible feeling. While you in camp, you don't know what tomorrow will bring. 

But what made me go is I thought my father was hiding in a village with my little brother, that he will survive there. And I always, I was very, very attached to my father. He was, was probably 6'4", he was beautiful person, and a beautiful human being. And I thought he'll survive there. 

And I always thought he'll need me. I'll, I'll have to help him heal sicks, or like I am, and he needs help. And that's what made me go. 

And in order to-- it's funny. I'm thinking of it now that, um, how I split myself. That it wasn't me there. It just wasn't me. I was somebody else. It wasn't me. 

And, but unfortunate, when we, the war ended, we actually afraid to leave the place. It was a very funny feeling, the three of us were sitting holding hands. We're afraid to go out. We didn't know what's, uh-- it's very funny. Who's going to what-- or what are we going to do? What are we going to find? 

Finally, when we did go out, and we found, we found something terrible, like nothing. And, uh, and the natives weren't too friendly either. I went back home. And, uh, to look for my father. 

So naturally, they-- I came to the city. There were already a few people. And, uh, they told me that my father and my little brother was turned out to the Germans. 

And the cemetery was completely, uh, torn apart. There was no cemetery. They pulled out the, uh, trees. And there were oak trees. There were beautiful, big oak trees. And, um, they took off all the stones. There was nothing there. 

And then, um, my uncle had, uh, a bakery. And it was standing. It's not-- it wasn't burned, one of the few houses that weren't burned. And some of the people found out if I came, I didn't even come. I just registered that I was alive. 

And, um, they shot up the place where I stood. I went home. I went back to-- my sister came to get me because the communications were bad. She says they were killing Jewish people. They killed, at the time, some people in Kielce. And, um, my sister came to tell me that we have to get out of the small towns, because they were killing the Jewish people. 

Uh, after I left, and I went back to Czestochowa, my girlfriend, who's now in Israel, she told me they came and they were calling for me. And they started to shot up the place. And somebody got a bullet in the shoulder. This was after the war. 

And, uh, there's another thing which sometimes I've-- always said I would go to a priest and ask him why, because being-- always going to a Catholic school, you're so interwoven with the, uh, things that, um, you think almost like certain things. 

Um, we gave, um, to one of the Polish people there, some of our, um, clothing and things to hold, because we thought we'll come back, uh, when they were going to the trains. And those people, and you know, we lived with them for generations in the same street. And we got along very well with them. We didn't live in any ghettos or anything before the war. 

And I came in and I told her who I was, and she crossed herself when she saw me. And I asked her if she wouldn't mind to give me some, something to wear, any clothes, anything. And she swore that the Germans took everything away from her. She didn't offer me a glass of water or anything. 

And, uh, I was staying across the street with my girlfriend. And on Sunday, her daughter walked to church wearing my aunt's coat. And this is a woman, and this has always bothers me something terrible. And one of these days, maybe I'll get enough nerve up and go and ask a priest why. Why did she go to church wearing-- she crossed herself telling me she had nothing, and then she went to church wearing my aunt's coat. And she let me, let me walk away with nothing. 

Well, anyway, so it wasn't too good. We had to get out of Poland. And, uh, I went back to the land of Germany, would you believe it? I felt safe in Germany. Only because there were Americans, I suppose, we felt safer there. 

And then, uh, of course, I felt very, um, degraded. Um, you hoped that after the war, somehow they, they, they won't pester you. They won't be after you all the time. It was the same thing, just like, uh, nothing happened. 

And, uh, of course I came to the United States and met my husband here. And we had three children. And, uh, every time, this is when I became pregnant with my children, I-- it just like I woke up. I got terribly frightened. 

And, um, every time I, I thought of that woman, Rachel, Rachel Goldferb was her name, what happened to her baby. What, uh-- she was very close to having her baby. And, uh, her face is always in front of me. What did they do to the baby? What did they do to her? 

And here I am. And I did have the children, because, uh, I always said if, um, that's what Hitler would want to, we shouldn't have any children, or we shouldn't-- to just disappear. So my children I named after my father, my brother, my mother, my sister. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you feel when you-- uh, your children, and you're giving your children to-- your daughter just went around the world-- 

SUBJECT: Well, what do I give my children? Just so happened I'm very fortunate. I have very nice children, very bright children. So my big one is a physician in New York. He's a second-year residency. 

Uh, my-- the boy is a reporter. He writes for the Union Register. He's a bureau chief of Milford. And my daughter is in college. 

And you know, they always question me, because you know, the old story, where are grandparents, tell me about. They were very curious, very bright children. Tell me about your-- about our grandparents, how were they like, and what was your home town like? 

And, uh, it seems, I, I lived through my children the things what I hoped my little brother would be, maybe, or, um, or my sister. They understand. My children are very good. 

And, um, I hope they'll be all right and OK. They don't feel the trauma, maybe, like my sister's children, because my husband is born here, so there's some kind of a, um, stable, stabilization a little more [INAUDIBLE], a little more stand where, um, it helps, the nightmares or whatever. It's funny. I still cry when I talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't try to block it out. 

SUBJECT: Uh, I can't. I can't. I'm not that person to block it out. I, um, I can't. I live it. I have, like, a panorama in front of me constantly. 

I could be in a room full of people, and, um, if-- there was a time when I was, let's say, in Skarzysko, I didn't-- I didn't talk at all. And, um, I just, I just couldn't believe it. I just didn't talk. 

And then I was constantly talking after the war, because then I realized I, I was afraid. If I won't talk, I'll see everything. And even now, when, um, when I vacuum or I do some tedious household thing, I always cry. I always see-- because I could be at that-- with 100 people. And if I sit quiet, it's just like a panorama with all that stuff coming to my head. 

I don't know. Maybe I blocked it out for four years after the war. I was like in a coma. I was looking for my father. And I really didn't realize what was happening. I, I just like-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what would you see now? 

SUBJECT: What do I see now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I see my father walking with my little brother, or walking with-- I used to love to walk with him Saturdays in the fields. He used to show me things and explain things to me. Or my little brother was very good. Even being six years old, he was carving things. Or my little sister who was holding on to my mother. She's a beautiful blonde girl. 

[INAUDIBLE] my grandmother. We were very, very close to my grandmother. She was in her 80s. She never would tell us how old she was. She was always-- she was always with us, and we just adored her. We just-- I always did talk about my grandmother more than my mother, because she was always there. 

And of course, sometimes the holidays, mainly Yom Kippur, all seem to me, leave a very big impression with me, because they seem to be so very holy. And, um, my aunts, many aunts and uncles. We were a very close, very close family. And little cousins. 

Nobody's left. And we were always-- my house was always full of people, because always come-- because my grandmother was with us, so everybody was coming to my house. 

And, um, so I always think about those people. And I'm always afraid that I'll-- I don't have any pictures of them. 

And I, I wish I could draw. My older son once came very close to drawing picture of my father. It was pretty good. But you know, you fear, you just, you just, I don't know. Maybe I feel guilty that I'm here and they are not. Who knows? 

And then always wonder about my little brother and my father, because the two of them were together. You always say, how did they die? What happened? 

Because we saw when there were, um, when, uh, they took us out of, uh, our home, home, room, that-- what they did, which a lot of people left their children in carriages, hoping somebody will take them. But nobody did. So they knew they were Jewish children. They just grabbed them, just threw them under trucks. And the old people, just threw them. And cripples, they just right in front of us, just in the head, just shot in the head, just like they were no human beings. 

So those things that just stay with you. This is something you don't forget. So you see the trucks. You see the babies. You see screaming mothers. You see, um, hanging people. You sit, and all of a sudden you see that face there. 

It's, it's something you don't forget. And, and the horror of it is, every time I see the newspaper now and, uh, with Nazis and how they-- it's just like it never ends. There's no end to it. 

And this frightens me very much. And I'm not trying to show to the children. I don't want to scare them. The, the men who were, you know, grown people. And, uh, I'm scared. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of what? 

SUBJECT: Of something might happen again. I don't know. I'm just scared all the time. We have good veneers. We pretend a lot. But, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And people around you, neighbors, friends? No. 

SUBJECT: Um. Yeah. I have very nice neighbors. I have very nice friends. And it's funny. I had-- I was interviewed by the Register one time. And there was-- made the front page. It was at a time when the, um, two years ago, when they pulled out the trees from the memorial, from the thing. So I was interviewed, and a couple other people. 

And I have a small store, lady shop. So people come in, and my own friends, so they're American-born people. I, you don't go around telling them. They knew I come from Europe. I was in a camp. I don't go around, "I'll tell you the story of my life." You don't just talk about it. They felt so terrible that they didn't know. 

Then I had some people come in, non-Jewish people, crying, really, I'm so sorry. And calling me up, I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. I said, why are you sorry? You didn't do anything. 

Then there was a very fine black, uh, woman who lives close by to the store. She came in. She grabs me, and she started to kiss me and hug me, and she said, and I'm complaining, what you went through? And this was just a, a fraction of what goes through. 

I mean, every day, every day you could write, you could write 1,000 pages what went on every day, if you just want to, to think what went on every single day in the ghetto or, uh, during the bombing, or in the concentration camps, the beatings for nothing and the shootings for nothing and, uh, the making the counting, or the counting I had done. One of my sisters got very-- was very sick and she couldn't-- we were, we were walking to work. We were holding each other up so we wouldn't fall. 

So, and my sister, she just fainted. So they put her in one of those, um, barracks. It's supposed to be like an infirmary. There was nothing. They just put them in there. 

So every morning we would get up, my sister and I, my other sister, earlier to, to call her name to make sure that she's still alive. Because a lot of times she didn't answer. So I ran in. I was very brave. I ran in to see if she was there. 

So that nurse-- nurse. [INAUDIBLE] She held a horsewhip. She came after me and she beat me up with a horsewhip and she chased me out. 

But my sister was there. She made it. She made it, and then, then, uh, oh, the factory where they put them, and every day they were taking people and putting them on trucks and we never saw them again. And then it was-- every day was something. Every day was [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And can you ever relax? 

SUBJECT: I don't think so. I don't think so. I, uh, I don't know how to completely, uh, just-- just relax and forget, you mean? I can't. I can't do it. It's, it's with me constantly. 

I work. I, I cannot be alone. I cannot be in the house alone. This I know, because it's just, just I run. I just can't be alone. 

It's-- I have to do something. Not that I'm afraid that something's going to happen to me, but my mind is just, just terrible. So maybe when I was pregnant with my second child, I, when I had to get out of bed, my husband used to follow me, because I was terribly tense. I don't know why I was tense more with my second one than with my first one. It's just like I woke up and something hit me. 

And, uh, I was afraid they'll take him away or something. I don't know. There was always something in, uh, my mind, where you just don't forget. Think about grandmother. 

Then I had my father's mother. She-- they pushed her, the Germans. She broke her wrist. So I would see her with two, two pieces of, of wood. Somebody helped her with it, and when I saw, she started to cry that her arm hurts, and I was little. I couldn't help her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Isn't it amazing how some people are just totally calm and other people-- I mean, like Eva really didn't remember that much. I mean, she didn't, obviously, want to. 

SUBJECT: Well, it's the truth. Sometimes it's just, um, you have-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] I think it's what's so interesting about this. 