CREW: One second. 

INTERVIEWER: Pick up where you left off. 

PAUL ROSENBERG: When I saw how dangerous-- that it's-- it's impossible to survive out there, if I will not die from a bullet, I'm going to die from starvation. Now let me say this. If you see that your life is in danger, you take all kind of chances. 

And I know I took a chance, one of 100,000. And I said to myself, I haven't got nothing to lose. And thank god, I look like a Polack. And thank god I speak the language well. I spoke, maybe the language, the Polish language better than the average Pol. 

I got to escape from this labor camp. Two weeks later, I remember it like today, the 14th day of being there, I slip out. 

INTERVIEWER: How? And what was the date? Do you remember? 

PAUL ROSENBERG: In the night-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was the date? Do you remember? 

PAUL ROSENBERG: No, I don't. I don't even remember the month, not only the date. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it cold, warm? 

PAUL ROSENBERG: But-- no, it wasn't fall, fall. I escaped. Before I escaped, I didn't want to tell anybody. Because you had-- you never know to who you are talking. To your own friend-- if, God forbid, anybody find out, they take you and they shoot you. 

When I escaped, I run for-- I can say I run. I walked quietly, they shouldn't hear a noise. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get out? 

PAUL ROSENBERG: From the barrack-- I broke-- I made a hole in the barrack. It was just a regular barrack. It was no problem to break out. The problem was only that a German shouldn't see or Ukrainian shouldn't see you, because they had Ukrainians and Germans up there. 

When I escaped, I walked five or 600 yards. I saw nobody shooting. Nobody's running after me. After a while, I said, I'm safe. Sat down by myself, and I said, I have a little idea where the next city is. 

Now that time, you have to make decisions. Right there was no time to think too long. And I figure this is the way to come to the next town. And I estimate, I figure that it was maybe 13 or 14 miles from the camp to a town. 

I walked the whole night. And I'm walking in the night-- I was used to walking at night. 

But you had to watch somebody doesn't see you. You had to watch every move what you're doing. And pray to God. It's the only way to do it. I had no money, had no food. 

By five or six o'clock, I saw already that I'm near the city. And I know, in that city, in those cities, Jewish people are still around, are still there. Because the ghettos were not-- was not liquidate yet. That was in, I think, the beginning of '41. 

CREW: Can we wait a few seconds? OK, go ahead. 

PAUL ROSENBERG: I came into the city. I met some Jewish people in the ghetto already. You had to be careful, even to slip into the city, slip into the ghetto. 

I slipped-- slipped into the ghetto, came in, and met two Jewish people. I told them-- well, they said, you are a courageous man who was able to escape from that camp. I said, well, courageous, not courageous now. 

Stay here is no good. I'm not registered. You know, in Poland you have to be registered. You have to have a passport. [INAUDIBLE]. I said, it's only one thing left for me-- to go back to my town, to my city. And I said, whoever I met that time, I need help. 

For one thing, for the Jewish people, they are wealthy. That time in Poland was, they called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Some way they put together, they gave me enough money to buy a ticket. And by train, I should be able to go home. 

They ask me-- you haven't got any papers, anything. What are you doing? I said, I haven't got no choice. It's the only thing what is left for me. But again, I was lucky, because I spoke the language good. And the-- I didn't look like a Jewish-- Jewish. 

I came on the train, on the station. I bought a ticket. It was 400 miles, I think. It was 400 miles from our city. I bought a ticket. 

I sat on the train. Took me the whole night. I think took, like, 46, 48 hours till I came home, when I came home. 

And I-- my father was a religious man. And I saw it before I stepped into my house, that he's sitting at the table-- you know, Jewish religious people, they were praying a lot. And I see that his-- the Bible is open on the table, and he is praying. 

And now that he's heared a noise, and he saw that I'm coming, he start to cry. He said, my son, you know why you came back? I've prayed. God help you. He believed it. Or I believed it-- I don't know. But he believed it. 

And he said to me, you are here again. We are hungry. You will have to see what you can do for us again. I took my risk again. 

A few months later, all the kids were home. There was nothing in the house to eat. My mother was standing, you know, like the women. Most are standing near the kitchen. 

And she said, kids, I feel my heart is stopping. I feel that I am-- in Jewish, they say, you're [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. But That means I'm starving from heart. I can't take it anymore. 

We just were looking at each other. We can't help. We haven't got it-- anything. And I remember. 

I had an older sister. She said, Mother, take some water. She took a cup of water and gave it to me. That's the only thing that we could help that time. 

Now when I hear that, that my mother is starving from-- then I said to myself, no. Or I'm going to die from a bullet or I'm going to see to it that my family should not starve. I took off my star of David, and I said to my mother and my father, I said, I'm going out from the ghetto. 

My son, how are you going to do it? I said, the explanation will not help. I am going. And I have to bring something home. 

Now how could you bring food home? Money? Didn't mean nothing. First of all, we didn't have it. 

But we had seven children. We had some shirts, coats, sweaters, shoes. I took two or three shirts, took maybe one or two sweaters. I said, I going to go out of town three or four kilometers from the city. I go to the farmers, and I exchange this for food. 

And that was a good idea, for the farmers couldn't buy for money. They couldn't buy any clothes at that time. And I wait for them. 

And if I had took two shirts, I could bring home 10 pounds potatoes. I could bring home a loaf of bread. A loaf of bread in Poland was two kilo. 

And this was going on for a few months. And if you came-- first of all, it was so dangerous to slip out from the ghetto. And if you came out fromt the ghetto, you had to be alert every step. Had to look that maybe some Pole shouldn't see you. 

He knows you. You had to be calm. They shouldn't recognize you. And if you had the food already, the ten pounds of potatoes or whatever it is, you had to be careful to slip into the ghetto again. 

So every move you made was dangerous, was life or death. One thing, what I promised myself-- or I die from a bullet, but I will not die from starvation. And this is what I ate that time. 

But in 1941, it was before the war started with the Germans. Was rumors it was in '40 already. That [INAUDIBLE] of Jewish people are trying to cross the Polish and the Russian border, to cross to-- to the Russians. [SNORTS] 

I don't know. It's something in my blood. I always was an organizer. I organize a group. 

I said, fellows, we have to do something. 

INTERVIEWER: Who were this group? Who was this group? 

PAUL ROSENBERG: My-- my friends-- and one, even is here in New Haven. His name is Jack Pepper and his brother, and five or six other friends. We organize a group, and we are going. 

The border was hmm-- Our city was maybe 100, maybe a hundred miles, was near Krakow. The border was in-- they call it [SPEAKING POLISH]. 

Ah, before the day when I was supposed to leave, I went in to the house, and I said, my mother-- because my mother was, I would say more the head from the family than my father. She was more understandable. [SNORT] 

And I said to her, Mother, I made some way zloty what I needed for the trip. And I decided to leave you, because I see I will not be able to help you. And to go to the Russian. I didn't go to the Russian because I liked the communists. I went to the Russian only to save my life. 

INTERVIEWER: You thought that your sisters and your other brothers would be all right where they were, or-- 

PAUL ROSENBERG: Well, no. I know that it would be no good. But I didn't have-- my sisters and my brothers, they were not that type what I was. And I know it. They wouldn't do the same thing as I did, what I made the decision. [SNORTS] 

I start to kiss my mother. And I told her. She said to me, son, I cannot stop you. You did it, enough, for us. I wish you luck. 

But one thing, before you leave, I want to remind you only one thing. Now you may leave on this trip. If you leave this house and you go to Russia, I know you're going to save your life. Maybe you're going to save your life. 

But one thing-- [CRYING] we here, eight people-- we're going to starve. When I hear that from my mother-- [SNORTS] [COUGHS] all right, this moment, I said, mother, I'm not going. I'm going to starve with you together. Which the group went-- I stay with her. 

If you would ask me if I did it right or wrong, I would say I did wrong that time. [SNORTS] Of that group, even some of them didn't survive in Russian. But a friend of mine, which he is here in New Haven, he survived. His brother didn't survive. Why he didn't-- he did survive, his brother didn't survive-- some devil came to him, and he came back to the German occupation. [SNIFFS] [SIGHS] 

1942-- Yom Kippur night-- we hear from the Jewish-- they call the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], the Jewish administration, that tomorrow the Germans are liquidating the ghetto. I, because I looked as a Pol, I said, let me go around and see all of this true. There was no way to escape. The whole ghetto was surrounded from SS, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, Polish police-- was impossible to escape. 

I came back. That was at night. Tomorrow morning, liquidation started. 

CREW: I think we'd better stop now. 

