SUBJECT: For me, the break. Because I re-group my thoughts, so to speak. Because I think I stay on one subject too long, maybe. 

INTERVIEWER: No. I want to know what happened that night. 

SUBJECT: That night-- 

INTERVIEWER: Wait a minute. Wait. OK. All right. Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: March the 30th. And they finally calmed me down. They said, you have nothing. You can do nothing about it. Whatever happened has happened. And if anyone of your family will survive, or did survive, or did run away and escape, they know where to come and they surely will come here. And I went to sleep at night. I don't know if I slept. I don't remember what, and how, and where I slept in that house there. 

And I was awake in the middle of the night and saying, your mother, and your mother, and an aunt, and your cousins are here. Hurry up. Let's go. And they took us out of the village to a bathhouse-- a Russian bathhouse. You know how they were built outside? A steam room. Like Turkish baths, sort of, but, really, that was the only means of plumbing, washing. And steam baths. 

But it was awfully cold over there. And the villager, the man-- Piotr was his name or Peter, in English, if you will-- he said, if I put fire on wood, all then the other people will notice the smoke coming out this bath. And no one bathes out in this bathhouse in the wintertime. It's only for the summertime. In wintertime, everyone takes care of his own means in the privacy of his own house. 

We cannot do it because the smoke will come up. But on the second day-- I mean, my mother was there, in this bathhouse. My mother cam, and my cousins. and my brother, Simon, and some other people that ran after my mother because they were lost and they saw a group of people. And they ran with them and we all came together. We met in the bathhouse there, in the bath. Or what would you call this? A shed? Or a shack? Or whatever it was. The building. 

In other words, the villagers could not be blamed-- no individual could be punished for keeping, which means that if anything happens to us, it's our responsibility. And we did not want to take anyone else's life with us. And we kept on running. And from that night, we decided that we stay together. We're not going to run. We are going to search for my father. We want my father. We didn't know where my father was. And my other two brothers. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were they? 

SUBJECT: We didn't know. So my mother said, I'll tell you what, you stay here and you will-- I will go to the city to find out where your father and your brothers are. But first, a woman from the village went to the place where they have had this massacre or the slaughter. In our city, they have taken them out to, apparently, the end of the city. And it was literally to the end, at the edge of the city. 

And they have put them in one barn, took the-- told them to take their clothing off, all their possessions off, and go, in fours, abreast to the other barn, where they were shot. And after all the work was finished, they have burned these people, after they were shot. Some of them were alive, some were wounded. They have-- it was a big fire. 

And this woman was-- from the village-- went to the city to search. First, to see if any of our family is alive, or dead, or whatever happened. And she came back saying she found none alive and none dead. And she searched among the dead. And name was Hanka, Hanka Haranina. And some day, I plane to write-- write about her. I can tell more about what a wonderful person she was. 

It reminds me of the name of Anna Karenina, sort of, because it's Hanka and Haranina-- sort of. And my mother then decided to go and find out. Maybe some had seen my father, or anyone else in my family, or what happened to her sisters. And us-- she-- and we were left in that village. And Peter came and said, I'll tell you what, I'll take you to the other village from the bathhouse. I think it calmed down in the city and you can go back to town. 

But on the way home, we stopped in the neighboring village. I know it's confusing for you, but it's like one kilometer-- one mile-- away. One village was a mile from the other village. And the man-- it was already Thursday-- came from Dolhinov, from my home town. And then he saw us coming and alive. He grabbed us, this Julius Karinovich. And he cried bitterly. 

He said, my children, what they have done? What are they going to do to you? What will happen to us all? And he cried. And I did not understand why he cried. Until the next day, they took us back to town and we-- and we drove by the corpses, the burned corpse. Hands-- corpses without hands. You could not identify. That was on Friday night. Friday afternoon and Saturday morning, I went to see whom I can identify from the corpses there. 

And I have identified some friends of mine, who were artists, who could paint, who could-- who were excellent in school, and whose hands were burnt off. And-- and there were families, like a husband, and wife, and about-- I don't know how many children they had-- six or seven, laying grouped together. And I have seen an old man digging a grave for his handsome, young son, who was-- whoever survived buried his dead. 

But the ground was still frozen to-- to make-- to dig the whole grave for all to be buried. And therefore, they have heated the ground with wood and to make it more dig-able, if that's a proper word to say. And they dug. And those who had relatives were digging for their own to bury. Who survived-- the survivors were digging graves for their own. 

And I recognized many of my friends there, laying. With so fresh-- that I have seen only a few weeks before. From school and from my neighborhood. And my mother said, why did you come home from the village? I said I wanted to be home. And she said, don't you see we have no home? There is no more home. And she was angry with me that I came home. I said, why are you angry? Once you are angry with me that I did not come home, now that I came home, you are angry with me again. 

And she said that we have place to be and we have to see what can be done. My mother really worked out a plan that we would have to hide someplace. And I don't know how she arranged with the villagers, to give them the way all-- abiding citizens. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: We were-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can she start? 

CREW: Fine. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, good. Say that again. 

SUBJECT: We were law abiding citizens. We were good people. We lived in peace with our neighbors. We worked. My parents worked, my grandparents worked. We always treated respectfully them and they treated us respectfully. And what, all of a sudden, has happened to us you here? We did not really-- we said they are shooting, they are killing, but why? And that was the question-- why? How can one human being be so cruel? 

To me, it was-- I could not. The cruelty of it-- of one human being to another. And I remembered my history. I went back-- all the way back-- and I remembered Bar Kochba , and Masada, and I remembered-- and I remember way back. I went back into history and I said, this is it now, and I've got to pull myself together, and we've got to get organized somehow or other. I don't think we did have the power because there was no organization at all. 

We were all kept in the dark. We did not know what was going on, except what hearsay. One person came from one place and said, they are killing here. The people are going away to the forests, to the resistance movement. No one knew how the resistance movement works, who is going to be accepted into this movement-- movement, if you will, or whatever you call it. 

It was not a movement, really, it was a group of people that have escaped from the bullets and from the graves, literally. And we were-- my mother took us back, all of us, into hiding, to this village. She wanted-- she asked-- she did not find yet my father and my other-- my younger brother. My older brother came back home. He was someplace in hiding. He was hiding out in a barn somewhere. I don't know where. 

And he-- my mother said, where is-- I mean, we have to find father. Finally, Hanka came from the village and she had brought a little note to my father stating, what shall I do? Shall I remain in the village? Or shall I-- my mother read this letter, this. But I'm sure my father didn't mean this the way my mother read it. He says, how do you like? He writes, shall I come home? Or I shall remain in the village? 

And she said, we are definitely-- she replied, stay where you are, we are coming there. And we got together. And with the note, she sent me and my brother with Hanka. I believe it was the Sunday after, which was Easter Sunday. It was the Orthodox-- the Greek-- the Russian Orthodox Easter, which is a little bit later than the Roman Catholic. And we had to go. She said, you come with me. 

And she says, do not look around. It was a beautiful Sunday. And then I walked with her. She says, do not reply if someone says anything. Let me have-- I'll wear your coat, you wear my coat. We exchanged coats because I had, probably, a different kind of a coat. It was a more city like winter coat and she had the more of a villager's. So she says she can take care of herself, but I should not say anything, even though I spoke well the language. 

And she-- I remember when a group of people said, hey, where are you going? Who are you? She said, mind your own business, she replied. And then they knew that she was a villager. She was wearing my coat. And we came to her village. It was still daylight. And she said, you better wait up here, on the outskirts of the village. 

And then, when it got to dark, we came to her house, put us into her house, and on the attic of her house, which is where I found my father and my younger brother, Jack, who is teaching music, by the way, right now, in New Jersey, USA. And my mother was gathering some more of people that would like to come with her. She didn't know, I guess, or we didn't know which place was better-- this place, or the village, or the town, or the next village, or the forest. 

We were really-- the helpnessless-- the helplessness. That was-- that gave us the problem of-- we were so helpless in finding a way out and there was no way out, when you are surrounded like in the lion's den. We, all of a sudden, found ourselves, in a-- in-- like surrounded by vultures. And if-- if there were few villagers that wanted to help us, they would be destroyed with us. And we did not want any more people with us destroyed. 

And all of this-- this tortured us. Why? And the where? And how can we escape? And I believed-- I did believe and I had faith. 

INTERVIEWER: You stayed this way the whole war? 

SUBJECT: The whole war. We stayed like this till summer came. And when the villager woman-- we were 10 people. One brought in the other. My mother brought in and she couldn't get my cousin, who wanted to leave, but she did not want to leave if her parents should remain in the ghetto. And she said, if my mother and father do not go, I cannot leave them alone. And I don't know how could she live with this thought now, looking, in retrospect? 

She, probably, like other people do, would be able to go on. I don't know which way it's better. Who am I-- I am not judging. I am just thinking back. And we stayed till the summer, until we decided-- 10 people, in this summer. And I used to open up-- And finally, they put us-- because it was too many people-- 10 people-- on the attic of the house, so they took us into the attic of the barn, where-- 

INTERVIEWER: How was it like to live in the attic of a house, 10 people? I mean, you had no-- no bathroom, no sink. 

SUBJECT: No. I mean, how do you live? So you live. Because life, and the force of life, and the power of life is so powerful and so strong that anything else doesn't matter. 

INTERVIEWER: What was a day like in an attic of a house with 10 people? 

SUBJECT: OK. We were laying down, all stretched out. The woman-- I was with my mother and grandmother. 

INTERVIEWER: In the summer, it must have been hot. 

SUBJECT: It was in the Spring. It was not hot because it was in the village. It was open. But in the evening, I used to open up, on the attic, the board a little bit, and smell the fresh air from the outside, and look at the people-- the villagers-- that were walking freely. And I could not understand why-- I didn't know. I knew it, that I cannot go out. But I did not understand why. 

INTERVIEWER: You lay there all day? 

SUBJECT: We laid there all day, on the attic. And the Hanka used to bring us food, whatever it was. 

INTERVIEWER: But if someone was sick, what happened? 

SUBJECT: No one was sick at the time. And if someone was sick, everyone know-- I mean, they kept silent about it. And we had no headaches and we did-- no one was sick. I mean, we were sick, but we were able to overcome that. It was not the disease, at that time, yet. 

INTERVIEWER: But if you had a bad stomach or if you had something. 

SUBJECT: OK. I mean, So we walked down from the attic, where the cattle was of the people of the village, like downstairs. And you used for the bathroom. OK. We-- they had some utensils there. And this Hanka woman used to clean it out at the end of the day, whatever it was. And she was baking the bread and bringing us bread, up to the attic. And it was in cooperation. She did not have so much food, herself. 

And there was another man, Piotr-- the same Piotr that I was telling you before-- was helping her out with flour. And she was baking and making a soup of flour. And it was really excellent food. If I mean-- the water and the flour. And we were hungry, but we felt it will pass by. And we were staying there for the summer. I opened the-- I remember, distinctly, opening-- I have written a diary, daily, which would be very good, if I would have had it now. 

But this diary did not survive, unfortunately. A daily. Sitting there in the attic, in the ghetto, and the daily activities-- going to work, what was happening, the date and day, the exact thing that was happening. I have-- going back-- now and this-- we realized that this would not last for long because we heard, in this village, our city was completely destroyed. All the people-- the Jewish people-- were already killed. There were free-- there were no Jews at all left. 

And we decided this-- we will not endanger the peoples' life. Because they had only one son. [INAUDIBLE] was his name. Fiodor, probably, in English. I hope he's still alive there and well. And we looked out through this attic board. There was no window, but the boards were not tightly closed, so we could look out. We could not-- no one could look in. I do believe, at this point, that some of the villagers knew we were hiding. I really do believe they knew. 

But no one did any harm to us, at that time. And one summer day, the woman came running. And she says, my god, everyone is walking free and I can die. But she said, if you have to die, I die with you. I go with you. I mean, she-- at one-- at one and the same time, she refused to die and, on the other hand, she says, if they want to kill you, I'll go with you. 

And one day, the police was coming into the village. And we were afraid-- or she was afraid that they are coming after us. And we had to jump off this-- in the middle of the day. From the attic, we jumped off. Or maybe it wasn't so high. I don't know. I jumped and skipped. And maybe because I was young, I could do it. I don't know how I did it. 

And we were running through the forest. Like my father gave the orders how to run. And my cousins. And we all went to the forest. And after us, was following a villager. One of the villagers was following. He wanted to know, who is there, running? And he was running with a-- hack? 

INTERVIEWER: A-- a scythe? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. It's like that you chop. 

INTERVIEWER: An axe? 

SUBJECT: An axe. 

CREW: Excuse me. 

