INTERVIEWER 1: Are you rolling? OK. Yes. 

Just pick up where you left off. 

SUBJECT: OK. Anyway, I pushed toward and got into the ghetto. I showed the Jewish police-- police mans the letter which I have to deliver to that party, and they brought me to the family. 

Um-- I mentioned to them that I'm Jewish. And one talks to the other and says, well, she-- she is a good Pole but how could she be Jewish? If she came out from the Gestapo alive, she can't be Jewish. Because the day before, a young woman was killed, was shot. 

I came to see the family. I didn't have to explain the circumstances, because everyone knew, because through the fences, through the holes, they've seen what went on. I told them the police took away my money. Here is the letter. And they had to give me money to be able to go back home to my family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they able to save the child? The sick child? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I know that the child was sick at the time. If they had the money to give me, or they borrowed the money to give me-- they give me just enough money for the train-- I should be able to get back home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Helene, what was it for you to go into the ghetto and go out of the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Somehow, going in together, it was like a challenge. It while-- it was kind of like in a dream. When they let me go, I said, whatever I will do will be all right. A certain kind of a faith, that what from now on, whatever I will do, I will survive. 

I-- I couldn't-- when they mentioned to me that-- they didn't say it to me. They spoke between themselves, she's not Jewish, I wanted to talk Jewish, but I couldn't. I understood everything what they were saying, but I couldn't say it to them in Jewish, listen, I am Jewish. And I came home. I came home, and I didn't do those things anymore. 

At that time, two weeks later, they decide that all the people from the neighborhood have to get together and go to a bigger place. The Germans should be able to have watch-- watch them to know what to do with them, or what would be the next step. And we heard, from other people, if we get together and we go on the trains, they will go to Treblinka. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As Poles now? 

SUBJECT: No, as Jews. As Jews, because we were in a small village. They picked-- or they called all the Jews. The police came and knocked on every door and says, tomorrow, you have to be at the market, because you will go to a working camp. And there were a few more trains coming from different directions and people would be picked up, and you're going to have work and you're going to have food. And at that particular time, tomorrow morning, you have to be at City Hall and wait. 

At that particular time, my sister and I decided we will not to go. Since we have false papers, maybe we will be able to survive. The group of young people who decided to go to forest and join the underground, were ready to leave. And we got an offer from that young man whom we were working with, and making those false papers for people, if we like to join them, we could. We jumped at that offer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember his name? 

SUBJECT: No. I really remember-- you know, sometime my mind goes blank. I can't recall names. 

And somehow, he was the leader of the group. And the people said, no, we're not going with women. Women-- women are a drag, girls at that time. 

They are not able to walk. They will be hungry. They are not able to schlep and to carry the bundles. They will be a nuisance. 

And he says, those two girls helped a lot of people to survive, in certain ways. And it's my responsibility to give them a chance. And if you fellows don't want to, you go by yourself. I'm not going to go with you. 

So they-- they-- they-- they agreed because he was a guy who knew the forest. He had some connections, and he had the gun, one gun, you know? And having the gun, he was a hero. Just by having, you know, some kind of things that you could defend yourself, in case. 

At that time, we had to part. My husband's-- not my husband's. My sister's husband looked typical Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What does that mean? You-- 

SUBJECT: Typical Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What does that mean in your memory? Because you said it a few times. 

SUBJECT: A few times. 

He was dark. He had a long nose. And somehow, in Poland, people dark with dark hair and long noses were identified as Jews. Here, in United States, the Italian look more Jewish than Jews themselves. 

But in Poland, everyone was light. And if you had a long nose and you-- and you had black hair, even if you were not a Jew, you are automatically taken for a Jew. And if someone meets you on the street, they will accuse you that you are Jew, even if you're not. 

The worst part was to part with my mother and my little brother. My mother didn't look Jewish and my little brother, and they spoke beautifully the language. And even if they were caught, they maybe would survive. 

Mother said, no. She's going where everyone is going. And my little brother said that he would not leave his-- his mother. Where mother goes, he goes. 

And up today, this is very often on my mind, that I could have saved maybe my mother and my brother, particularly my brother, my little brother. Maybe I didn't press enough. Maybe I didn't-- I didn't sound convincing enough. 

My mother said, I will not blame you. You go and save your life. And don't worry, you're young, and try-- try to save yourself. Don't worry about us. And we parted. 

And this, very often, comes back. Certain guilt that maybe-- maybe I could have saved them. 

We went into the forest. We were unprepared. It was the rainy season. We slept under the tree, without blankets, without food. 

And then, at night, went to farms and we were stealing food for us to survive. Wasn't easy, because every farm has dogs. And if people were approaching, the dogs were barking. 

Things were not right. We couldn't get in touch with the people who we were looking for. And we decided to part. I and my sister went one way, and the whole group went on their own. 

There were-- I don't know if you knew about it. The Pols themselved-- them self helped the German and destructions of the Jews. They were offering five kilograms of sugar for every Jewish head. 

The Poles were quite anti-Semitic, and they went out in the forest and they looked for the Jews. They were in a group, and for every head they brought in they got five kilo of sugar. And there was no chance. I don't know what happened to all those people. 

I went on a train, my sister and I-- I, and we were-- we were traveling-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So all those people meaning the group of men? 

SUBJECT: The whole group. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You split from them? 

SUBJECT: We split. Since we couldn't get-- get in touch with the underground. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you have a suitcase with you, clothing? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we-- we had, uh, what do you call it? The rucksack. You know, I loaded-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Knapsack. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Which we had on the back. A little suitcase. No, not too much things, because when you go to forest, you cannot carry those things. Just the most necessary belongings. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many days were you with them? 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the forest? 

SUBJECT: About 10 days. 10 days, and it was the rainy season. It was Fall. And there was not a dry piece of ground. 

And we were not equipped. We didn't have anything. We just went, and we thought we will conquer the forest and we will find the people from the underground. We will join them, and we will, together, try to solve the problems of the war. 

Maybe the directions were not the right-- the right ones. Maybe this wasn't the right forest what we went. We heard dogs, and were heard that people were caught in different part of the forest. And we decide to part. 

I went with my sister, who had some money. And mostly our life was living untrained. Going to one town and staying there, trying to find a job, which you couldn't. Trying to survive. 

Somehow, wherever we went, they were closing the ghettos. We walked into one town, we would come into one town and we stopped in a hotel, and all of a sudden, we hear screaming and people going with suitcases. Cops, Germans keeping them in line. And I said, my gosh, you were-- we're trying to survive, and by that kind of a travelling, we're going to get caught with the people. 

One time, traveling on the train, the German need-- needed human labor hands to work in Germany. They were very often stopping trains, and whoever was on the train-- this is talking about Polish population-- they took all the Poles to Germany to work in the factories, to work-- and ammunition factories to work, on the farms, because older mans went to war. 

You had to go through a physical examination, and if you were physical fit, you were deported to Germany. We were caught in one, when we were traveling once, the train was stopped. My sister and I were caught, and brought into a special place where we had to stay for 24 hours, where the doctors were checking us out, if we're physical fit, and transported to Germany. 

We had-- I had good papers, but my sister had false papers. She had papers which we worked on-- which I mentioned before-- which we did ourselves. She had a different name, I had a different name, and somehow since we look alike and the papers were not the same, we decided if we were caught, and we're going to go to Germany, we shouldn't go together, because by going together, and having different names and different papers, we might give it away ourself. 

When I went for a checkup to that Polish doctor, I said that I'm sick. He says, what's the matter with you, he says. Well, I'm sick, because after all, I'm a Polish patriot, and why should I go to Germany and work for them they should win the war. And I told him that I worked in the hospital in Warsaw, and I mentioned some big names of professors and doctors I used to work, Polish doctors. 

And the guy somehow was impressed with me, and I said, I don't think that we should help the Germans to win the war. And I-- I think, as a colleague, you should do something for me. I didn't know what it meant. I didn't know what the reaction-- how he would react to what I'm saying, but I think, I have nothing to lose. And he was impressed with what he said, and he gave me a paper that I'm-- I'm able to, at this particular moment, to go to Germany. 

I came out. I said goodbye to my sister. And I said, you go first, and when you settle, I will see to it that I come out to Germany too, because in Poland we couldn't find a place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you feel when making this decision with your sister and then leaving her, or having her leave you? 

SUBJECT: She was an older sister. She was 10 years older than I am. So you see, she was-- I was a teenager, and she was an adult. I didn't worry about myself. I worried about her, because she had certain ways about her-- that she was an extremely intelligent woman, but she had certain ways about her that you could've maybe guessed that she was a Jew. 

And I remember we were once caught on the railroad station. And there was a Polish detective running, and he says, hey! Hey, girls! Uh-- you are Jewish! What are you doing here? 

I said, how do you know that we are Jewish? What right do you have to call us Jewish? You know, that we could sue you for it-- sue you. But you know, you try to act big. 

And he says, let's see those papers. He says, well, you're sisters. You-- you have different names. 

And I said, well, in Poland, if you-- if you had an aunt and her daughter could have been called your sister. Somehow it's difficult to explain, but cousins sometimes could have been called sisters. So I said, yes, that's my mother's sister's daughter, and she is my sister. And somehow it was explanation to it, and he let us go. 

And then we realized we cannot stay together. The names are different, papers are different, and we're-- at that particular moment, we were safe. I said, how could you say that she is Jewish? She's my sister. 

And he says, yeah? Let's see the papers. And her papers were the false papers, and he couldn't do nothing about it, because he wasn't in Germany. I mean, the papers were good to a certain extent what she had. 

And with those papers she went to Germany. And when she arrived in Germany, I had a letter from her. And we thought that when we together and we travel, we have a lot of problems, but when you left by yourself and you have no one to talk to, no one to trust, no one to be with, then you really find out that you are all alone. 

And one day, I went to that particular train-- we knew, more or less, that in that neighborhood those-- certain days when the Germans would stop the train, because they need people to work. And after the money ran out, there was no place where to hide, no one to talk to. I went to that station and hope that the train will be stopped and I will get to Germany. 

I want-- the train was stopped. We went to the same place. It was a different doctor. I didn't try to persuade him that I don't want to go. I was glad that I went. 

Somehow there was a girl sitting next to me. She was a dark haired girl, and she had a little girl with her. Very friendly woman. 

All of a sudden, we're on the same transport going to Germany, and she's saying, I have to say it to you, I use-- I need someone to-- to-- to talk to. And she says, I am Jewish. I have false papers, and this is my little girl. My husband was killed, and we're trying to survive by going to Germany. 

I said, my God, from all the people she had to pick me. Now, besides having my problems, I had her problems on my hand. And then she was quite talkative. 

She-- the way she said it to me, she was telling it to other people, and I was frightened. I was frightened because of her that I will lose myself and somehow get caught. We came to Germany, and she went to a different part of Germany, and so did I. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever tell her you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You did? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a risk. 

SUBJECT: Yes, but you know, some time emotion-- you get-- In the beginning, I didn't say it, but after she started telling me all her biography, all her things, unintentionally, I said, I'm Jewish too. I was sorry that I said it, and that's why I tried as hard as possible not to be sent to the same place where she was sent. 

Being in Germany, I got in touch with my sister by mail. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where in Germany? 

SUBJECT: I-- I was in Mosbach Baden, near Heidelberg. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was your sister? 

SUBJECT: My sister was in the English zone, in Mannheim. They had factories, ammunition factories over there. And I went through a lot of jobs in Germany. First of all, they brought me into a factory-- brick factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Helene, that was what year? 

SUBJECT: 1943. This was a month before-- no, in 1943, March 1943. And being in Germany, there was the uprise of Warsaw in '43. And all my four brothers were killed in the uprise of Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know? Did you hear? Was there news? 

SUBJECT: After the war ended, I tried to find people from Warsaw. And I inquired about them. They were young people. No-- no one knew where they went. And if anyone would have been alive, we would-- we each look for each other. We probably would find them. 

Or if you're dead-- if you're dead, you can't come back. Can't find people after they're dead and buried. Only memories, and hope maybe, maybe. But we never heard from them, and we assumed they're dead. 

And that factory was a old fashioned brick factory. Uh, the ovens were make-- machines were making bricks. And you had to catch the bricks with your hands and put them on a rolling table, and the bricks went to the oven. The bricks were extremely heavy when they were wet, and you had to catch them. If you didn't catch them, you know, the whole procedure were hold up. 

It was a very difficult job. I wasn't physical fit to do a thing like that. I got sick. 

I got sick and I went to the doctor, and he allowed me to stay a few days away from the factory. We lived together with all the Poles in a big house. They call it barracks. Uh, 12, 14 people in one room, beds up and down. 

And somehow the Poles were suspicious of me. To-- to them, I spoke too well German. I didn't use the language which maybe they used. 

And my mail was open, and only letter what I used to get is from my sister. And we used to say, in the name of Jesus and the Holy Ghost, to bless you and so-- and there's certain where Polish people start a letter, starting with God and religion. And then we went into telling certain things. You had to be able to read between lines. 

And they were wanting to know how come I just have one sister? That where do I come from? Where are my parents? Where are my grandparents? They-- they think that oh I'm a Jew or I'm a volksdeutsche. Volksdeutsche is someone with a certain amount of German blood in them. 

And I couldn't work there. I was, at that time, ready to have a nervous breakdown. Being with them, and they picked on me that I'm not physically able to do the job what they're able to do. That the doctor-- I mean, being sick, being sensitive. 

Anyway, I went to-- to that Arbeitsamt. This is a place where they supply you with job, like the employment office. And I said I would not work in that factory. I have a profession, and if I have to work, I will work at my profession. I would not work at something which I don't know how. 

They didn't send me to a hospital. They send me to a-- to a farmer. At that particular place, I had to feed the, cows. Everything was done by hand. At that particular time, they didn't have so many machines as we are having it here. 

And we had to chop wood, and I wasn't very handy with chopping wood. And the wood was flying around me, hitting me in my head. And I said, my gosh, that wood someday going to kill me. 

But I didn't work too long there. I got appendicitis, and they took me to the hospital. And they didn't operate me, but they decided maybe I should have a job which is not so strenuous as working on a farm. 

I worked in a place where the-- how do you say, a garden, uh- where you have fruit and vegetables? Orchard. Right? And that place was fantastic. First of all, I worked outdoor, I was planting, and this gives you a certain-- I had a chance to be with nature. And the sun was shining, and somehow there was hope. 

But somehow, people were always asking me if I'm not German. They're saying, you have light hair, or you have blue eyes. I bet you that, if you go back, there is someone in your family who is German. To save your life, sometime you do everything. 

They told me if I would become a German or volksdeutsche-- I could-- I will have a chance to go out with soldiers, I would have more food, I would be able to go to movies, because the Poles were quite restricted in Germany to certain thing. Till seven o'clock, they could walk on the street. After seven, there was a curfew. And they couldn't get clothing. They couldn't go to movies. It wasn't easy for them to go to work as laborers too. 

And-- but I act like-- like a big patriot. I said, I would never do a thing like that, because I knew if they going to start checking my papers, there's someone alive, you know, because they are starting-- they check so-- they checked the thing so true that, you know, if I saved myself till now, I would jeopardize my-- my life just by trying-- trying to help myself. I said, now I can make that I am a Polish patriot, and this would-- 

Then a call came in that they made a hospital, in Mosbach Baden. [COUGHING] Excuse me. And they need someone who is-- who speaks some languages, could be interpreter. And since this will be a hospital for Auslanders-- Auslanders mean people who are not of the German race-- they need someone who is not German to attend them. And they looked through the papers and they found that I'm a nurse, and they assigned me to that particular hospital. 

It was a wooden built hospital, like barracks, beds up and down. And the ground near the large hospital, but you had to be a Pole, a German, a Russian, Italian, or French to-- you know, they even had prisoners, war prisoners, who were sent to that particular hospital. 

I had 40 people under me without any help. I had people which had tuberculosis. Had women who were in for delivery. And when the bombs were falling and the doctors were in the basement, I was helping the women to have the baby by candlelight, having no experience whatsoever in delivering children. 

The doctor was an excellent doctor, but that's all what he was. He-- if there was a surgery, he did the surgery, but he wouldn't even come in to take off-- to take out the stitches. This belonged to me. Experience what I got in that hospital and 2 and 1/2 year what I worked in the war time was fantastic, because I was exposed to everything, operation, amputations. 

And for some reason, he always wanted me to be in the operating room to see that whatever he's doing, he's doing right. He was a Nazi, but when it came to the job what he's doing, he was doing it proper. 

Working there, in the hospital, I also was an interpreter for the jail, if any of those people were caught running away or doing things wrong. So I speak a little Russian, I speak French. And none of them spoke German, so since I spoke German, I was an interpreter. 

Once-- Sunday was visiting day. People from neighborhood farms came to visit their friends. A young man walks over to me and he says, nurse, can I speak to you for a moment? I said, sure. 

He says, you know, you have a sister, but your sister is Jewish. Your sister's name is Sarah, and she used to work for your uncle. And he mentioned the name of my uncle and the street where my uncle had the factory. She was a bookkeeper. 

And I stood there and I couldn't say a word. And I think to myself, what should I say? Should I deny it? We look alike. The guy knows her name. He mentions the name of the uncle. 

I figured, well less I will speak, maybe will be better. I said, excuse me, I have a lot of patients. I will see you later. And I walked away. 

That-- and I guess the guy left. You know, the visiting hours were over, and the guy left. I don't know who heard what he was saying, but living-- I lived in a dream for weeks, wondering who else-- else heard this. 

Leading a double life is a very strenuous thing. You've don't sometime know where you belong. In the day, I was a Pole. At night, I was Jewish, because I always dreamed about my family, particularly about my mother, which-- which I left with the little brother. And I do speak from-- some people speak when they sleep, and I do speak. I don't know what I say, but I know I was told that I speak when I'm asleep. 

In the same hospital worked a superintendent, in the German hospital, and he did the laundry for me. Once I brought in the linens from my department, and he says, damn, you-- you like a Jew. And I said, my gosh, what did I say? What did I do? How could he-- how could he find out that I'm a Jew? 

When the farmers used to come to visit me, visitor workers, they very often brought a gift for the nurse, a bottle of wine, uh, a piece of ham, a pack of cigarettes. And those-- those things were quite precious, because the Germans themselves were rationed. You know, there wasn't enough food even for them. 

The reason they brought the gift, they wanted me to send out the patients as soon as possible, because the farmers-- the fields need-- need the people, need their hands to work. I used to keep the people a little longer, because I couldn't handle 40 people myself. So I trained them after the felt better. But So certain people did certain things, and this way I was able to-- to handle all the sick people. 

Whatever I got, I brought into that Pole, the wine, the cigarettes. I figure, maybe by giving them the gifts, you know, what I get, maybe this will somehow calm him down. 

Then come Christmas. He had a girlfriend. They lived together, they had a baby. And she said, Maria, why don't you come over our place and we're going to decorate the tree. I said, good. 

We came over, and somehow he got excited and he called her a Jew. At that time, when he called her a Jew, I said, my gosh, if she-- and she wasn't a Jew. She was a Pole. After he left, to whom I said, listen dear, why does he call you Jew, he says. If he is excited, it's something that goes wrong with him, everyone is a Jew. 

But the nights and the days-- days, what I lived and that fear of being recognized There were plenty incidents that-- that people somehow didn't know, but they guessed, or they tried to guess. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Helene, you married a survivor. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is that something that-- that happened because, not only of circumstance, but because of a need to relate to someone who had a similar experience? Do think. 

SUBJECT: Well, let me tell you something. I-- in 1945, the American occupied the territory where I was working. The English came in, and also the American. 

When they came in, they took all the people, the displaced-- displaced persons from all the camps, and they made a hospital for them. They took hotels and they turned to convalescent homes, and they tried very hard to bring them back alive, and to give them whatever they could. I'm talking about the first soldiers who came in. 

A-- a team of doctors came to the hospital, and they asked the nurse, the head nurse, that they need some equipment for that convalescent home. And she says, no, we don't have any. Whatever we have belongs to the sick people. 

And I stood up, I said, that's not true. The basement is full of equipment. And I took them down and I showed them where it was, and they took it and to supply the stuff to the convalescent homes wherever they were needed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That was a German nurse or a Polish? 

SUBJECT: No, no. I was the only Polish nurse there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The one that answered-- 

SUBJECT: The head nurse was the German head nurse. She says, whatever equipment we have is for the sick what we have. We can't just take away from those sick, and give them to others. 

But the basement was full of supplies, and I brought him down. They took the stuff and left. They didn't say anything, because the war was over. 

We were not very sure if the war was over, because there were towns that they-- one night belonged to the American, and the next day, that American somehow moved back and the German took over. And if you were pro-Americans, you-- you were killed. If you wanted to show your identity all of a sudden, you were killed. So you had to keep to yourself for a little while longer before you could identify. 

When-- when the war was officially over, I went to visit all the people in those convalescent homes, and there were all nationalities. I-- with the French people, I spoke French, the Russian, Russian. And there was there a Polish Jew, and he says, there is-- you know, you speak to everyone in their native tongue. If I could express myself, in my own language-- if I could speak in Jewish what I went through, all things for those people who went through here would be nothing. 

I said, I understand Jewish. If you speak to me Jewish, I will translate it. I will tell you in Polish what you said. He says, no, it's impossible that you could-- should understand. I said, why don't you try me. 

When he start talking Jewish and telling me his biography-- which was a language which I didn't hear since I left home-- I became so emotional. I just-- I just couldn't hold it in, because at that particular time, I didn't know who I was. And I-- when I translated to him, in Polish, what he said to me, he start crying like a baby. And I decided I will have to look now for all Jews who survived. 

And we had-- there was an Anders' army, who were fighting with the English, who also came in and was in the neighborhood. And the Polish captain came around, and he asked me if I would care to go and see some Polish prisoners. I said, sure, of course. But we will look for the Jews, just as well. 

He says, Jews? I said, yes. The Jews are Poles. The only different is their religion, and as a nurse, religion has no meaning. You treat the person no matter what nationality the person or what religion they are. 

He says, OK. And we went to look in those old-- they were not really old homes, but in those hotels where they turned to-- to-- to convalescent homes, and we looked for the Jews. I came there and I told them that I'm Jewish. I brought them little things which, at that time, were precious, a comb, a little mirror, a toothbrush. 

We take things for granted. We live in normal times. But at that time, to have a comb or a little mirror-- three by four-- or a toothbrush, this-- this was a fortune. 

And I tried to talk to them, find out their experience. And everyone says, isn't she nice. We talked-- we talk about the Poles, that they were selling us for five kilograms of sugar. You have here a woman, look what she's-- a girl, a woman, look what she's doing for us. 

But none of them would believe that I'm Jewish. They figure I'm a righteous Christian, I'm a righteous Pole. You have good and bad in all nationalities. That I'm the right person, and that's it. 

I met my husband in one of those convalescents homes. Somehow he was the only one who believed me that I was a Jew. Or maybe he wanted to believe. And whenever I came to see them, he was always around. 

They tried-- they tried to treat me nice. They wanted to make a milkshake. So everyone-- one had some cocoa, the other one had some jam, the other one had some powdered milk, and they put those things together. They mixed everything up just to treat me right food, for the things what I do for them. But I understand what they were talking Jewish, and I understood what they were saying. 

I had a friend-- a quite close friend, but she didn't know, of course, that I was Jewish. And when I start going out with my husband, Willy, she says, my gosh. Who are you going out with? A Jew? You parents will turn in their grave if they would know with who you out. 

You have a chance to go out with officers, with captains, with anyone you want. You are good looking woman. Why did you pick the Jew? 

What will I say? At that particular time, I didn't reveal my identity, because the time wasn't right. But afterwards, when the war was completely over, I told her the reason I go out with a Jew is because I'm Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Listen, I couldn't let you not end there, because it was such a-- almost as if an orchestra was under it. 

Helene, you're-- you're so-- well. It was magnificent. Magnificent. 

Take it a minute. It's all right. 

Is it running? Do you know? John? 

INTERVIEWER 2: It is rolling... 

INTERVIEWER 1: There's probably somebody waiting. We're like an hour behind. 

What? Is it rolling? 

Go ahead. Just tell. 

SUBJECT: You know, when-- when I-- when-- when I mention that I'm Jewish and I wanted to register in the Jewish DP camp, I had difficulties being accepted, because they told me that I'm a non-Jew. I said, how could you say it? I had a brother in Israel. At that time, I was still Palestine. 

And I lived through-- I went to hell. I led a double life as a non-Jew. Now I'm coming back to my own identity, and you are telling me that I'm not a Jew? And this was in Stuttgart. 

There was an American captain. He was in charge of the DP camp. He was a Jewish fellow. He spoke Jewish, and he thought that he's speaking German. 

And he said, I'm sorry, you are not Jewish. I said, what I went through, you are telling me that I'm not Jewish? At that time, I used to go out with Willy already then on a steady basis. 

He says, well, the fellow who is trying to prove that you Jewish is a Jew, of course, but if you're in love with a non-Jew and if you care for that person, sometime you will say that the partner is Jewish too. I got so excited, and I said-- well, I don't know if this is something to be said on the TV. Maybe you should cut it out later. 

In Poland, a Jew-- you could recognize a Jew, because a Jew was circumcised. Only the Jews were circumcised in Poland. And some non-Jews who had to do it for sanitary reason. It was a disease. 

And if you wanted to-- if someone didn't look Jewish, and if you had any doubts, the German used to take the guy into a house and tell him to take off the-- let down the pants and they checked him. And if he was circumcised, he was a Jew. 

And there was a old saying in some of the farms. A Jew, you'll recognize, because he is circumcised. How do you recognize a woman? And there was some ignorant old people used to say, well, a woman, you could recognize-- recognize because she has it in the opposite way. Her sex organ is an opposite way. 

And I-- I didn't know what to say to the guy. I said, how can I prove to you that I'm Jewish? There's one way to prove. You know, in Poland they used to say, a Jew you recognize because he's circumcised. But a woman, you could also recognize, because her sex organ is in the opposite direction. 

And he looked at me-- opening his eye. He didn't know what to say. And I said, and if you doubt it I prove it to you. And I walked out and I slammed the door, and I figured, hell with it. I survive as a non-Jew. I could survive for the rest of my life as a non-Jew, after what I went through losing my family, leading a double life, you come and you want to become what you really are, you have such difficulties. 

There was someone running after me. The guy was an interpreter. He says, Miss, I want you to come back. The captain wants to speak to you. I said, no. This is it. He says, please, I was told that you have to come back. 

In that particular moment, I got certain fears. I said, my gosh, maybe my tone is maybe too sharp. Maybe I should keep things to myself. 

And I said, the war is over. He's not German. He's an American. 

And I went back. And he asked me what was your Jewish name? Where is your father? And he gave me a displaced-- displaced person card. 

And when we got married-- Willy and I got married in Germany-- he was saying that the Jew who got married to the non-Jew. Our children are blonde also. Not typical-- typical Jewish looking. As you said before, what means typical Jewish? 

And when we came to United States, I was saying my husband is a Jew and I'm a non-Jew. Well, in-between, I learned the Jewish language, and I have no problem talking Jewish now. Jewish I learned from Willy, my husband. And-- well, now at least I know who I am and where I belong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wow. Wow. Oh wow. 

