HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Oh. 

INTERVIEWER: But I went into this because I couldn't do anything else when I came to Hartford. I tried to to get a job in [INAUDIBLE], but [INAUDIBLE], which I was not. So we went into [INAUDIBLE]. But this is immaterial. Now I do have problems. I have a problem-- 

Just give your name, and the day that you were born. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: OK, Hanna Goldstein. 

INTERVIEWER: Wait a little more. What's your name? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I'm Hanna Goldstein. I was born in Poland, Lodz, 1923. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, it wasn't bad at all. That was the way of life we were used to. We had a happy life. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the house? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, we had an apartment, like three rooms. We was eight of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Eight kids? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Eight at the early years. And was room for everybody. Oh, I can-- I remember, I was very young at the time still, like 1930, we bought our own house. We had like five rooms. And two of mine-- one brother and one sister were married. They got kids of their own. 

There was still six of us was home. We went to school. We went to public school. We went to Hebrew school. Was-- I'm choking. 

INTERVIEWER: What about? What pictures came back? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, I hope I could make it. We had a very, very happy life. Everybody was contribute, working, helping. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were crying, what did you remember that moment? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, it's really hard to explain. We all-- 

INTERVIEWER: Father? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Father was in business for himself, small business. Two brothers helped out. Mother was helping out. And the oldest always take care of the youngest. We were quite happy. We were rich in tradition. Holidays were observed. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember a holiday? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Every one of them. That's the only thing I got left is tradition that I remember from home. I'm-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell about a holiday that you see? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, every holiday was observed happy. Like here, you observed only Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. But at home, every holiday was a holiday, and was observed. Saturdays were observed very strictly. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the pictures you saw in front of your eyes? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, everybody sitting at the table on a Friday night, on a Saturday. Mother and father telling-- were always talking discussions. And they used to tell us about the bad times during the war, how bad it was. My father was-- you kept hearing it constantly. You know, for sometimes, we-- a child-- oh, I don't like that or what. You should have been the times we went through. 

And otherwise, you know, we just went. It was mostly a way of survival, hard work. There wasn't too much luxury. But we didn't know any other way. We were perfectly happy. And you know, in like in '39-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Times started there. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you-- how did it start for you? What are your personal memories? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, in 1939, when our city was taken with not even one shot. Because Lodz were like 60% Germans. And they just marched in with no-- there was no struggle or anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember seeing them march in? Can you describe it? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: They come in. You were-- right away, we were hiding. And there were curfews. Like 5 o'clock, we couldn't go out. So we sat in the yard, neighbors, and talk and play cards, and things like that. After a short time, you couldn't even use lights, and there were no light. 

And in 1940, they closed in on us. Everybody, wherever you lived, had to move into one spot in the city. And there were no-- like in Berlin, they have that brick wall, or anything like that. Just a wire. 

And at first, people thought, oh, it's going to be a breeze. So if people tried to cross, and go to town to buy something, they right away start killings and hangings and whatnot. And it was done publicly for everybody to see. And sometimes-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember such an event? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Oh yes. Sometimes, they would leave-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one that you can describe as you see it in front of your eyes? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Right, they hung the man. Well, the reason why-- I don't have to describe why he was hung. And they left him for three days. That was in a-- it used to be a marketplace. And they made us come out and see, though just to scare us. Nobody should ever attempt. And believe me, after a short while, nobody tried. 

And it just went from bad to worse. At the beginning, there used to-- there was food, enough. Right away, they started rationing food, and we got so much of bread. And it wasn't too bad. Well, then this went on was less, then less, then from the early beginning, they start taking people out. And we never heard from anybody. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember those razzias? What, through your own eyes, did you see? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: What we got-- 

INTERVIEWER: What you saw personally. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Many tragedies. 

INTERVIEWER: Not what you know about, but what you saw. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Many tragedies. Like it was 1942. Without a notice or anything, they came into the yard. One German came in. I don't know what you call it-- he had not a rifle, or whatever. And one shot in the air. And all he said, alle Juden raus. 

And they start picking young kids and elderly, and whoever-- you know, whoever he chose. And they were loaded up in wagons, and were taken away. Oh, as I told you over telephone, that incidents, they had a nursery, where the president of the ghetto, Chaim Rumkowski-- he was in charge of an orphanage before the war. 

And then when he was president, then they start taking people out, send them away. And he urged people, if you have small kids, leave them, and they're going to be taken care of, which it was the way he said for a while, maybe six months or so. And that was right across from us. Before the war, that used to be Catholic church. It was a building like, five or six story. And they had that orphanage there. 

And one morning, we look out the window, and undescribable. You see people, kids, be thrown from every direction. It was like a hurricane. The most beautiful kids. Now that's a scene that you cannot forget. And people being shot in the street. 

INTERVIEWER: Thrown by whom? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Germans, and some Jews. You had to do it or else. From every direction, from everyone window, you saw kids just thrown. And there were no trucks, some big wagon. Those kids were just thrown through the windows. And you walked out on the street for-- and no reason at all. There was a German-- 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to those wagons? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: They took those kids away. And you got an idea-- you knew very well where they went. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you know? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: What I knew? Where they went, where they took the people-- we had no idea whatsoever. We had no news. There was no radio for us. There was no newspaper. There was nothing. And we had no idea. 

INTERVIEWER: So as far as you knew, they just took them away? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Took them away. But there was no idea. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you imagine where? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: No one could imagine anything like-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well, what did you imagine? What did you think? What did you think to yourself? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: We-- if we would imagine anything like that, we would have never have gone to Auschwitz. The only thing they kept telling they taking people out to work. But what could small kids do? What could elderly sick people do? 

They took them out on stretchers. What could they do? There was a-- we had a pretty good picture, but no one ever suspected anything so tragic. We couldn't imagine anything like that could ever done by people. 

INTERVIEWER: So you thought they took them someplace? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I couldn't have-- we never believed that they go, and then you know, it's going to be that-- but not as bad as they are burying people alive or-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you personally know Rumkowski? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe him, tell about him? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, I knew him because I used to work in the garden. My job in ghetto-- everybody had to work. You had to register for work. And what you got, that's all what you did. And I worked in the garden for a while. 

Maybe-- he was was a lot-- well, I heard a lot about him, that he was a very nice man. But then the orders he had, you know, you need that and that many people, this and that time, and there was no choice. There was always a gun probably, at his head. He was a very nervous man. 

To carry out orders like that was quite a task. But personally, I never talked to the man. We used to see him. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he look like? What were his habits? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I have no-- personally, as I say, I haven't known at all. I've never talked to the man or anything like that. But he was mean and very nervous. And I can imagine, because what he had to do. Because the man, what I know about him, what I heard about him, what he was before the war, he was a very kind man. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see him? He was the head of the ghetto? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Head of the ghetto, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever seen being cruel? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Not real, not really. But I'm sure that maybe he was to some. But I can't imagine anybody being nice after you have to carry out orders like what he did. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell me more about the life in the ghetto. The day-- how did the day begin? What was summertime, winter like? Incidents? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Just horrible. One day-- 

INTERVIEWER: Tell it. Describe it. What passes in front of your eyes? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, you went in the morning to work. There was no transportation or anything like that. You went to work hungry. And you were hungry at work. 

The only-- we didn't get paid or anything. All we had was the soup during lunch hour. We had to go to a kitchen, stand in line, and get the soup. That was the reward for the work. 

And in fact, in the city I come from-- and we were six years there in ghetto. We had from a tailor factory to a shoe factory. You name it, it was done during that period of time was occupied by the Germans. 

And sometimes, you know, like a factory, they've done a lot of work, they would get a loaf of bread. A loaf of bread back home was like two kilo, around, and that was very big bonus. They tried very hard, and there was a lot of work done. 

INTERVIEWER: The family was still together? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: The family was still together. And they were more like the chosen people, as long as they needed them. In fact, those people were from the last ones. And when they did start [INAUDIBLE] they said-- they took-- let's say, this time, they called it a resort. A factory was a resort, fact--- another resort, or metal resort, shoe makers. But they-- 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like to live in ghetto Lodz? What is the hunger like? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: In ghetto was-- 

INTERVIEWER: What is day to day life in ghetto? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Bad. You saw people, day by day deteriorate. People couldn't even walk. They were skin and bone. Because we got less and less food. At first, like they start giving us horse meat. 

[PHONE RINGING] 

For a while, we didn't. There was-- but then, you kind of were glad you got a piece. And you got less and less, though we ate one. Went out to pick the, you know, weeds or potato peels. And on the end, even that wasn't available. 

They kept sending in loads of stuff, like powder for washing clothes, vinegar, salt. Anything and everything, but nothing what you could eat. We used to have in the back yard, a garden. My mother was go out, and we had some vegetables. But later, you couldn't get any seeds or anything like that. It was horrible. 

INTERVIEWER: So in the beginning, you had your own garden, and would eat that food? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: It was a big help. People, the best-- 

INTERVIEWER: But look, people-- six years is a long time. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: People married. Children are born. There are birthdays. There are holidays. What-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: There was nothing like that. You saw less and less people every day. There were a few births, where people had a child. But there wasn't-- 

INTERVIEWER: I am asking about your own-- what you remember, what pictures you remember of the daily life in the ghetto and events. Not what you know about, what you actually experienced and remember. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Horrors. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing regular, nothing? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Nothing happy. Nothing happy. Like my father was the first one to get sick. He was a big man, and I don't think the food that would have been that bad. He wouldn't have died of that. 

But when he saw the things going-- he went out in street. When they saw an older man or anybody, just put him against the wall and shot him, or beat up an old lady, or whatever. He just couldn't take that, and really, he start to deteriorate. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you notice about your father going downhill? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I kept talking that he can imagine things like that are happening. And he only was worried what's going to be-- what's about to come. And that got him sick, and there was no medicine. There were a few doctors, but they had nothing to give you. And most important, there was no food. 

And some people-- if there was a death in the family, they would leave the body to collect that bread what we used to get, like for a week, for weeks, as long as they could, just because that piece of bread was so precious, or we kept hanging about, to live through, and to have enough bread to eat. 

Like clothing, there was no-- we used to like, from big, make small. We managed. We never went raggedy. We was sewing and doing things to keep. 

But food was very, very scarce. You got up in the morning hungry, you went to bed hungry. People walked around swollen. And I don't remember-- I must have weighed 30 pounds. When we got to Auschwitz all right, there were-- I was only in Auschwitz like three days. And then we were sent to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let's stay with the-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: All right. 

INTERVIEWER: --we're still in the ghetto. 

CREW: All right, excuse me. We got to stop just a second while I change the tape, OK? 