SUBJECT: Now then, I got hold-ups to my store, and I want to give up business. And I meet here, and I stayed. We went a long time. Then she lose the husband, she was married. After they lose the husband, she takes me. It was two years on the beach, but I got a real good tan. 

This life was very hard, we didn't fit together. I told you before this story. She didn't like to play cards, and I like to go for concerts. We couldn't-- didn't fit together. That was divorce. She didn't want to divorce me. She want any tricks you got. That's no good, you see. But I take another lawyer, and then I divorce her. Now you want to know from concentration camps something? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why don't-- 

SUBJECT: Not necessary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why don't we begin with growing up in Russia. What'd your life-- what do you remember about your family, what it was like for you then? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I got-- my father was-- my mother was a great-- Modistin, you know what Modistin is? She designed dresses. She was a good opera singer, too. She used a song, and I take it with my violin from my father, and I used to play. That's-- like, a child. 

Then come friend of my father, he heard me. He said, pretty, eh, the music, he said to him. You play this? Yes, come in. My mother opened the door. Said my son, he played this? Unbelievable. Maybe your husband is in the back, he played. He couldn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: I was nine years old. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nine years old? 

SUBJECT: Maybe a month later, two months, this age. I was a wonder child, you see. And he said, I take your son, give me your son. I have not to pay anything. I send him to Vienna, conservatorium, and I pay every expenses. And I want-- from this boy, I want to make it a great artist. That [INAUDIBLE]. 

Couldn't send money more, you see. I have to give up on everything. Then my father has a friend, he was with him in the army, in Russia. He was in Austria. He takes me to him. And I learned straight, designing, pattern mater, and everything. He showed me everything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was World War I? 

SUBJECT: Was World War I, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you tell us a little more about your family? You've described-- 

SUBJECT: Me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could you tell us a little more about your family? You said your mother was a designer-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And a singer. What kind of person was she? 

SUBJECT: What kind? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What kind of person was she, your mother? 

SUBJECT: She was-- she come from a family, very religious family. Her father was-- the father was a cantor in the temple, you know? You know, it comes everything from the family, you know? She got talent for good singing. When she started to sing, my father meet her. He was crazy about this, he likes the music, when he was a musician, great musician. And he married her. 

That's why this life was a good family life, my family. Very good, very good life. And they build up, they have six of the-- six children. Two passed away, the beginning, the boys before me. They got a wonderful life, it was very close, the family. Very close. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the name of the town you grew up in? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the name of the town you grew up in? What was the name of the city that you grew up in? 

SUBJECT: This was Liubartov. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Liubartov? Was that near Poland, or-- 

SUBJECT: That's where-- that's where we went after the-- when the Communists come, we went to Poland. My mother was Polish. This by all the Russian, too, by Russian and Polish. It takes over the Russian, country. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So when did you go to Poland? When did you-- 

SUBJECT: This was nineteen-hundred and, I think, eight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where-- what town in Poland did you go to? 

SUBJECT: This was Lublin. Lublin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you had four brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: I got one brother and two sisters. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And were you the oldest, or-- 

SUBJECT: I am the between, I was the oldest-- before me was two children, passed away. And I was the oldest, the third one. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you were sent away to a conservatory when you were about 10 years old? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what was that like for you? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like for you? 

SUBJECT: I tell you, it was, for me-- I was a child, I never got to experience life experience. What you do with me, I was satisfied, you know? I was a child. This was very important life for me. I was crazy, but very interested in music, like a child. I used to hear the-- my father, my father takes me along, he got friends in Russia, you see. Great friends, government people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did he do for a living, your father? 

SUBJECT: He teach. He teach, and he wrote notes. He was professor of the music. 

SUBJECT: Professor of music. 

SUBJECT: He was a great-- great man, you see. He got a nice living, you see, we had a wonderful living, we had. We got friends, my father got friends, the biggest Russians, good-- from the army, the generals, and type of thing. He was with great people together. Was very great man. Come Christmas, we were invited by the all greatest of people. 

Want me married this time, and Max comes a little-- great, everyone's-- have it from her husband. Somebody that used to tell me. I was very good-looking child. With hair, I got blond hair. I was a very good-looking boy, from then, when I was young fella. I'm sorry that I didn't bring you some pictures here. You wouldn't ever recognize me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So how many years did you spend in Vienna? 

SUBJECT: In Vienna, I spent 3 and 1/2 years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Studying violin? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I played, but didn't-- I couldn't go for lessons, you see? I played myself, home. Then, after the war, I moved to Germany, Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: After World War I you moved to Berlin? 

SUBJECT: Berlin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what was it like in Berlin? 

SUBJECT: No, I was this time, but I like it. I was first of all, I was have a job. I designed there, I fit, I made patterns. I was experienced in this trade, and this-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Clothes designer. 

SUBJECT: Clothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you at that time? 

SUBJECT: This time, I could be 21 or 22. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And so what year would that have been, that you went to Berlin? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year would it have been, that you went to Berlin? 

SUBJECT: What year? This was '21. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 1921? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you leave Vienna? And why did you choose Berlin? 

SUBJECT: Yeah I tell you, I got friends, and they tell me in Germany's a better life, you'll see. And he went with me, another few boys, to France, that I meet in Austria, in Vienna. Well, then, you know, a young fella, well, you travel. You don't think oh, anything, it's better. But I like to travel. I was in my life always to travel. 

I used to travel and meet people, you see. It was for me, very important. I'd meet stars, the same what I hear, the same. In Germany, I got the all stars, the opera stars was my friends. All the artists, everything was my friends. And I meet in Germany a lot of people. It's part of my business to include it, you see. I got a wonderful life in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was a wonderful life. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kinds-- what kinds of things did you do in Germany in 1921? 

SUBJECT: Now when I started, I went to business, for somebody else, and a job, I got. I got a job, a good job, and I made the same-- I handled this whole business, like a manager. I looked for the-- how the people, how they work. And I was a fitter, and I was a salesman. And I used to speak good, this time. And I speak other languages. And my boss likes me. It was two, three years. 

But after I take over, and I said, I go in business myself. And I start business. I got friends, they give me store-- store, empty store. He kicks me up the store and I make haberdasher, and I got the ready-made suits, pullovers, shirts, everything in my store. And I make a wonderful life. 

I was a big man, occupied by over 30 people. I give out-- I make the patterns, I got a cutter at my place. He give us a the work, custom-made work. And I got pullovers, shirts, umbrellas, scarfs, everything, you can have in my store. Ties, everything. And I make a wonderful [INAUDIBLE] with very nice, great people, rich people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you live by yourself? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you live by yourself? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And then, then that's come the time when Hitler, you see, you have to give up everything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like being Jewish in the 1920s in Germany? 

SUBJECT: I went-- I was-- from Germany, was '39. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it likely when-- earlier, in the 1920s, when you had your store, and you were social-- 

SUBJECT: I liked very good Germany. I was very satisfied. I got a wonderful life over there. I not was a millionaire, but I got very good income. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have non-Jewish friends, or mostly Jewish friends? What was it like being Jewish there? 

SUBJECT: No, I lived with everybody. I was an international, for me it was no difference. Everybody was my friend, when he was a nice man, he got a nice education, behavior like a friend-- he was my friend-- included me in business, come to me every day. I got-- I had very great friends, it was very, very big people. 

He called me up at 4 o'clock-- no take any appointments with somebody, we'll pick you up to the 4 o'clock, for your store. And we went out, we had a wonderful time. I live a great life, you see. Here, I don't remember the middle man lives better than I lived. And I was a rich man, you see. I spent and I live, very good-- that's with everybody, no difference what kind of people. Must to be natural, nice people, you see. 

They meet me, they likes me very much, people. That's why my life, when I came here, started here. Two of us [? [NON-ENGLISH-SPEECH], ?] over two years. And then I started for myself, a business. And I make up a good life here too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you stay in Germ-- how long did you stay in Berlin? 

SUBJECT: Berlin I was by 18 years. Now, between, I traveled to Paris sometime. I travelled to Belgium, travel all over, you see, take vacation. But steadier, I lived there by over 18 years. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you get married? 

SUBJECT: No. I met my wife in Belgium. I know her from Germany, we went together this time, when we was asked to go see, in 1939. We went out to Belgium. I went to Belgium, in Belgium I got money, I live a private life, you see. Then I married my wife. But she passed away after the-- the war time, Hitler time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you notice things begin to change in Berlin? 

SUBJECT: When? This could be-- you mean when I left Berlin? 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, when did you begin to notice that your life was beginning to change, that the good life that you had became in danger. 

SUBJECT: That's-- this was-- so we came together to Belgium. Belgium was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before you came to down Belgium, what was-- before you came to Belgium, when you were in Berlin-- how did-- when did you notice that things were changing? Over the years, you were there for 18 years. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How-- when did you notice that things were changing? 

SUBJECT: You know, because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you notice, what did you see? 

SUBJECT: I came out in business, when I have to change in different life in Belgium. Because I was in Belgium, and I was a citizen, a Belgian citizen. We leave in not so good situation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But before you came to Belgium, in Berlin-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did your life change? 

SUBJECT: I didn't like the change. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, why did you leave Berlin? 

SUBJECT: I have to change because-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened? 

SUBJECT: For Nazi, there come the Hitler situation. We have to change, we have to go out. Otherwise, we thinking that we come in concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened? How did you know you had to leave? 

SUBJECT: I know this, because the other people leave. The Jewish people, the most, they leave from Germany, you see? Leave to Belgium, to France, to America, to all over the countries, you know? But I, at this time, I got my mind, maybe-- maybe I come back, maybe it will change, maybe they kill Hitler. 

But some-- I got everything, I got a different mind, you see? I like very good Germany, this time, where I was before the war. I got a wonderful life there, you see. And changed my life very good. Belgium, I couldn't do nothing. I got a little money, you see, and we leave together. I met my wife in Belgium-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You couldn't take your money out of Germany? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was hard to take your money out of Germany? 

SUBJECT: That's very hard, but I got to make up with somebody else, that he-- he take those. He was a special man in Belgium. A man from-- belongs to the Hitler organization, but he know me. And a very-- wouldn't do it nobody, he bring the money over there to Belgium. You understand what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: He was a very good friend of me. Was not a Jew, a Christian. He said, don't worry, Max, you come to Brussels, your money is staying there in this and this bank. He give me a notice, you see, paper. And I went to a bank, and I take it off of my name, everything. [INAUDIBLE] of my name. For when I make a book out, you see, like a savings book. 

That is, that is-- this is this life. I got the money this time, and I live in Belgium, like a visitor, like a tourist. The time I become card, you see-- green card, like here, you see. And then come the-- I lost my wife, and then I learned here my family. I got here cousins, they sent me paper, every day with paper, you know what this mean? And I come here in 1950, this country. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you in Germany during the Kristallnacht? 

SUBJECT: Hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you in Germany during the Kristallnacht? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I was there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you, what happened? 

SUBJECT: Now, I went in the street, I didn't look like a Jew. You see, this time I was light blond, like a Christian. When I look at-- they opened us-- the Christian, they opened us with the machine, you see. You know, constructors, the turn us, they opened the all windows, and they robbed everything from the Jew's stores, the Jewish apartments, the Jewish jewelry stores, everybody. This time I got close my business, before. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your business had been closed before? 

SUBJECT: I was close, I gave it up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? What happened? 

SUBJECT: This was a big Risiko. One time they come to my store, the gestapo, said you got some papers here, Communist papers. I said, I never belong in any organization for Communists. I live my life like, here, like a German citizen. And I go the law, everybody, I not belong-- I belong in the union. My organization, my club is not-- is not any Communists there. 

No, no tell us these story, we know that you got here Communist papers. And then they started to look, didn't find it. They said we have find it, a lot the stuff. I said, you can tell me everything that you want, but I know that I never belonged to Communist organization. Then the arrest me. They arrest me, I was in jail for over two weeks. 

One day, passed over like here, a man. He said to me, you Max? I said yes. You recognize me? I was so-- he gave me a lot of directions, over there. He want to know if I'm a Communist. I'm never-- not a Communist. He punch me some time, "Tell the truth!" I said, I can just tell you the true-- truest, I said I never belong to this organization. Now every Jew was-- was Communist. "You too." I said, my dear friend, I can't help you. I tell you the truth. 

Then he come a man, along, he recognize me. He says, you, Max? What are you doing here? I said, I don't know. Tell me, you've got something with the police, something? I said never, they arrest me, I don't know for what, for why. OK, he said to me. Wait a few minutes, I go in. I know you better than somebody else, you're my friend. And I bring you in a short time. 

He went in the police office, the top office. And he said, this man is a very honest, nice man. He's the best man that I know. Please, when I tell you something, this is true-- I'm an organized man, and I work here. Give the man free-- let they go out. And he's going crazy here, the man. But I know he was an honest man, he was never Communist. 

And a half hour, maybe, later, he said, you can go. I was free. Yeah, I got a lot-- then I said, I have to go now. Maybe it's the time to go from this country, you know? What he tell me, such a story, he arrests me that I am a Communist. I have never been a Communist, I have never decide to be a Communist. 

But lately, he sent me out. I got such a blue eyes. You know, they gave me lessons there. He wants to know exactly. I said, you can kill me now, I'm not a Communist. I never-- I never was organized by Communist. My life is Democrat, Republican, or a Democrat, but I never was a Communist in my life. I was businessman. I remember [INAUDIBLE]. They didn't believe, they want to just arrest you. 

And then they came out my store, everything. They take out everything from my store. They rob me of everything. I got maybe about-- maybe now today, the money was maybe about $50,000 in the store. Shirts, and ties, and material that I got, everything, that's-- they take away, that's everything. That's why this finished, life, and then I have to go to Belgium. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you arrange to go to Belgium, was that hard? 

SUBJECT: I tell you, I arranged it so. I got to go to the frontier myself, with my wife. I not was married, it was my fiance. I was engaged, and we went to Cologne. You hear from Cologne city? Rhineland, Cologne is Rhineland. It's not far from Belgian frontier. And there, we meet a man, he arranged us. The smuggler, you know, he bring us over to Belgium. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Smuggled you in? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And become a Belgian one. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you feel as you were being smuggled into Belgium? 

SUBJECT: That's a very, very hard life. They catch-- one time, they catch us, the policeman, the German policeman, with a bicycle-- not a bicycle, a motorcycle. And I started to talk nice. He said I can arrest you now, to give to Gestapo, and they do with you what they want. But he tell me to-- And I got my violin with me. 

How do you-- how do-- you play well? I said, yeah. I played the internationale, the German. This-- you know, like, here. He said, OK, you-- he looks very nice, man. I said I have a mother over there, and I tell him a little not true, you see. I have a sick mother, and I want to see her, in Belgium. I go to Brussels. 

He said OK, sat down at the bicycle. He bring me at free zone, you know? There's a free zone over there, before-- before you come to Belgium. But he tell me to go this, this way. You go to make a left turn, and then you come a turner, and then they-- you have to watch that the Belgian police don't catch you, and they give you over to the-- at the German. And you have to go, you have no passport. And he tell me exactly the route, where I have to go. And I come over, and they got private cars there, and he bring me to the city of Brussels. We pay for this. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were you with? Were you by yourself, or were you with somebody else? 

SUBJECT: I was with somebody else, another friend too. He come over the same. He's in Belgium now, I don't know what he is in life now. I never see him last time. But I-- when I went to United States, I didn't see him anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: During this time, did you hear from your mother and father? Did you have contact with your parents, with your family? 

SUBJECT: No. My father died at the time when the war was with Poland, the beginning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I didn't-- when he died, it was bombed? 

SUBJECT: He was very-- he had become sick, and then he had a lot aggravation, and passed away. And my mother killed in Auschwitz. In the street, they make a ring, and the all people, you know, all the people, killed-- young too, at this time. That I-- I got information maybe when I come here, one year, somebody tell me, you mother was killed in the city. 

Takes a lot of people, couple thousand people. They makes the ring, they shoot with the machine pistol. Killed us out. And there's nobody, my sister, they went to concentration camp, they killed them there, poisoned-- gas, gas chambers. And this is the story. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to your brother? 

SUBJECT: Brother, they take him too, and they-- von einem Bomb. You know, they kill him. He ran away, he was in putting away, you know, of a place, some places. When they fall bombs, a lot of bombs, and he become a bomb, head. People tell me this, I got information. Yes. So. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what did you do when you got to Belgium? 

SUBJECT: I do nothing there. I make sometime a few dollars, or places, I come in some department stores he wants to know from designing patterns that I make there. And I make a few dollars, you see. And I got a little money from Germany, what they sent me over, you see, in the beginning. The German [INAUDIBLE] my money. Got a few thousand Marks, then I changed this to Belgium, Belgium money. [INAUDIBLE] 

I got-- I had become good life there, not so bad, you see. I was a free man, first of all. I went out when the Nazis, you see. When the Nazis, they arrest you every hour, a lot of-- that's-- that's this man arrested, this man arrested, this man arrested, this, arrest, arrest. And sometimes they kill him in the basements, and take him the basement, and they kill him. 

But people sometimes asking a question-- what I do? Why'd you now arrest me? Because you're a Jew. We not want Jews here. And he answer some time, what is a Jew? What, what, what, what, what'd we do bad here? I'm a business man, I'm a worker, I work my whole life. Do not need the Jews. They hate the Jews. And then they kill him there, you see. Some, some they sent him to the Auschwitz, or another concentration camp. I was maybe in four or five concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- how were you taken? I wondered how you got arrested, by the Nazis. 

SUBJECT: Yeah that is-- in Belgium, occupied the Germans country, this time. And I went in a factory, working, to have free. That have been free, you understand? But it's-- I had become a-- the company works for the German. They occupied at this time, Belgium, this were '42nd-- '41, or '42nd, like this. 

And they give me papers, the man that I'm working for him, at that factory. And he works for the German army. He works fur coats, fur jackets. And he went to Russia-- this, the war time. Then I got to [? Plevernitch, ?] that I come work all over. Then I was one time by a friend of me, and I visit him. 

He was secret, he lived secret. No one has to know where he lives, when they come there. One time come the Gestapo. They got twice that he lived stand there. And I was there, and they arrest me, at this time. He said, why they have to look in here? You got your papers, you have to stay home. Not to go into nighttime after 8 o'clock to visit people, friends. 

There's no friends, you have to go on the law. You have to keep the law. And the law was, after 8 o'clock, nobody has to go out from their apartment. You have to stay home. Just German army, you couldn't walk around in the city. And then they arrest me, and sent me into camp, in Belgium. I was in Belgium there, about nine months in the camps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which camp was that? 

SUBJECT: This were a camp, a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the name? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, the name-- [? Bunno. ?] And from there, they sent me in a saving camp, later. You know, where they all people come together. From there, they sent us-- I was there about two, six month, six month. They sent me to Auschwitz, you know. You heard of Auschwitz concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: My parents were there. 

SUBJECT: And there I was one and a half year. Then I came from there, then come the Russians, not far from Auschwitz, this time. We have to evacuate it, from this place, to go another-- another camp. They take us to Austria, and they stop in a lot of-- change the work, and lot of camps. There a month, and there a few weeks, we have to go always travel more, more, by foot. 

Then some time we got trains, they open the trains, you know, what merchandise, they travel with them. This was a very bad time. They kill a lot of people of the route. Every-- every few minutes, nobody can walking, you see. Was snow, was winter time, January. Then they shoot them, and let them, so understand? 

Anyway, camp-- camp Mauthausen, that is in Austria. And then there was terrible-- terrible, terrible, terrible. Worst to be all over. Then we are sent there by six weeks. And from there, to send us-- this was the last camp-- the name was Ebensee, Austria. Ebensee, this was the last camp, this is not far from Linz-- you hear maybe from this city, Linz, yeah? 

From there we was-- in Linz I was over a year. And I was terror, I was my last-minute, I was lucky that I meet a man, he was a doctor, a French doctor. But I spoke to him French. He saved me. But anyway, when the war was finished, I couldn't work from here-- [INAUDIBLE] this, and they call me. I was so sick-- very sick. They want me always to the Gaskammer. 

But he said, that's my cousin. That doctor said that's my cousin, I have to save this man. He is my best cousin. I no was a cousin for him, but he said, this is my cousin. He likes me very much. Then, we come free one day. This was May 15. They liberated us. And goes the Germans, with the everything, then I was liberated. They come there, they make us free. 

And then I was very sick. Then I come, I want-- I have to say in what country they arrest me. I said, from Belgium. You want go back to Belgium, or you will look for a different country? I said, no, I want to go back to Belgium. I couldn't work, I couldn't go to the airplane station. I was so sick, my weight was 60 pound. 

And when I came to Belgium, it takes me control, doctors, professor. And he said to me, he ask me, how you feel? I couldn't answer, I not feel good. I looked terrible-- 60 pounds, I couldn't spoke, my stomach was spoiled, just bones, you can see. 60 pound was-- I was about 180 pounds, they arrest me, I got 180 pounds. 

He said, professors, said to the doctor's, that man is completely ready. We can't keep him. Maybe we send him in a sanatorium, a hospital. He not-- he not make this. He's too sloppy, he has not any force more. We can do nothing with this man. And-- and he said, one professor and one doctor said to me, we'll send you in a hospital first. We want to see how you feel, these few days. They sent me to the hospital, I couldn't stay. That was a very bad place, bad hospital. And said to me, and you feel a little better-- one doctor, a German doctor, was a Jew. He was from Brussels, he was belongs too to the organization. 

Said to me, I tell you something-- stay here five, six days, in the hospital. And then when you come of the hospital, I visit you here, and I pick you up. You come in my place, and I try the best to do for you, I'm very sorry for you. Maybe I bring you back a new life. 

After five, six days, he come with a car, and he pick me up. And he take me-- him office. And he started with injection, injection. Consume vitamin injections, every day, three, four times, injection. And then he helped me, a lot. 

Then he sent me to Czechoslovak-- where your father was. These cities-- Mari-- Marienbad, this is Mariánské Lázne, it's the name now in Czechoslovak. And I got a doctor friend, he keep me there for six month. After the six month, I come out a different person. I was a new man. And that was the end. 

Then I come to Brussels, I started to working in my business. And I come out very good. And then I-- I tried to go to United States. And this take me a few years, my cousin makes me papers from here to there, and I come here to New York. And that's about 1950, August, '50. It's now 31 years. It's enough? You have another question? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you like to talk about what it was like those years in the concentration camp? What you remember? 

SUBJECT: I remember when I came concentration camp, the first control was Auschwitz, people control. One have to go right, and one have to go left. You was lucky you went left, then you didn't go in gas chamber. They looked, naturally, they looked for people, the healthy. I was a very healthy man-- was a very. 

He's asking me, you can work? I said yes. You like to work? I say yeah. You will come a job for us. You're working on transportation. This means railroad, to pick up something, cement, or something, stuff potatoes or something. You strong enough, you can work. I started there. 

Then the people like me there, some of the Kapos. You know here what Kapos means? They handle people, handle with the concentration. He likes me, people, he takes me over in a difference, difference commander, you know, a difference. And I working there, and everybody likes me, you see, and I got all over jobs. 

I could do everything, I could work, I could make everything. Then-- this was in Auschwitz, they were very bad, very bad time. Food was very bad. Sunday you were not a rest day. Until 11 o'clock, the commander, Gestapo, the SS-- to work! We have-- we have to add up a lot of [INAUDIBLE] things, rounds, you see. 

Then we have to do this, we're working very hard there. They give us work, you couldn't work, you have to run you see. You've got a sack here up on the-- 50 kilo, 60 kilo. We have to run. You couldn't go like-- like regular. You have to run, or they come down on you, you know, after you. You have to run there, like-- like a-- like a horse. 

And this were a very hard life, but in the time come-- come the Russian not far from Auschwitz, you see. We have to emigrate it in a different place. And we went by foot, 50 kilometer a day, 60 kilometer, 40 kilometer. And then we couldn't more walk. You have to put it on the floor, and to sit, the snow and everything-- and to sleep there in the nighttime. And you sit. 

This were a very hard life, and I wouldn't be a strong man, I would never come out of this. I was very strong, I could take a lot of-- was a very healthy man. And after this, we come to Ebensee-- to Mauthausen. We stop in Gross-Rosen, in the camp, they have here for two days. And from there, we went to Czechoslovak, all over, and then we come to Austria, to Mauthausen. 

Mauthausen was a was worst camp, and then we didn't believe this-- the nighttime, 2 o'clock in the morning, we wake up. You have to go appel. You know what appel is? To stay in the street, when the people fall down, was finished, passed away. 

And then we have to stay till 7 o'clock, five hours, not dressed, in the frost, snow, not-- no shirt, no nothing. Just a [INAUDIBLE] slacks. And then 7 o'clock, we went to work. I can tell you what kind of work-- [INAUDIBLE] stones to put those with the machine. 

[IMITATES MACHINE] 

You see? This were terrible work, that we lose the all-- with the time, you go every day, you lose five pounds, every day. And then, couldn't more work, you come in the hospital, terrible hospital. It was not clean, you know, it was terrible. And I-- I was there, come the doctor, he got me some stuff that I can keep my life, you see. He was a nice man. 

And then comes the end of the war. After the war, a lot of people died-- a lot of people, a lot of people. Because the American army gives us packets, food. And they eat too much, they couldn't take more, their stomach, you see. Stomach was spoiled, and they passed away. 

And then, I-- I was, I watch my-- all over, I watch my. I didn't eat so much, you see, I eat little bit. I know that's not good for me. I see that people fall down, is finished. He was hungry, you know, he want to eat everything in one-- in one time. That's no was good. 

I take a little bit, a little bit, and a little bit. And the old people take it-- it's such a package like this-- and they eat it completely up, you see. It was terrible, look, they passed away. In five minutes, pass away. 

I watch my life, this time, there was operation, I have to go home. Everybody went home. When I sent there, I couldn't work to do the plan, couldn't work. I tried to, with my hip on the floor. I couldn't work the stiar. Then I stay another few days. Then they-- then they pick me up, and bring me to the plane. I came to the airport, you know. And then they brought me to Belgium. And I tell you before, the story. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you think gave you the strength to survive? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What gave you the strength to surv-- to survive? Was it only that you were healthy? Or was there more that-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah I got-- my natural life was-- I was a very healthy man. I never-- never been sick. And the doctor tell me, nobody-- I have never see a man like you. That you can take it so much, so bad life. And now I bring you, survive that, you in good condition 

INTERVIEWER 1: All those terrible years, what was going through your mind? What did you think when you were-- 

SUBJECT: Now? 

INTERVIEWER 1: There, then. What-- 

SUBJECT: I tell you the truth, my thinking was now to become healthy. Just-- I know that I-- I all over make a living in my life. And I been in my-- in my profession, a man, you know. That I can-- everything, I can do it. Like you say here, handyman. 

I got-- where I came, I got all over, friends. In Belgium, they give me some-- some instruction. Where you can start it, where you can make it. That's-- that's I will come up. I was very-- when I came to Belgium, I was-- couldn't do nothing, you see. 

At the first, at the beginning, when I liberated from the concentration camp. I couldn't work, I was in a place where I just sleep the whole day. I couldn't work, I couldn't eat, I was nothing. With the time comes a little better, better, better. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can I ask when did you get married, what year was that? 

SUBJECT: I get married in Belgium, in 1939. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what happened to your wife? Where was she when you were taken away-- 

SUBJECT: She was too with me in concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So when they arrested you, they arrested her too. 

SUBJECT: When she come back from concentration camp, too, she was very sick, very sick in concentration camp. She lived maybe a half a year. Then she was finished. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Which camps was she with you? 

SUBJECT: She was in Auschwitz, and she was in other camps. I don't remember the camps, but the most she was in Auschwitz. The most time she was in Auschwitz. She come, she was very sick. She couldn't take more life, started everything. Doctors and doctors, nobody could help. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have contact with her during those years? Did you have contact with her when you were in the camps? 

SUBJECT: In camp, yeah. That's why I was the one man in all-- in the whole camp in Auschwitz-- that they have contact. She work in the factory, and I went in the factory, I work in the factory. And I-- I working-- I deliver the stuff there, for the transportation stuff. With the cars, I bring in the factory. And I could, can see it, everything there, when I worked there, in Auschwitz, not far from the munition factory. She works in the munition factory. You know what munition. 

And I couldn't come to see every day, but every second day, or two days. She was, I could bring her sometime food, you see. And she was in no good position. Later she came to Germany, and they liberated Auschwitz, you know, the Russian. She come to Germany, I didn't see him more. I see her just when she come back to Belgium, after the war. 

Then we live a half a year, she was very sick. She couldn't take more, she couldn't eat right. When she eat, her stomach was spoiled. And passed away. Was a good wife, very good. Was a very lovely person. But sick is sick, you can't do nothing. I couldn't help her. 

The doctors tried, the best doctors, best professor said whole body is completely spoiled. Her hunger got enough, her eat. When I was a younger person, you asked me 15 years, you will be the same. Couldn't take more, and she got to eat something. [INAUDIBLE]. Stomach were completely spoiled. Yeah, that's life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Before you said that after you came the United States, you eventually got your own business, and then you were able to travel back to Europe. 

SUBJECT: Oh, I travelled for every year. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever go back to Germany? 

SUBJECT: I was one time in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like for you, to go back to Germany? 

SUBJECT: No, it's not more, it's no was my life more. You know, I didn't feel more, but I no got nobody there. I have one friend in Germany now, he's an artist, painter, great artist. 

He wrote me letters, come, come visit me, visit me, visit me. He was here for one year, in New York, he's American citizen. But he got orders that he works here for a couple of months, he works over there when he has the orders. He's a great artist. Wood painter, a first-class painter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SUBJECT: Eh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think when you saw the German people after the war? 

SUBJECT: I no got feeling well for Germany, I tell you. I couldn't have been German in my best life now. They give me every free-- Medication, apartment, free. Doctors free, everything what I needed. It's everything free for me. That's just, you know, this means he comes back in the same country where he lives before. 

These people was in the concentration camp, when they live before in Germany, he has everything, privilege, free, every privilege. You can have an apartment. You pay a small pension, they give you a high pension over here, that you want to live there, to stay in Germany. But I'm not interested in Germany. 

Because we will say this like I joke-- from one door you threw out, you want to in another door coming in? This is no life, because I give up German. I don't want to stay there. I can have a nice life in Germany, but over here. But I never-- smell meat, not good. I have no big interest in the German. We have now here [INAUDIBLE] for life live, or what Germany's wasted. 

INTERVIEWER 2: They're changing the tape. They're changing the tape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

