[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER: Mr. Tobias, I want you to give us your full name and the year you we're born and the town and describe it a bit, if you will. 

MR. TOBIAS: My name is Herr Tobias. I was born in Giessen, Germany, November 29, 1921. I lived in a little town in Zurbach, 70 miles south of Frankfurt. The town was more or less a farm-- a farm village. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were your friends like? What kind of-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I was the only Jewish boy which went to school. And I went to school. The children was all right we had played with at the time. But it's a time for crisis. 

From 1933 to 1934, '5, I had difficulties being a Jewish boy. And I also had difficulties in school, especially in 1934, because they wanted to write a story about Hitler in 19-- when he came to power in 1933. And it was very hard for me to write a story about Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's talk a little bit about that. You were a child. You were in school. You had lots of friends, a nice family, and suddenly things were different. Can we be specific about the things that you noticed? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, the children I used to play with, today they was my friends and tomorrow, I should say, they was almost my enemies because they were stirred up by some of the youth leaders from the Hitler Youth. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember certain incidents? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, they wouldn't play with me no more-- simple as that-- because I was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: They said that? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember their words? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, they said, I'm sorry. We can't play with you no more. As much as we would like to, but you are a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: You were about 12 years old when you first had this happen to you? 

MR. TOBIAS: Just about, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. In school, the teachers? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, the older teachers was all right. But we had some of the younger teachers which used to belong to the Storm Troopers, which had quite an anti-Semitic feeling in themselves. And so Youth would try to transfer it to the children. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever ask your friends why they said this to you? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. They said they was afraid to play with me because they was told not to play with me. 

INTERVIEWER: Who told them? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, some of the older kids in our village used to belong to the-- well, the girls used to belong to-- let me see. I-- some kind of an organization just like the Storm Troopers I say. And the-- and the boys the same way, from the age 9 till about 12, 13, my age group. They had certain age groups where they belonged to it, I'd say. And they wouldn't play with me no more, just for that reason, because I'm a Jew. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you discuss this with your family? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. My mother said, you've got to make the best out of it because until you've finished school. And I was told that the only way for me to live with it to make the best out of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your mother talk to the teachers about it? Did she complain? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, because we understood there's no way to complain about it because that's the way it is. And you've got to make the best out of it and live with it. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you-- today, would you make the best out of it and live with it? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, what-- what can I say? Perhaps, yes. There was no alternative. Where could I go? Where was a place-- there was no place for me to go unless I finished school and learned a trade. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1936, you did learn a trade. 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- tell us. 

MR. TOBIAS: I learned to be a cabinet maker. There was a special school in Frankfurt. And my cousin at the time, he was a rabbi in Berlin. His name was Dr. Fritz Baumberger. 

And he talked me into it, to learn a trade, because it's the only way you can survive when you come to the United States. So I went to Frankfurt. And I learned a trade to be a cabinet maker. 

INTERVIEWER: You had-- 

MR. TOBIAS: It was-- it was only for Jewish boys at that time. There was for cabinet makers. And there was also for blacksmiths and-- and related trades. 

INTERVIEWER: You had planned to come to the United States? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

MR. TOBIAS: Because at the time my father was over here. 

INTERVIEWER: And he told you you would come? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What was it like in the all-Jewish school? Did you have any problems there? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, no, we didn't have any problems in the old Jewish school-- in the old Jewish school. We had no problems. But as long as you-- as your friends was all Jewish, you had no problems. But you couldn't go anywhere else and have friends or make friends, except Jewish boys and girls. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember things on the street, signs, or in the newspaper? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, of course, there was all kinds of signs against Jews. But you was used to it at the time because there was hardly any Jewish stores no more there where you could buy. And if there was Jewish stores, they couldn't survive because they couldn't do any business, because they was taught not to buy from Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was taught? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, from the German government all the way down. 

INTERVIEWER: I think, Mr. Tobias, I'm questioning you a lot on this because we're trying to get an understanding of what the atmosphere was like in Germany at that time. 

MR. TOBIAS: The atmosphere was a very anti-Semitic time at that time because people were stirred up that the Jews exploiting Germany. The reason why are hard times in Germany is because of-- because of the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever hear of anyone who said-- stood up and said, that's not true? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, no, I didn't because it was-- the people was so used to it. And as I said, you wouldn't argue with people anymore because you couldn't win anyhow then, because this was going on since 1933. And people just believed-- believed them. They said the Jews was-- was there for-- because Germany was-- is bad off because they was told that the Jews exploited it then, and that's why they are as bad off as they are. In fact, in 1933, 1934, they broke in all Jewish stores in Frankfurt, smashed the glass, the windows, and took out whatever was in it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see that? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, what can I say? If we-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

MR. TOBIAS: --want to use some harsh words, I could say a bunch of hoodlums, maybe 30, 40 people, come smashed the windows and took everything out. And if the owner would say something, they'd beat him up. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you when you saw this? 

MR. TOBIAS: In Frankfurt at the time, 1936. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? Where were you standing? 

MR. TOBIAS: I walking on the street. Walking on the street. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you afraid? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I was. I was only a child. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hide or run? 

MR. TOBIAS: No. I walked fast in order to get home. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother say when you got home? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, my mother at the time, in 1936, still lived in a little village in Zurbach because I lived all by myself in Frankfurt. And I was learning my trade. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Did you discuss this with the teacher in the cabinet-making school? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, yes. But there was nothing we could do about it because they was aware there because some of the people which lived in Frankfurt, they did it even before that we was told in 1934, '5. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

MR. TOBIAS: At that time, at the village where we used to live, we wasn't used to that because we were the only three Jewish families. But in the big cities, they was used to it. That was happened before. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they think it would stop? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, yes, some people thought it would stop. Some didn't thought it would stop because some people left already in 1933, and '4, and '5, and '6. And some people thought it may go away. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your mother say? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, my mother thought also it would go away because in 1936, we had no place where to go. So we had to make the best out of it. So we had no visas, and we didn't know where to go. So we had to stay. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it hard to get a visa if you wanted to leave? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, it was very hard. It took me almost three years after I had my visa to get a boat. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe that process. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I got my visa in 1938 in Stuttgart, Germany. And I didn't leave Germany till August 21st, 1941, because it was very hard to get a boat. Very hard. 

INTERVIEWER: To get passage on a boat? 

MR. TOBIAS: To get passage on a boat. Yes, ma'am. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us about your cabinet-making experience and then what happened in 1938. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I worked in a cabinet shop for the railroad. That was right in 1939. Up till '38, I worked to learn my trade in Vishnevets. And after that, I had to go from the-- what would you say-- unemployment office wherever they sent me. 

And I had to work in factories where they make bricks. I had to peel potato-- pick up potatoes in the fields. And I also worked in the railroad. And in the railroad, I worked for one year, from 1939 till '40. 

INTERVIEWER: But before that, you were in Frankfurt. And you were there on November 10th, 1938. 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I was. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe what happened November 10th? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I went to work in 1938 in the morning, and I saw nearby a synagogue was burning. And I didn't understand what was going on. So when I came to work, everything was closed and locked up. And I see police moving and picking people up, putting it in vans. 

And then I inquired what was happened. So they claimed the-- all the synagogues are burning, and people are getting picked up. And we didn't know what happened to the people, where they went. 

So what I did, I walked home where I used to live. And as soon as I came-- came there, two policemen came up and asked me how old I was. And I said 16. So they looked at me and they left. And I was very afraid because I still didn't know what-- what it was all about it. 

So I wanted to go home because my mother and grandfather were still living at the farm. So what I did, I took the train from Frankfurt to Lindberg, another little village, and from there took a bus. And then I had to walk another three miles. 

So when I did come home, our house was closed. Everything closed. And the barn, which we had some cattle left yet, was empty. And the chickens we had was running around. 

So I ran to cross street to my neighbor and find out what was all about it. So they claimed my grandfather, my grandmother, and two other Jewish families, they moved in an empty house. And beyond that, they couldn't tell me anything. 

So I went to the mayor for the little village and I asked why. So he told me, he said, the other two Jewish men, they was taken in a van. And they didn't know where. But my grandfather was well-advanced in age, and they left him. 

So I said, where are they? He said, well, in an empty house about a mile from where we used to live. So I went home, see my grandfather, and my mother, and the other two Jewish women crying. And I said, what's going on? Well, they said, they told us to leave and we can't go back anymore there. 

So there was very little food. And all they had was a couple of mattresses on the floor where they were sleeping. So the policeman from the little village which was, perhaps, 10 minutes away from I'd say. So I went over there and he was home. 

And I ask him, what happened? He said, well, they arrested all the Jews up to a certain age, up till 70-- I think that at the time my grandfather was 71-- and they took them in a concentration camp. That was the answer I got from him. He knows what was going on. He knows where they went. 

And so I asked him if I can get some food. They have-- people have hardly anything to eat. So, well, he agreed, said we could go back to the house, get a certain amount of food. But we have to leave. He told us, it would be better if we would leave the village. 

So I gave this message to my mother and to the other two Jewish women which was left because their husbands was in a concentration camp, because they took them there. They were arrested. And they were younger in age than my grandfather. 

INTERVIEWER: When he said to you they took them to a concentration camp-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --did you know what he meant? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, I didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, at the moment I thought, well, maybe they just put them there and-- for the time being. But I just couldn't understand what it was all about it. 

INTERVIEWER: What did the word "concentration camp" convey? 

MR. TOBIAS: Up till this time it was for me hard to understand what it meant. But after a while, I understand. I understood what it meant. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ask the policeman, or the mayor, or anyone what it meant? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I asked the policeman. Well, he said, they want to keep the Jews all together and I said, man because there was a crime committed. One-- what you call it? A German ambassador was shot and killed in Switzerland by a German Jew. 

And that was, I guess that was something they wanted to do against the Jewish people there because one of them got shot. One of-- ambassador got shot. And that was supposed to be the penalty, I think. But then later when I found out what a concentration camp was all about it, it was a different story. 

INTERVIEWER: How much later did you find out what it was about? 

MR. TOBIAS: Oh, about-- about two, three weeks later when I went back to Frankfurt to get a place for my mother and my grandfather to live. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you find out then? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I was told in Frankfurt from the people where I used to live that they put them all in camp and some, perhaps, wouldn't come out no more. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, because there was rumors that some of them got killed on the way down even. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, of course, you think it's an awful thing. Just because you are a Jew, and you're getting killed for something you-- you don't know. You-- I mean, you was born just like you could have been born as a Catholic or as a Protestant. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you frightened? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I was. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you change your behavior with these? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I was very frightened because in Frankfurt we lived an all Jewish neighborhood. And you're afraid. God knows what can happen tomorrow or the day after. 

And I think it was planned pretty well because we left the village and we moved to Frankfurt. And it was so arranged so that you couldn't shop in any store no more, except for Jews only. They had certain stores where you could get meat and groceries, but for Jews only. And at certain hours you had to stay in line in order to get the food. 

And you didn't die. I mean, you got enough just to go by. But it wasn't that you could move in any store or go in any store and buy anything you wanted to. 

INTERVIEWER: What would happen if you walked into a non-Jewish store? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I do not know. I was a child at the time, still young. And perhaps they wouldn't recognize that I-- that I was a Jew. 

But I think if I was a Jew-- I just can't imagine what could happen because, No. 1, they probably would've taken the food away from me. And God knows what, maybe they would beat you up too. And maybe you ended up yourself in a concentration camp yet. 

INTERVIEWER: How would they know that you were-- someone was Jewish if they walked into the store? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, they wouldn't exactly know. But suppose they follow you in there which they, perhaps, did and see that you live in the Jewish quarters at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt they might follow you? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What made you have this feeling? Was it in the newspaper, or were there signs, or did people talk, or what made you know? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it's the people, the people in itself which was talking about the Jews because, as I said previously, that they blamed the Jews for all the ills which was in Germany. And that's it. And you was afraid to speak up because you was afraid. God knows what can happen to you. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know of anyone who spoke up and something bad happened? 

MR. TOBIAS: Hm-hmm. No, I don't. I only do know that some doctors, before they got arrested, in a hospital in Frankfurt committed suicide. I do know that, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: How did-- how did you know that? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I heard it from nurses which worked-- which were student nurses which worked in the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: And what did they say? 

MR. TOBIAS: That some doctors committed suicide when they tried to arrest them. 

INTERVIEWER: Jewish doctors? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they talk before they did this act? Did they talk to-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I think they was aware of it, what was going on, perhaps, more than I was because we-- as I previously said, we lived in a little village. And we wasn't as well-acquainted with what was going on than, perhaps, the doctors which was more acquainted with, which was in the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: November 10th you were in the village. That was commonly called-- 

MR. TOBIAS: No. November 10th I still was living in Frankfurt at that time. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you-- 

MR. TOBIAS: --went to the village about a day later. 

INTERVIEWER: So you saw what is called Kristallknacht. 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I see-- well, I did see synagogues burning up. Sefer Torahs was thrown on the street. Prayer books was thrown on the streets. And they just wanted to destroy anything which was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw them throwing the Sefer Torahs? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it was a horrible sight because where I learned my trade, just about 2,000 yards away was one beautiful synagogue in Frankfurt. The name was Bern Street Synagogue there, Bernstrasse Synagogue. Very beautiful synagogue. 

And going by there, I see the synagogue in flames. And I seen people go in it and throw Sefer Torahs on the street and prayer books on the street. And I think it's a hor-- it's a horrible sight to see, a horrible sight. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there noise? 

MR. TOBIAS: Of course there was noise, from explosions inside the synagogue there. 

INTERVIEWER: Was anybody shouting, yelling anything, that kind of noise? 

MR. TOBIAS: No. There was police there. And there was also firemen there. But all the firemen did, keep the flames from adjourning building. 

They didn't-- I mean, they didn't try to save the synagogue. They made sure that next door that no houses was burned. But in those houses was no Jewish people, more or less. 

INTERVIEWER: Anyone try to save the Sefer Torahs? 

MR. TOBIAS: Not while they was burning. Not while the police was there, no. But I do know some people saved the Torahs. A rabbi's wife saved a Torah before the synagogue was burned. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I couldn't exactly tell how. But she brought a Torah over here from Germany. We have it in our synagogue. 

INTERVIEWER: She hid it? 

MR. TOBIAS: She hid it, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: It was large. That was hard. 

MR. TOBIAS: It was a large Torah. And I imagine she took a great chance. I-- also, in a little village it was easier to do than in a big city. In a big city, I almost would say it was almost impossible to do that. 

INTERVIEWER: What else did you see that night, the Kristallnacht? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, as I said, I went home because I was-- I wouldn't go out anymore there at night. And I went home afterwards there. 

INTERVIEWER: The next day, what did you-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yeah, the next day I went home. And at night, I wouldn't go anywhere no more. No, no way. I was afraid to go. 

INTERVIEWER: As you were leaving the city, what did you see? 

MR. TOBIAS: What I was seeing is a policeman on every corner because they still thought that, perhaps, people was hiding in places and what have you. And all the way to the railroad station where I took the train was full with policemen. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they stop you? 

MR. TOBIAS: They didn't stop me, no, because I was tiny. I was a tiny boy. And they didn't stop me. 

INTERVIEWER: You came back from the village with your family. And you lived in Frankfurt. 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us what life was like then. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, life for me, it was a little easier. I was young. And for my mother it was a little harder because she was older. 

But I think hardest of all it was for my grandfather, which could never get used to it no more because for him it was very, very, very hard. And I saw him just about slowly almost fading away. I mean, it was very, very hard. 

What could a man do in his age which was-- used to be in the cattle business. We had a little farm. And what can a man a big city do? What can he do when he get up in the morning? 

There's no place to go. Where can he go? I mean, he take a chance, perhaps, he'll get beaten up yet because it was all Jewish neighborhood where we used to live, because that's the only way where you could live. 

And there was no way to get through outside. You could call it almost a ghetto. Call it any way what you want because that's what it was. 

INTERVIEWER: The ghetto wasn't closed though. 

MR. TOBIAS: It wasn't closed, no. But at the same time, if you're older, you wouldn't get too far out of it there because, No. 1, my grandfather wasn't too familiar what Frankfurt looks like anyhow. Where could he go? Where could he go? He would get lost, perhaps. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened to your grandparents? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it was very, very, very hard. Very, very-- it was very hard. And it just was very hard for him to live there, to get adjusted. 

In fact, I don't think he ever get adjusted because I worked from morning to night. So when I came home, he's just sitting in a chair. And it was just-- couldn't get used to this type of thing. And I think he didn't even understand very-- what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your grandmother and your mother? 

MR. TOBIAS: My grandmother died in February 1938, the little village Zurbach, before everything happened. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, my mother had to make the best out of it to stay in the village till we finally moved away and had to live with my grandfather because even at that time, as a Jew you couldn't do no more business because even in the cattle business you had to have papers in order to do business, like you have here. And in 1936, we didn't get any more papers to do our business there. So at that time already it was very hard. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1938 when she came to Frankfurt with you, what did she do? 

MR. TOBIAS: My mother? Nothing, because there was nothing to do. What could you do? What could you do? 

INTERVIEWER: How did she spend her day? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, there was another about eight, nine families used to live in the house. And as I said, there was other Jewish families there which we got to know and which we went-- which my mother went to and talked with it and get acquainted with. But to venture, let's say five, ten miles outside the city, no. Where would you go? You don't know anybody. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did she spend her day besides talking to these people? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, taking care of the house. And as I said previously before, they had stores only for Jews where she stood in line to get groceries, get meat and what have you. 

INTERVIEWER: You were working. Tell us about your work. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, as I said previously there, I worked in a railroad and a cabinet shop. And I also had to do different work besides making cabinets in there, especially in the wintertime. When it used to snow, we had to keep-- make sure that the trains could-- was pass-- which passed by the cabinet shop, the tracks was clean. 

So we had to clean it. At times, we had to clean the tracks out, too, for the trains to go by, the railroad tracks, was also part of our job. I mean, there's not such a thing that you could say, I don't like that. You just had to do what you had to do. 

And after I worked in the railroad a year, I had to go to Sternburg near Berlin at a farm. And we had to pick up the potatoes because they was short on labor. And the only laborers they did use to pick up potatoes in the fields was Jewish boys and girls. 

And girls used to cook for us. And when we come back from the fields-- we was about, roughly about 300 boys. And about four or five girls used to cook for us. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this called forced labor? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, call it what you want. I think you call it forced labor because we had no-- the only place where we was living in was a big hall, an empty hall where we had mattresses on the floor where we slept on at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: They asked-- they forced you to leave your mother and your grandfather? 

MR. TOBIAS: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I mean, you wasn't your own no more. You had to go wherever they sent you. And that was the place where they sent us. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you concerned about your-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I-- yes, I was. 

INTERVIEWER: --family? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I was. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you communicate with them, letters? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did-- I did write and I did get answers from them. I think as much as I was concerned, they was, perhaps, more concerned about me. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? You worked for a year in this potato-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Just about. Roughly a year, yes. And then I had to go back near Frankfurt and work in a little factory where they make bricks. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the treatment on this farm where you picked the potatoes? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, the treatment wasn't too bad, I should say. The treatment wasn't too bad because there also was some people which felt sorry for us, I should say-- bring that out. There was people which felt sorry for us. But the people which felt sorry for us was in the minority, very, very few. 

And it was tough because you had to do that in all types of weather and rain, whatever there was. And it was real tough, especially when you came home and you had no place to-- to wash your clothes, more or less. You had to wash your clothes yourself and hang it up on a piece of string. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the people who felt sympathetic? Do you remember them at all? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, there were some people which felt sympathetic when I worked in the railroad and the cabinet shop. I had a-- I had a boss at the time which was a Catholic and which told us that he does the best he can for us because he feel sorry for us that we lost everything. But beyond that, he couldn't do much because God knows what they would have done to him-- 

INTERVIEWER: And then-- 

MR. TOBIAS: --if he were to show a lot of sympathy to us. 

INTERVIEWER: And on the farm, you said there were some people that-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Oh, yes. There were some-- there were some people too. Oh, yes. But they couldn't express themselves, because all they would say, well, we sorry that you have to do that. But that's all. 

INTERVIEWER: Who were those people? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, mostly what you call foremen. That's about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Could they help make life a little easier if they felt like it? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, they did in a certain way. As long as you picked up a certain amount of potatoes, they wasn't pushing you. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. When you came back from the potato farm-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --what happened? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, then I had to go to a little town which they called [INAUDIBLE], which is near Frankfurt, where we had to set bricks inside the oven where they burn them in there so, you know, make bricks out of it there, which was not an easy job, which was a dirty, filthy job. And it was hot inside the ovens where we had to put it up. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Had you-- did you know how to do that? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, I never-- I never did. I never did because in that particular factory was also working prisoners, because already there was war on. There was French prisoners, and Polish, and Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: So the French prisoners, and the German prisoners-- and the Polish prisoners-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Polish prisoners and Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: --and Jews were working in the brick factory? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did you work? How many hours a day? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, sometimes eight, nine, ten hours, what have you. I worked there till I finally left Germany, 1941 in August. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you live while you were in the brick factory? 

MR. TOBIAS: We still lived in the same place in Frankfurt. I just took the trolley outside. We had a trolley in Frankfurt which brought me outside. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Did you talk to people there, what their plans were, what their fears were? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I got friendly with some French prisoners. And they had one aim in life if ever the war ends, to burn that place up. That was their aim because they got a-- I should almost say a harsher treatment than we got because the guards was German troops, German-- German soldiers, which was guards which was guarding the prisoners there. 

And they had it pretty rough, the prisoners. Not that we had-- not that we had it good. But they had it rougher. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see in the city? You were, after all, coming and going to this brick factory every day. What did you see in the city that was changing that was different? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, what I was seeing, what was changing from before was that Frankfurt went to almost a military base because Frankfurt is a large city, got a large railroad. And you could see-- near the railroad you could see all kinds of vehicles coming and moving. And you could see the trains loaded. 

And you know, don't forget. Frankfurt got bombed many, many times. The war was on in 1939 when the war started. So Frankfurt got bombed. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. What about the people that were going to the concentration camp, other Jews? What did you know about that? What did you hear about that? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, what I hear was they got very, very rough treatment. I mean, you can almost say what you heard later on when they put people in camps and killed them. They didn't-- I don't think they did kill them, but they got rough, very rough treatment. They got beaten up. And it was horrible. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see anyone being taken away? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. I see when they arrested people in Frankfort, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe some of those incidents? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, some of the incidents, you know, it's-- it's very hard to describe because people was crying. And-- and the one got arrested from the police. They just pulled him in the wagons. And it was a horrible sight to see. It was a horrible sight. 

INTERVIEWER: They pulled him in the wagon? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, yes, because people wasn't always willing to go, because on my way back from work, that's what I saw. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us-- take one day and describe what you saw, and what you heard, and what you felt. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, what I felt was, maybe I'm next. Even so, they let me go at the time. But still, you know, because I was year older, God knows what will be next. 

And for a while, we didn't even-- we'd know that there wasn't a concentration camp. But since no one came back, it was hard to imagine what happened to the people. Although we heard later that they had very rough treatment. But for a while, we didn't know what happened to anyone. 

INTERVIEWER: So you would be walking down the street coming back from work or going to work-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --and you would see what happening? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I was afraid almost every day because there was hardly any young people or middle-aged people left no more, because they all was in the camp. So all was left was younger generation, like my age. And we was very afraid because maybe we next. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said you saw the police, or whoever, go to homes-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --and do what? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see exactly? What did you see? 

MR. TOBIAS: What I saw is I saw the police pulling people out of-- out of homes, because I see them on the street just pull them out of doorways and whatever. 

INTERVIEWER: How pulling, just grabbing? 

MR. TOBIAS: Grabbing them, yes. And people were-- as I said previously, people wasn't always willing to go. And so they just pushed them and shoved them until they finally got them in the police wagons. 

And you could hear screaming from people. And if you looked up, you could see woman screaming. But the police didn't care about that. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel when you saw policemen on the street? What did you do? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, always afraid. Always afraid. And it's a funny thing, that feeling sometimes today is even with me. 

Not that I'm afraid for police. But sometimes that feeling stays with certain people and-- all their life. And I think I still sometimes when I see police, I don't feel-- not afraid, but I don't feel comfortable. 

INTERVIEWER: So tell us about how you left and what happened with your mother and your grandfather. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I finally left in August 19, '41, August 21st, 1941. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the leaving? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it wasn't very easy. I remember a few sentence my mother told me when I left and a few words my grandfather left-- when I left. My mother said to me, wherever you go, whatever you do, please don't shame me. 

And my grandfather said, if you can't be good to people while you're alive, you're not much good if you're dead. So that was the two things which still are in me today. And that's part of, perhaps, why I'm very active in the synagogue. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see your parent-- your mother and your grandfather again? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, never, never, never. 

INTERVIEWER: When you left, did you think that you might not see them? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. I also thought, perhaps-- my grandfather didn't want to leave no more. My grandfather wanted to go in the old people's home because they had an old people's home for Jewish people also in Frankfurt. 

But my mother I thought there was a chance, at least at the time, if I was in Spain or, perhaps, in the United States to get out. But there was no way to do it. I tried while I was in Spain, but unsuccessfully. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know what happened to your mother? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, I did. My mother died in one of the camps because some people which went to Shanghai, and which was in the camp and came out of it there wrote me about it, that my mother died in one of the camps. 

INTERVIEWER: They saw her? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you left? Where did you go exactly? How did you-- 

MR. TOBIAS: When I left Germany? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, yes. How did you leave? Where did you go? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we left with a transport from Berlin-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who is-- 

MR. TOBIAS: --maybe-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who is "we"? 

MR. TOBIAS: All Jews, let's say. Older-- a little older people, middle-aged people, and mostly young people, mostly young. 

INTERVIEWER: Why didn't your mother go with you? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, my mother at the time didn't have no visa. And my mother wouldn't leave because she wouldn't leave my grandfather. My mother said to me, when you in the United States, then see what you can do for me. But she wouldn't leave him alone at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? You got on a train? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we got on a train. And it was almost all-night ride. And finally we arrived in Berlin. And from there, they had-- all the people which went to Spain came from different places, like Muenchen, Frankfurt, wherever, from all places in Germany. And from there, we went to-- to Spain. 

INTERVIEWER: Why Spain? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we supposed to leave with the boat from Spain to the United States. But when we did come to Spain, we find out the reason why we was in Spain to get us out of Germany. We never had no boat. That's why some of us stayed two years in Spain. 

INTERVIEWER: Tell us what happened when you arrived in Spain, what city, and what you did. 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we arrived in Barcelona, which was a very lovely city. And we was put up in hotels, which was pretty nice. And Dr. Sieukara, which was from Portugal was living in one of the hotels. And he took care of all the refugees which came and which was previously there, which we found out. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have money? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, we didn't. All which we was allowed to take out 10 marks, which was $4 at the time. 

INTERVIEWER: So how did you live? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, the Jewish Committee under Dr. Sieukara leadership supplied the money to pay for hotels which came from the United States, from the highest. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in Spain? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, I was in Spain two years, almost two-- almost two years. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we didn't do nothing. I helped a little bit at the Jewish Committee, and that was it. And the rest of the time you just tried to keep yourself busy and do the best you can. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't there Nazis in Spain? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, there also was Nazis in Spain, especially the German Embassy. And as we found out, someone in the space knew that the German government put a tremendous pressure on the Spanish government to send some of the younger people back to Germany, which they tried to send us back to Germany because one morning when we-- I got to explain one thing, that every day we had to go to the police department and register ourselves because we had a card which was stamped every morning. 

And one morning when we walked in, six of us, they told us to come with one of the lieutenants. So they searched us. Whatever money we had and whatever papers we had, they took away from us, also our belt. And then they put us down a little police cell, like you find here in any police department where they have a little cell. 

And when we saw-- when we came down there, we saw already other-- other boys which was there. So we was about-- I don't know, maybe 25, 30. So we stayed overnight. 

And the next morning we got handcuffed and a big van took us to the main prison in Barcelona. Then each of us was put in a little cell, cell block. And for three weeks while we was there, we had no communication with just about anybody. We didn't know where we were, where we going-- where we're going or what's going to happen to us, which we just was out of touch with anybody. 

So one night, in the middle of the night, about-- after two or three about three weeks, twelve o'clock all the cell blocks was opened. And each of us was handcuffed to another-- to-- one to another fellow. And we was lined up in the main courtyard in the prison. 

From there we marched about, oh, I would say about four miles to the main railroad station. And from there we was put in a railroad car which was locked. So I asked the policeman in Spanish where we're going. But he doesn't know. 

So one-- one fellow wanted to go to the bathroom. So he took the handcuffs off. So while he went to the bathroom, he jumped through the window and jumped out of the train. And after that, we had it pretty tough because if you wanted to go to the bathroom, you had to go two because they wouldn't take the handcuffs off no more. 

So from there, we went to Portbou, which is the last town between France-- between Spain and Southern France. So we didn't know what was going on. So when we left the train, we was interviewed by the Spanish police if anyone spoke Spanish. Well, after being about almost two years in Spain, I just spoke a little Spanish, enough to go by. And I volunteered. 

So he told us that their purpose was to bring us down to Southern France and hand us over to the Germans. That was his duty. But you know, when I look back, one of the policemen which was a lieutenant, I think he must have felt very bad because he's the one who really saved us. 

He told us that, as I said previously, said his mission was to bring us down to Southern France but he's not going to do it. He said we should go up a mountain which was right ahead of us and stay till twelve o'clock at night till the guard changes, and then tell the guard that we went to-- down the mountain. The German police sent us back. That's the chance we had to take. If he wouldn't believe us, then he'd take us back, but he himself wasn't going to do it. 

So we stayed on top of a mountain till maybe a little after twelve. But everybody got impatient and wanted to go back. So I told them, if you go back, that may be the end of us, because we had to wait till the guard changes and then tell the new guard that we went back to Southern France and the Germans sent us back, which we did. So if they wouldn't believe us, then they could send us back. 

So at the time, they didn't know what to do with us. So they called Barcelona back. So from-- then the answers they got, I guess, that they put us in a camp. 

So we stayed one night. We stayed in a hotel. And then the next morning we left by train. And we wasn't handcuffed anymore. 

And from there, they brought us right to the camp near Miranda De Ebro. which was halfway between Barcelona and-- what you call it? Southern France, in between. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people-- how many boys were there? 

MR. TOBIAS: About 25. 

INTERVIEWER: Had they ever given you back your papers? 

MR. TOBIAS: Our passport we got back. 

INTERVIEWER: The visa papers? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. Well, we had a regular passport. The German government took it away from us while we was in Spain. But when they was going to send us back, they gave it to us back. That was the purpose, to send us back with the passport. 

INTERVIEWER: And then what happened? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, in the camp itself, I would say, it wasn't a pleasant thing. That's the first time I got exposed to what a camp really is or really means. The conditions was horrible. The living conditions was just horrible in there. 

And the facilities was unbelievable. And the food-- well, there's an old saying, it's-- it's not enough to live, and too much to die, because I only was six months in the camp. And when I finally left, I weighed about 97 pounds. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the conditions in the facilities which were so bad? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, the living conditions and the food was just horrible. I do say we wasn't physically molested. But they had another way to get rid of us. I think if we stayed another six months or, perhaps, a little longer, I'd say most of us wouldn't survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, you said they were horrible. 

MR. TOBIAS: The living conditions, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What does that mean, "horrible"? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, to wash yourself with it-- I mean, there was bucket with water for 10 or 15 people to wash in it. And if you went to the bathroom, you had to stay in line. And if you couldn't make it, you just couldn't make it. Simple as that. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your clothes, or keeping yourself clean, or-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, as I said, we had a bucket. We had a bucket which used to go around for 10 people and used to wash yourself and wash your clothes with it. That's it. 

INTERVIEWER: One bucket of water? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Did you have changes of clothing? 

MR. TOBIAS: Where do I changes the clothes? And they say, oh, when we got arrested, and we had the clothes which we had on. That's all we had. And we had to make the best out of it there. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER: If someone got sick, what happened? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, people got dysen-- dysentery. And people did get sick. But you'd never know because they'd tell us they put them in a hospital outside the camp. And there's no way we could find out what happened to the people. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. What was the food like that it was so bad? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it wasn't enough. Like what you did mostly get was soup and fish and potatoes, but not enough of it to sustain yourself. You could buy stuff, like a black market, but who had money to do that? The-- the Spanish soldiers would sell you anything, but who had money to do that? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do all day for those six months? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we kept walking inside the compound. And after a little while, they allowed us to play soccer, because mostly of the boys used to know how to play soccer, and that's what we did. But after-- after a little while, it was very hard because we didn't have the strength to do it. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't have to work? 

MR. TOBIAS: No. As I said previously, they didn't molest us physically. But it was enough mentally to get you down. And if you haven't enough food, you just waste away. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there beds for you to sleep on? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, we had-- we had beds, yes. We had beds, what you call beds, mattresses in there. And that's about all you had. There was bunk beds, two-- two-- two-- two bunk beds. One below, and one up it. 

INTERVIEWER: Cold? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes, it was. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Were the barracks or whatever-- 

MR. TOBIAS: Barracks, regular barracks, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they heated? 

MR. TOBIAS: No. 

INTERVIEWER: How many people? 

MR. TOBIAS: Oh, I don't know. I'd say quite a few thousand because they had one section where they had all the war prisoners which ran away from the war from France. They was kept separate because we-- we as Jews had separate barracks. And we had also Canadian soldiers, and French soldiers, and even some German soldiers but which was kept in separate barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the name of the camp? 

MR. TOBIAS: Miranda De Ebro. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. It's inside France? 

MR. TOBIAS: No, it's inside Spain. It's halfway between Spain, France. 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? 

MR. TOBIAS: About-- after six months, the Quakers got us out of there. You-- I think they call it here American France, or whatever it is, because the American consulate couldn't take us out because we wasn't American citizen. So it was the Quakers at the time which got us out. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

MR. TOBIAS: And from there, we stayed maybe two or three days in Spain. And then we went to Portugal for about six weeks till we finally caught a boat. And from there we come to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think now? How do you feel now about that experience? How has it changed you? 

MR. TOBIAS: Well, it changed-- it changed me quite a lot. I come back-- when I said what my grandfather said when I left, if you can't get-- if you can't be good to people while you're alive, you're not much good if you're dead. And if I can help people, I will, as much as I can afford to because I saw what happened. And it changed my path, my whole personality. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that people did try to help one another in that time? 

MR. TOBIAS: Yes. Yes, I think so. And I hope, and I'm almost sure, that most of the people which had the same experience I had, when they come to this country, they are changed people. 

It's hard-- it's hard to say. But I'm pretty sure that they are changed people from what they went through, because there's an old saying which says, money isn't everything, and if you can help people which in distress, I think you do a good-- a good deed. And if I look-- right now, if I look at my children and I see-- I'm very happy because both of my children are very active in Jew-- in Jewishness. I mean, if you look at my oldest daughter which went to Brussels a few years ago on behalf of Rashid Shoueli. if I look at my youngest daughter, which is very active, and then I go down and share in mass. And it makes me very happy. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much, Mr. Tobias. 

MR. TOBIAS: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, but we're both-- 

[COUGHING] 

I'm going to keep-- 

