SUBJECT: The town was finally made judenfrei, which means free of Jews. We were the only survivors of that town, and we were incarcerated in the barrack, which was right at the woodworking process factory. And this was right near the railroad siding. That is how we were able to see what they were doing with our people during the evacuation. It's not evacuation really, it's-- it's the final transport, as it turned out to be. 

And in Mielec, there was another instance that stands out in my mind. There was also a group of Polish workers, who were brought into that particular camp to do some work. And I remember one of them hollered across the fence to us, "You guys are crazy. Why do you work? They're going to make soap out of you." 

We didn't know what they were talking about. We didn't realize it, that the soap we were using in showers was from human fat. And this we didn't know until the end of the war, either. 

You speak about living in the dark, or being uninformed, these Polish fellows were not forthcoming in letting us know the events of the war, whether there was a positive feeling or negative feeling. None. We didn't know what was happening, who was at war, or where the war was being fought. All we knew was that we had a daily battle for ourselves, that we were totally preoccupied. 

In that camp, in Mielec, in this-- when we arrived there, these people were just going-- getting over a typhoid epidemic. And the survivors were walking around like on their last leg. People just had no strength. We were the strong ones that came into this particular camp. 

And after a short period of time, there was an execution again. They claimed it was sabotage. A group of workers in the-- in the rubber department, they were accused of having committed sabotage. I can assure you, we did not commit sabotage. Because none of us wanted to commit suicide. And we knew the rules of the game. 

Also, there's another area that is-- that needs to be told. And that is that each prisoner had to look out for the next prisoner. In the event that one prisoner should escape, the rule was that 15 of his immediate coworkers would be executed. 

And there are a lot of things that are difficult to project in a book, a story, and slides. But as one tries to recollect some of these things, they had total control over us, body and soul, 100%. And we were totally subservient. 

Now, these were still camps that were primarily Jewish. In 1944, this was already the fifth year into the war, and I told you the situation with the soap. So it shows you how, five years into the war, so many millions of people were already destroyed. And we didn't know anything about it. 

From there, one day, a transport of freight trains-- freight cars-- arrived. Supposedly, we were going to load machinery from the factory. 

Again, we were just deducing that there were certain things happening. Like, our airport became the last forward base for the German Air Force to attack the Russians on their front. And we'd see sometimes 12 airplanes take off, and always less would come back. We didn't have time to study the situation, but it's just an observation that one recollects. Then, there were a few air raids at night, when we worked night shift. The plant was blacked out, and the lights would go out for a short period of time. 

And then, on that particular day, we were supposed to load machinery. Instead, they loaded up the entire camp of Jewish prisoners, and they took us into a salt mine. In that salt mine-- which was Wieliczka, also in Poland-- on the ground was a plant with parts. Airplane parts were being manufactured. There, we were only about two weeks, and from there, we were sent out on a transport again. 

Now, these transports are really something else. I think I'm going to talk about it afterwards. 

But anyway, next, the train stopped. We didn't know, at any time, where they were taking us, where we're going. We were totally in the dark. And as we arrived at that particular station, we smelled an awful odor. It was suffocating. All that smoke was coming into the-- through the slits in the car, in the freight cars. And as we looked through the cracks, we saw women working in the fields. And these women wore striped coats and had no hair at all on their heads. And this is an awful sight. 

Again, we still didn't understand where we were. We didn't know what it was all about. We found out, after the war, that was Auschwitz. Now, we also found out what took place there. The SS wanted us gassed, and the German War Ministry needed us as mechanics to work on the airplanes. And I guess the War Ministry won, and they shipped us into Germany. 

And for the next four days and nights, there was no food. The smell, unbelievable. Bodies all over the cars, people were dying like flies. Not even a glass of water. And this whole thing was-- it's like a nightmare. This is very difficult to describe, how one finds oneself in this type of a situation, completely helpless. 

But we made it. And we arrived in a stone quarry that was called Flossenburg, in Bavaria, Germany. And there was a large sign as we entered the camp, which said arbeit macht frei, which meant, work makes you free. It didn't. 

But anyway, then, the next situation, they brought us in on this large reveille place. And they told us all to undress, leave all our belongings, which consisted of just what we wore, and perhaps a few photographs. We had to leave everything. Then, they ushered us into a large shower room, and they let go of some ice water. Then, we went out through a different door into what they called a quarantine, which had four barracks. And that was a camp within a camp. 

In that quarantine, we walked around naked, day and night-- just again, four days and four nights. And during that time, they shaved us of all hair. And this is an extremely painful experience, when men use rusty razor blades and nick you, and then they use Lysol on the cut. That's an excruciating pain. Just burns. And some people didn't even survive that, from pain. 

And then, they give us numbers-- prisoner numbers. Oh, yes, I'm going to get back to this, but I want to get back and talk about numbers. 

In Flossenburg, they tattooed us KL, which means Konzentrationslager. The reason for that being, should a prisoner escape, he would be easily detected and apprehended. And then, they could torture him in front of the other prisoners. Thus, again, escape was discouraged. 

Now, in Flossenburg, they give us prisoner numbers. It so happens that I have saved my last prisoner number. The P stands for the Polish origin. The red triangle stands for the political prisoner. And the yellow stripe stands for Jew. As of that day, we ceased to have names. We were a number. 

Also, during that particular period of time, they lined us all up, and a German doctor inspected us for physical fitness. And he had a German assistant with him-- a soldier-- who had a bucket with black paint and a brush, and they applied numbers on us, on our foreheads and our backs, like cattle. We didn't know, at that time, what this represented. 

However, in my case, I still had two cousins who were with me, and the one standing next to me was still well built, and he got a number two. And as the soldier finished painting the numbers on him, he told the doctor that this was my cousin. This was one of the very few times we ever had the audacity to speak at all to authority. So the doctor said, give him a two also. So then, I felt, well, he's in a good mood, so I might as well say my buddy standing next to me is also a cousin. So he gave him also a two. 

But now, he stopped. And he said, "Was ist das, die ganze mispiche." 

Now, in German, "mispiche" is not-- that's a Hebrew word. Now, we all had a nice laugh about it. But perhaps, as I look in retrospect, he might have been a servant of some Jewish family where he picked up some Jewish words. It's a possibility. It's not important. I also did not see his credentials, as far as his doctorate, et cetera. But be it as it may. 

The next day, they lined us up-- no. After we got these two-- number twos-- all the number twos were separated into one barrack out of these four barracks. And also, while we were under quarantine, it was situated just above the-- the, uh, crematorium. And again, we smelled the smoke of burning flesh day and night. 

In front of the entrance to this quarantine, there was a large grate. And all day long, they just kept bringing bodies. And they just piled them up. And there was a guy standing with a fork-- pitchfork-- and he just keep shoveling the bodies into the grate, which was on a hinge. Just kept dropping and dropping, and all day long, just kept burning and burning bodies. 

And the next day, they called us all of from that barrack, and they started to call out numbers. I don't know for what reason, they came to the numerical sequence where my number was, they skipped it and went to the next numbers. And there were 50 of us who remained standing. 

I think what happened at that time, they needed 1,000 men for a transport. So the Germans were always extremely cunning. They were always a step ahead of us. They must have taken an extra 50, just in case somebody dies, or somebody becomes incapacitated and cannot go for the transport, so they also had a pool to draw from. 

Anyway, the 50 of us remained standing, and the other 1,000 were ushered into that shower room, outfitted for a transport, given uniforms, wooden shoes, and that whole bit. In the meantime, an air raid took place. I never saw any airplanes, but there was an air raid siren went on, and they pushed us all in to a bathroom, the 50 of us. 

Anyway, after that took place, most of the boys from my town-- the survivors-- were taken in that transport. And I just felt like life is not worth living anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Transport to where? 

SUBJECT: To oblivion, as it turned out. They were sent Leitmeritz, which was a camp in Austria, right on the border. The city of Luxembourg was situated in upper Bavaria, which is-- actually, it was right on the border of Czechoslovakia-- Germany and Czechoslovakia. 

And in Leitmeritz, they were digging some sort of tunnels. And this entire group, there are only two-- excuse me, three-- that I know survived out of this 1,000. One is in Canada, and two are in New York. But I felt that life was not worth living anymore, because most of my friends, and this one cousin out of the two, was in that group. 

Anyway, they didn't give me a chance too much to mourn, or to feel sorry for myself, because the very next day, I was taken off on a transport and sent out to a town named Hirschberg. In there, there were Polish prisoners. It seems like every concentration camp somehow had different leadership of different nationalities. In Germany, by and large, the German prisoners constituted the authorities of-- authorities within the camp. Not without, within. In this one, there were Polish prisoners, and when they got a hold of the Jewish prisoners, they had a ball with us. But I do remember, in that particular camp, that there was no water, because we drank from rain puddles. 

And from there, we were sent out into the mountains to dig tunnels. And we were housed in a local jail. That was quite comfortable, compared to the other facilities. In that job, which was a very difficult, difficult, physical-- was difficult because of the physical exertion-- our Which consisted of using drills-- oh, about a yard long-- with a large pneumatic drill. And you stand there, and your whole body shakes. After five, 10 minutes, you can't even stand straight anymore. Even when you drop this thing, your body still shakes from every after-reaction. 

And then, one day, one of the foreman there was asking for schlossers-- locksmiths-- so I volunteered. He looked at me. I was still a young kid. So I told him that I was a locksmith helper-- apprentice. He says, OK, we'll see. We'll find out how much you know. 

Actually, the whole work consisted of, in case a pneumatic hose got ruptured, so you ran downstairs and you shut off the compressor, and you sliced the hose. And you put in an aluminum tube, you clamped it on each side, and put it back on, and that was that. The next job was to grease the conveyor belts. And this way, my job became an easier one again, and I was doing quite nicely. 

But this did not last very long either, because two Russians, who were part of this particular detail, escaped. So they came down on us right away, under heavy guard, with dogs. They took us down to this Hirschberg camp, and we figured this is it. And we were more or less resigned to the fact that this is the end. But as we expected the worst, they started to read out some numbers, and my number was amongst those chosen. And they took us back into the train and sent us back to Flossenburg, to the original base camp. 

And once we arrived there, the next morning, they lined us up for job assignments. And there was this German civilian, who was looking for somebody who knew how to read blueprints. And I volunteered again, and he selected me to help him read blueprints, which, again, was a soft job for a little while. It was nice to be occasionally given an apple or have a slice of bread. I found out from him that he was a flyer who was shut down. And he just came back into active-- so-called active-- duty as an engineer, rather than a flyer. He had some sort of a metal plate, breastplate, to keep his ribs together. He was nice, considering all the people I had met during that ordeal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What time-- what month-- what date are you now? 

SUBJECT: I am now '44. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And he was German? 

SUBJECT: Yes. This was already in Flossenburg, which is in Germany, in a stone quarry, which also had a Messerschmitt aircraft factory. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that's what month and '44. 

SUBJECT: Had to be in the fall. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how did-- go to liberation. 

SUBJECT: Not yet. Not yet. This was Flossenburg, 1944. And-- but, again, as I was working for this man for a short while, the German kapo, who was a green triangle-- most of the important jobs in Flossenburg were held by German Berufsverbrecher which means they were professional gangsters. They were classified. Like, mine was the red triangle, they were classified with a green triangle. 

Now, these men were vicious. Most of them had life sentences. And they were extremely cruel to the prisoners, especially to the Jewish prisoners. And after a little time of doing this blueprint reading, in a department where they were bringing in Messerschmidts that were shot down, or that crashed, and we were taking apart the planes and tried to salvage parts to be reused in the assembly for new airplanes. So my job was to make sure that the part that goes to the new assembly meets with all the specifications of the blueprint. But this was just a very short period of time. This man, I don't know what happened, he got sick or was transferred. 

One day, I don't have the job anymore, and that kapo, who was in charge of this particular detail, assigns me to the penalty command, which is in the stone quarry. And this other kapo, who was in charge of the penalty command, was a totally deranged individual. He was a maniac. Just to give you an idea of how his mentality worked-- 

It was extremely cold. And we did very hard, physical labor. We were carrying with our shoulders airplane bodies. And for entertainment, when there was no actual movement of material, we were lugging rocks from one place to another, and back. 

But this man, one particular instant-- incident-- I have to explain, just to give you an idea of the mentality of these people-- he had an assistant, who was preparing some kind of a brew, some kind of a soup, I don't know what it was. And he calls us all in, because it was very cold. And he gives us all a dish, and he's having his assistant ladle out the soup for each prisoner. 

And as we sit there, before we have a chance to have a spoonful of soup, he takes the whip and cracks it, and have the soup, everything, blow up in our faces. And he starts to holler at us, "You lazy, good for nothings, what did you come in here for? You're supposed to work." No reason, no rhyme. But this was the kind of mentality we were exposed to. 

Now, this was getting close to Christmas of 1944. This, I do remember, because of the events that took place. I knew that this particular penalty command, from speaking to other prisoners, nobody survived that. This was a one-way street to finish you off-- work you until you couldn't do any more, and that was it. 

From the original 60 from my home town, there was a friend of mine, who was, at that time, an assistant to one of the German block leaders. And I pleaded with him. And he said that he'll intervene on my behalf. He spoke to his block leader, who, in turn, spoke Willie, who was the kapo in charge of this department. And that Christmas was the first time that we were given a pack of cigarettes. 

I heard afterwards that the Red Cross used to come in almost continuously to this camp, but we never saw one member of the Red Cross. We were never given one ounce of food that came from the Red Cross. 

Anyway, we got a pack of cigarettes that day, and my friend informed me, "You give Willie that pack of cigarettes and he'll set you free." And I did. And so it happened. 

Now, I came back to work in the department where they took apart the planes. Within a short period of time, we were pulled off the regular barracks into-- again, quarantined to two separate barracks, all the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When? 

SUBJECT: This was about two weeks before liberation. I'm getting to that point. This was April 1945, beginning of April. 

By the 16th, they evacuated us on trains and freight cars. After about less than a half hour on those trains, the American airplanes came overhead, and the massacre began. I guess they were not aware of who was in those trains. And there, for the first time, I saw a dead German soldier, or SS man, really. I saw one wounded once. Then, they brought another locomotive, and, again, we started out with this precious cargo. 

But that was some experience. You sit in a freight car, and you see arms, legs, flying all over the place, like in a slaughterhouse. A bloodbath. And there's nowhere you can go, because the minute you start to run out, the Germans are facing you with a machine gun. 

And the same thing occurred again the next day. Then, finally, they decided to march us. And we buried our dead. Oh, yeah, and on that particular morning, during that air raid, that second cousin got killed. After the war, I was saying to myself, who knows, maybe it was his brother in that American airplane who killed him, because I knew that he was in America. He must have been in the Army at that point. 

But at that time, I could not relate, because I did not know who those airplanes were. I didn't know what was going on. None of us knew what was going on. The conditions we were under at that time was-- oh, I do not know how to describe it, but you are at the mercy of the people in the airplanes and the German SS guards. 

Anyway, they started to march us, five abreast. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have anything to eat? 

SUBJECT: When we left the camp, they give us a half a loaf of this bread, which was about that size. And this was finished right away, because we couldn't trust each other. To keep bread on yourself, you invited death, because we would kill for a piece of bread. So you have to eat it right away. So then, we were hungry. 

But anyway, as we started to march into the woods, it must have been late in the night when they made us stop. And we laid down on the ice, because I remember, in the morning, we woke up in water. Our bodies melted the ice. This was in April. This was in Bavaria. It was still cold. This was going on for a few days. We laid in the woods in the daytime and marched at night. 

The day before liberation, it started to rain. And it was like a cloudburst-- thunder, lightning. It was pouring. And they just kept shooting all night. They decimated us that night. This was one of the most unbelievable experiences any man can even visualize. And this was going on all night. 

There's one survivor, a friend of mine, who lives in Pittsburgh now. He pleaded us to let go of him, and we just kept dragging him and dragging him. What happened was that our clothing were very thin, about the quality of this shirt. That was our uniform. And the shoes were made of wood, with no break in them. It was just a piece of wood with some leather over it, or canvas, or whatever. And we couldn't bend our knees, or the ankles. We just walked like robots-- just dragged step by step. But we knew, the minute we fall down, that was the end, because they just kept killing us all night. 

And by morning, they brought us into some kind of a field barn. And then, we started to march again. They brought us into some small village, town square-like thing. And then, we saw, as we're standing there, we saw German officers wearing rucksacks. German officers don't wear field packs. So something again was not 100%. But this is all like in a fog. You look at these things. You observe them. You notice them, but you don't notice them really. It's afterwards, you just start to relate back some of your memories that should have given us a clue that something was afoot. 

Anyway, they started to march us off again. And as we were walking in the woods-- this was in the daytime now they're marching us. Before, it was strictly at night, because the American airplanes were overhead all the time. So now, they brought us into this forest area. We're marching, and then we hear this German on a motorcycle pulling up to the head of the convoy. And the word passed on right away that the Germ-- that the Americans surrounded the forest. And somehow, the German guards were marching up forward to the leader of the convoy. But by then, there were already more guards than prisoners. 

I don't know what happened to me, but at that particular point, as the last guard walked by me, I started to run. I ran away from the group, and I just kept running until I ran into a clearance. And then, I saw an airplane circling, so I went back. As I ran back, I see some of my buddies from the same five-- marched in fives-- were hiding behind trees as well. 

So now, the five of us went to the-- a barn in the fields there, where they stored some plows and some appliances-- field appliances. But the hunger became so unbearable that we felt we have to go to some farm, or something, to get some food. And we did. We went to the first village, and the farmer did give us some bread. So we ran back to the barn, and we hid over there. And then, by the evening, went back into that same farmer's house, whatever it was. And he allowed us to sleep in the barn with the cows. 

And this was the first inkling of having any kind of modicum of security-- was in that barn with the cows. So much so, the next morning, we're liberated. The Americans occupied the area. The tanks were coming. But we didn't know whether they were Americans. At least, I didn't. It's just that the farmers kept screaming, "Die Amerikaner! Die Amerikaner!" 

I looked at those tanks with the five-pronged star. And I'm color blind, so I remembered that the Russians had a five-pronged star. So as they were hollering, "Amerikaner," I thought they were Russians. But it wasn't really that important. Suffice it to say, for the next three nights, we slept in barns with the cows. 

And also, one item I have to mention-- it's also of importance-- about the state of mind at that particular time. As we're walking by the road, we came across a group of Americans guarding German prisoners of war. And there was this American soldier, who spoke Polish, and he asked us who we were. And when we explained it to him, he interpreted to the American boys. And one of them took off his submachine gun. He handed it to me, motioning to kill the German prisoners. I became very frightened, and I gave it back to him. I just walked away from him. 

I couldn't believe it, that Americans were real. I couldn't believe it, that the Germans were actually defeated. It took a long time to understand that there was a stronger power than Germany. To us, they were the all-powerful. And they brainwashed us-- brainwashed us-- to such an extent that we had no belief in ourselves. We had no understanding for right and wrong at that particular point in time. 

And as I look back, bear in mind, we still walked around in these striped uniforms. I happen to have a picture here that I took a few months after liberation, in Frankfurt. I look good already in this one. I have hair. You see it? I also-- since you have the camera here-- I'd like to show you what this last concentration camp is now. It is a national shrine, whatever they call it, for the German people, which I went back to in 1973, with my wife. And they made a beautiful-- like a garden-- memorial garden-- of this camp. 

Now, if you can zoom in your camera here, this will give you an idea of what the camp looked like after liberation, in 1945. All these barracks. This entire camp was built in a stone quarry. And every centimeter of this quarry was paid for with human blood. 

There's also, over here, the money that they gave us for quality work. They called it Pramienschein. This particular one is for one mark. For us Jewish people, they were worthless. We couldn't do anything with them. The regular prisoners could. 

Here is a picture of a stone-- memorial stone-- at the German cemetery in Nuremberg vor Wald where we were liberated. After the war was over, the occupation forces-- the American army-- made the Germans take all these people, who were killed during that transport. I was telling you about, and they buried them in the German cemetery. This is one of the three stones. It's not there anymore. Right now, they have exhumed all these Jewish bodies, and they buried them in a separate Jewish cemetery, so as not to defile their own burial grounds. 

For the longest time after liberation, I didn't want to live. I had nothing to live for. Somehow, in my deep recesses, I was hoping to live to see Germany destroyed. And I did live to see that. After that, there was nothing. 

However, youth, I guess, has a tremendous resiliency. And it worked, in my stead, I guess. I was fortunate enough to meet many nice American soldiers, who took an interest in me. One of them, in fact, came from Springfield, Massachusetts. And when I told him that I think I have relatives in Hartford, he volunteered to write to the Hartford Red Cross. And when I came back from Poland, there was a letter waiting for me from a cousin of mine in Hartford, who volunteered to adopt me so that I could come to the United States. 

When I came to my hometown, I found out that my oldest sister did survive, and she was already in Palestine at that time. And I resumed correspondence with her. And she insisted that I come to America, so I can get my education. And that's why I'm here. 

Any questions? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How has America, and the American life, been for you, in terms of putting this experience into some sort of relationship with the rest of all your life? 

SUBJECT: America is one of the greatest experiences in mankind. In the beginning, I would say for the first year, I was very unhappy, very uncomfortable. I didn't want to live here. And yet, I was very fortunate to have relatives of my father's living in Hartford. At that time, there were two brothers and three sisters with their families. But I felt very uncomfortable. I felt strange. I could not adjust to a normal way of living. And you people are extremely normal. And I lived in a very abnormal society for a long time. 

And I did study. I was very fortunate to have that same cousin who volunteered to adopt me, she set up a school for the survivors. And she had a tremendous amount of empathy, and she was also gifted, to the tune where she was able to teach us English and the American way of life in a very unusual way. So much so that she was trying to eradicate the hatred from within us by explaining to us how, in the United States, there are interracial commissions, that people do not hate the Jews, as they did in Europe, the people are good people. And proceeded to introduce us to some of the finest professionals in the Hartford area, who volunteered their time to speak before us, and to answer any questions that we had, explain to us the American system, which was extremely valuable, because that somehow was positive enough to offset some of the hatreds within me. Not completely, but somewhat. 

And then, I was very fortunate to meet the right girl, and my life became a beautiful life. I'm extremely happy that I had an opportunity to live my bonus life, as I call it, because there is a birth and there's a rebirth. In our case, we were fortunate enough to come out of this hell and to be reborn. And having been given this opportunity, it has served as a very good force. Because somehow, I feel I was very fortunate to take all these negatives and transfer them into positives. The do not's-- do not do this, do not do that. 

I'm involved right now in setting up a center for study and education on Holocaust awareness. Hopefully it'll be at the University of Hartford. There's a group that I'm involved with of nine dedicated people, each one specializing in a different area. Mine is the survivors, of which I hope to have a constituency to impress upon the world the importance of eradicating hatred. Once we speak about hatred, I find that it is a counter-productive emotion that none of us should grovel in. 

I don't know what the professionals call this, but a person who hates actually hates himself. Because that's exactly what it is. The hatee may not even know the agony that the hater goes through the process of hating. And we have dedicated ourselves to educate the youngsters, because somehow I, who speak for Joe [INAUDIBLE], feel that my peer of Americans, and some of my fellow survivors, are very difficult to reach-- very difficult to even empathize-- expect empathy from them. It is an unpleasant topic. It's something, for the longest time, I did not talk about, because people do not want to hear it. 

I have been lecturing since 1970, and I find that the youth is the most responsive. The youth can get the best out of me, and get the best answers, because they ask the best questions. Adults somehow retreat into a shell, whether it is guilt, whether it is, uh-- I don't know exactly how to describe it. But I find that youth wants to know. And they are really the future of the world. And we have to get to them, in spite of their parents. 

So much so, to illustrate what I'm trying to say and to convey, is that a cross burning should not be looked upon by kids as an exciting event. It should be looked upon in a negative sense, that the boy who calls you to see an exciting event should be ostracized from that group. He should not get peer recognition, but contrary, he should be looked down upon, because they know, through study, what this represents. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you honestly believe, deep down, that people, when they know and they hear, will change their behavior? Do you think knowing can change things? 

SUBJECT: Yes, absolutely. I feel more so with each passing lecture before a young-- group of young people. I am more firmly convinced that these people can be reached, and they will react. We have witnessed it in the '60s. We have witnessed where youngsters have become totally alienated from their parents, hating ideas. We have seen youngsters put their lives on the line, as they did at Kent University, because they believed that their parents were following a wrong Messiah. Vietnam was a disaster for our people. There were enough young people who believed that it was a disaster. We did not recognize it as such, but the youth did. 

I recall one lecture, on the eve of Passover this past year, at the Xavier High School in Middletown, Connecticut. That was a group of approximately 50 seniors. All boys. Roman Catholic, of course. And there, I had an opportunity to explain to these youngsters what I expect of them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you talk about your distrust of the Church? 

SUBJECT: All the way. I gave them a lecture on the Roman Catholic Church, all the way back to Pope Constantine. I spoke to them about that famous painting, The Last Supper, and I explained to them what it represented. And I also explained to them that every man sitting at that table was a Jew. And I also explained to them that it was the Romans who conquered Judea. It was the Romans who were in charge. It was the Romans who executed Jesus. 

But now, we find ourselves in Rome, the seat of Catholicism. Now, how can the Pope Constantine allow for its followers to believe that the Romans killed their god? I also gave them an understanding of deicide. Site How can a god be killed, unless he wants to become a martyr? For a noble cause, to be sure. But nevertheless, he was a Jew. And all the rest is nonsense. 

I can talk to you about Queen Isabella, and what she did during the Inquisition, because of the power of the Church. It was that same Roman Catholic Church. However, she gave the Jews a choice. She gave them a choice to convert or die. We were not given that same choice. 

We talk about the Roots experiment in this country. As I was watching it last year, I couldn't help but observe an injustice, to be sure. But we find ourselves where slaves are brought into the United States to work and to live. We were brought into Germany to work and to die. And there's a major, major difference. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Joe, before we conclude, would you like to answer Laura's question? 

SUBJECT: Sure. Which one's that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The one before, what you saw at the train station. 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What you saw. 

SUBJECT: I did tell her, that I watched my friends and neighbors 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what about your own-- 

SUBJECT: --in an extremely bad state of being. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your family? 

SUBJECT: As my own family was concerned, after about a week, they were going from farm to farm, almost from village to village, and there was no room at the inn. They just could not-- nobody would accept them. They could not hide. They couldn't save themselves. And they came back into that street, and the next day, I went to work. 

And as I was working in that wood processing factory, in my home town, I saw a group of people herded down the main road. And afterwards, I found out that it was my family. And from that day, I never saw them again. I found out, after the war, from my sister, who did some research, that they were all exterminated in Belzec, which was an extermination camp-- annihilation camp. 

Before I conclude, strange you brought me to this particular area of thought-- how many of us really realize that the total annihilation camps were only in Poland? They were not in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dachau had an annihilation camp. 

SUBJECT: It was also a work camp. It was work as well. You have Belzec, Sobibor, Majdanek, Treblinka, and there were others. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Chelmno. 

SUBJECT: Chelmno. Chelmno's another one, that's right. And Babi Yar, which was already the Russian Ukraine. All in the east. Poland is the graveyard of my people. It is strange, when one starts to philosophize. 

And I look at Hitler, who is now the scapegoat for all evil. Well, it's not exactly so. True, he had an inflaming oratory abil-- capability. But Hitler, to the best of my knowledge, did not kill anybody personally. It was the dormant hatreds within the people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You think there's a chance for rehabilitation of life for Jewish people in eastern Europe? 

SUBJECT: No. Not the way it is right now. Maybe in future generations. As we say in our own Old Testament, the pharaoh, who did not know Joseph, came into being in a different way. Perhaps, a future generation of Poles will rid themselves of that hatred that their parents have so easily accepted. I cannot speak as an authority about what is going to happen in the future, but I would like to say that, if there's any hope for a better world, it has to begin with the youngsters. 

Also, at that particular situation-- time in Middletown, I explained to these youngsters that, when you hear, even in your own family, a person use the term nigger, kike, or any denigrating terminology, there's a person who hates. Get your antennas up quickly. And remember, if he can hate others so easily, he can hate you just as easily, too. Those are truisms, because hate has no boundaries, I don't think. It's not limited. Because once a person has the ability to hate, he can just as easily hate you as me, or anybody else. 

In another area I spoke before, I would say it was a total non-Jewish group, which was in Essex. There's a tri-town high school. And one of the girls, during the question period, I couldn't help but answer her in such a way that, assuming Hitler were successful and he did eliminate all the Jews from this world, which is not so far fetched-- thank God, he didn't-- nevertheless, assuming that he was successful, now three or four years down the road, somebody is reading this particular script. However, this particular person has a hatred towards people wearing glasses. Now, we all know somebody wears glasses. Now, having learned from the Germans, mein kampf, as well as the practice of genocide during the Holocaust period, they can just as easily eliminate all the people who wear glasses. 

And how will we know? And what are we going to do to prevent it? Because my feeling and belief still is that it can happen again. As a matter of fact, it has been happening right along. The war has been over 34 years and, for 34 years, this same kind of genocide, of one brand or another, has been practiced all over the world. 

We are finding ourselves right now, where, in Russia, for the past 60-some odd years, there has been cultural genocide. We see what's going on right now in Indonesia, with the Cambodian people. And the world stands by and watches all this happen? We have the United Nations. It's a joke. 

Anyway, in Bridgeport last summer, Professor Lapidus asked me a question-- "What are we Jewish survivors doing to help the boat people?" So I answered him that I'm here to speak on the topic of the Holocaust. However, I'm not an expert on this subject. I'll just answer you the way I read it, or see it, or perceive it. The first nation to accept boat people was the state of Israel. There were 100. 

Now, what I would like to ask you, professor, now, since there are approximately 3 million Israelis, would you please tell me the number of the population of the world right now? And some student volunteered, 4 and 1/2 billion. So then, I asked him, out of the 4 and 1/2 billion of people, this small, tiny, little group of people saw it in their hearts to help. And heaven knows, they sure have enough problems. And I understand that they have taken more since. There have been some Israeli ships involved in the rescuing of drowning Vietnamese people. We find a haven. 

But now, I'd like to ask the world this question-- where is the third world that is pounding at the doors of the Western world, "Give me, give me, I'm entitled!" What are these people doing to these less fortunate ones? They sure have an abundance of territory. I don't see their largesse trying to help. 

And this is what we have to address ourselves, to make the world aware that you've got to help. And you do not put an idiot like Amin to head a group of nations, or an Arafat-- a terrorist-- to come to speak before the United Nations. Those are the people that are given recognition? 

You go into Mexico, they speak about the woman's world, and you have people who speak in a derogatory fashion towards the Israeli women, who, by then, had already a woman prime minister? And in the same countries who speak and are listened to, women have no rights. They still walk behind their man. 

Injustices. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I think we have, the most, the most articulate man I think we've met so far. I mean, Daria was passing notes saying don't interrupt. 

SUBJECT: I never even spoke about my notes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, yes, you did. I was watching very carefully. 

SUBJECT: I was? 

You know, there's a lot to be said about a lot of things. But the most important part is, where are we going, and why did we survive? I think we survived to do just what I'm doing right now. It's important to show the so-called normal world that, unless they wake up, they'll be as abnormal as I was. And that should not happen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape stopped. 

SUBJECT: That should not happen. You're speechless. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We listened enough today, huh? 

SUBJECT: Thank you people for giving me this opportunity. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No, your-- your details are something we have been reaching for. 