When I was in Poland ah, in April 15, 1922-- 

CREW: If we could just start with that sentence again. The sound wasn't up on that one. 

INTERVIEWER: As soon as you give that then she will give the same statistics and then we'll do that. 

SUBJECT 1: OK. All right. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, rolling? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I'm Jacob Birnbaum. Was born in Piotrkow Trybunalski, Poland, on April 15, 1922. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: I am Mira Birnbaum, born Laudon, a town-- born in town Sosnowiec in Poland, ah, January 10, 1925. 

INTERVIEWER: I think we would like to start with you, Mira, just giving a little portrait of your family and the town. Just briefly, what-- what life was for you as a young girl. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: I am one of six, four sister, four girls, and two boys. Growing up, we had a very happy childhood. Uh, we had a large family. My father was one of eight, my mother was one of five. 

And the home life was beautiful. We had to visit aunts and uncles at all times, holidays, every Saturday. During the week we had school. My parents cared about us. They gave us Jewish education, Hebrew. 

And we had lots of friends. Never alone on the streets. We had communities, zionist communities. I belonged to some of them. That I remember very happy times. 

INTERVIEWER: OK, Mr. Birnbaum, could you paint a picture of your life? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes. Ah, I had a sister, Hannah, was three years, ah, younger. Ah, from the beginning I uh, went to a Hebrew school. It was a, um, a Bible study, a preliminary to yeshiva. Very famous, Yesodai haTorah. And my early years ah, was spent in this eh environment of, ah, religious education. And consequently, um, I was, uh, when I finished, the uh, premil-- preliminary studies in Talmud, um, I joined the, ah, public school system. 

And ah, I spent a very happy childhood. Piotrkow is a famous town, or city. Ah, Jewish community there dates about 1,000 years since the creation of, of the town. 

INTERVIEWER: What is the distance between the two cities from which you each came? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I don't know the exact, uh, distance in miles. But it, ah, Piotrkow is, um, is about ah, oh, I would say 100 miles from Warsaw. And ah, Sosnowiec and consequently Dombrowa, to the town that we moved in 1936, is near the German border. It's ah, near Silesia so that there is a distance. And there's also a distance in culture because Piotrkow is ah, considered one of the um Jewish communities, where people really ah, live studying and ah, leading a Jewish life, while segregated. 

Ah, it was a Jewish section and ah, Jews and Christians ah, rarely mingled except in business. Um, schools were um, separated. Uh, I went to a public school, ah, only Jewish children. And ah, we had ah, religious ah, training in the school ah, for about an hour. And later, ah, the we joined the um, integrated school, where Christians were taught by a priest and ah, we were sent out of the room. 

INTERVIEWER: Your relations with non-Jewish people, were they good? Were they friendly? Were they-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: My personal relations were very good because um, I had non-Jewish friends. My father was in business and he um, did business with ah, Christians. So my personal relations were good. In general, ah, this was an exception because ah, the people who lived in the Jewish section of Piotrkow um, did not uh, have friendly relations. I mean, the children didn't play together. 

And ah, there was a distance. And Jews felt ah, that they are not in the mainstream of life. So that ah, this later showed up when ah, the Germans came in and, uh, that relationship ah, had a lot to do with the annihilation of the Jews because they couldn't count on help from their neighbors. As a matter of fact, in many instances they were um, denounced by neighbors. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt that later on there was no way to escape because of-- because of this condition? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes. This had a lot to do with ah, the morale of the people during the Holocaust in the camps. Because this is the question that many people ask, why didn't Jews resist? Why didn't they run away? And there were a couple of instances where I, personally, had the opportunity to escape. 

Ah, I had a friendly, uh, coworker. I work with him. It was an old German who was against uh, the Hitler regime. And he told me so and he helped me. And at one point he asked me whether I would be willing to take a chance and escape because ah, he would help me to hide me out for a couple of days and then made my way-- make my way to my hometown. 

Now my camp wasn't too far from my hometown. And I was going around with that idea for about a week and then something happened that changed my mind because a friend of mine did escape. And he was brought back to the camp and they-- he was hung in public. And that's why I said to my friend that I-- I'll take my chance. 

But this-- this really ah, speaks a lot of the climate where you were on the one hand, you were persecuted by the Germans. And you knew that the Germans are the enemies of the Polish people. And yet, you couldn't count on your neighbors. So it was a helpless situation. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Can I just stop you? You go a little further. I just want to go back. At the time, but just before the war broke out, when the Germans marched in to Sosnowiec, the pan-- how everybody was panicking. We all were hiding and the Germans were running in the homes and taking out all the-- the men. We didn't know what happened. 

And then suddenly when they-- a time was over, when it was quiet. We went out in the streets, we saw men shot in the street, just Jewish men. Then a little later, they started to say if people want to be safe, not to be killed, they should give jewelry. Little by little, then silver. They were going from home to home collecting. 

So we-- they shouldn't make those roundups. After death, they were-- there was the gold was out. Silver, nobody had any more. Then they wanted fur coats. When we were all out of these valuables, they decided to send to working camps. 

So they started to round ups in the streets again. They used to-- then we used to find out somehow or other, by some coincidence, that there will be round ups in the streets. Eh, then they were making middle of the nights. So when we found out that they-- there going to be round ups the middle of the night, we were sleeping in cellars, on the roofs, just to hide out. Then they got wise with us and they started to send out notices to come to a point that we are going to a labor camp. 

We never knew what it is, a labor camp. They started to warn us, if you won't go they will shoot again. At one point, a year before I was taken, my mother was in my grandparents' home. They started to look for elderly people. When they walked into my grandparents' home, they started to ask my mother where are the, my grandparents? 

My mother said, oh no, they're not here. They said, they must be here. And my mother said, no, they're not here. If you won't say where they are, we're going to take you. And that's the last I saw my mother. Then we had to live with my father for one more year without my mother. 

It was rough. There was not enough food. Times were really-- we couldn't keep a maid the way we had before the war because gentiles were not supposed to be in Jewish homes. So being the second girl I had to go be a maid. Whatever, for whomever I worked if there was some food left over I would bring home to my younger siblings to help out. 

It-- I will never forget the time when the first high holidays came up and my father did not want to go to services without his partner. And he asked us, all-- all the children. My older sister was married, had a husband, and he says we are not going for synagogue. We're going to pray right at home because my second part is gone. This I will never forget because my father sent the prayers, people were standing underneath the windows listening because he missed my mother. 

And he was holding on to us. Then when we had to leave, I received a note, either you go or your father. My father said to the Germans, take my right hand off but not my child. But I wanted to-- I thought still that my father will survive, and I am young. I might pull through. 

I went to camp with my sister at the time. And my father-- she being younger three years than me, my father says don't forget you have a sister younger than you. See to take care of her until we survive. We always live the hope of survival. 

Being in camps, she always-- she was a little stronger than I was. When they tried to split us she always ran over, enabled somehow to switch over, be with me and to survive together. Now you want to take over? 

INTERVIEWER: I wanted-- it's hard to. I wanted to go back to this climate because I think that people don't understand this inability to escape from the camp, and also, or from the situation. Also what Mrs. Birnbaum said, you didn't seem to know anything that was going on. Were you unaware of German policy? What was the situation in terms of understanding of what the total picture was? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: You know, I tackled with these questions, especially in the last ah, few months, because I was asked to speak to students in junior high schools. And they are very profound. The young people really want to know the truth. Some adults like to skim around the truth. They like to have a sugarcoated package of the Holocaust. 

But when the children ask me the questions, you know, and these are the questions that they ask me, about did you know? Why didn't you do something about it, and so forth. I was quite aware of what was happening because I, I read German and I always uh, was interested in politics and what was happening. Now we knew what was happening in Germany. 

But although Poland at that time was um, there was anti-Semitism. But it was remote. These things happened to the German Jews, or the Austrian Jews, you see. And people didn't realize the final uh, desire of the German government. In fact, we didn't realize it until after the war when we found out that this, there was a plan to annihilate, to kill. 

So that the things that were happening to us-- when the Germans came in, for example, I was Piotrkow because, uh-- and this is another paradox. We lived, our whole family lived in Piotrkow. And we lived there for generations. In 1936, uh, my father went to Dombrowa because his brother opened a shoe store and he went in business for uh, business purposes. But we communicated with Piotrkow. 

And when the war broke out, ah, was on Friday, September 1, uh, 1939. A few days before, we knew that the war, that there will be a war because the ultimatum uh, was rejected and ah, we could tell. So my parents decided to send me and my sister to Piotrkow because it's safer, you see. Dombrowa was on the German border so they figured, well, if the war starts, the Germans are going to march in and all the devastation is going to be there and they couldn't leave, you know, because they, there was, after all it was their home and ah, the war wasn't yet. They said well, when it gets serious, we're going to join you. 

Well, we came to Piotrkow and Saturday morning, they started to bomb Piotrkow. And it was really-- we went through the whole um, bombardment and escape and we escaped to the woods and they were shooting with the machine guns into the woods and many people were killed. Now in Dombrowa, there was no shooting because the Germans just marched in, see? So that when they did march in, of course, in Piotrkow after three days hiding, or four days in the woods, we came out and we were prepared of uh, um, you know, some trouble. And we saw the trouble because uh, they started with um, robbing uh, the Jewish stores and beating up Jews and killing some Jews. And I saw that with my own eyes. And uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: But you were prepared. You felt-- you knew that this-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: We knew that, that, that we going to have trouble. But what we didn't know was that every one of us is doomed. You see, we knew that if we hide out, ah, if we stay out of trouble, you see maybe it will go over us. The war's going to end and everything is going to be all right. And then when we came-- when, uh, I finally joined my parents in Dombrowa, there was this slow uh, deterioration of the Jewish condition. 

As my wife told you, first you know, they had the Judenrat, and they put all kinds of demands to give jewelry. They had a, ah, quota. They have the, some pounds of gold and pounds of silver so that everybody had to give them even uh, the wedding rings, you see? Because they said if you don't do that, we're going to take you and we're going to send you to camps. The camps, going to camps was the worst thing at that point, you see? 

And uh, then they took first when they had uh, trouble in on the Eastern Front. They took ah, first, if they saw somebody in a warm clothing, it was illegal. And then of course, uh, the final thing, as far as we uh, knew, because uh, people in the Judenrat told us that there are worse things going on. At that time we didn't believe it. But this happened, ah, at the time right after the uh, uh, invasion of Russia, you see, where the Germans really started to kill, you know, with the Einsatzgruppen, and we didn't know at the time that we are part of the plan because we had-- we got uh, special cards, Sonder Karte. Sonder Karte was a um, special case. Ah, I know German. It sounded strange to me. Why a special case? Why not, um, Judenkarte? But later it became clear because that was a, a special treatment where um, the Jews were, uh, destined to ah, be annihilated. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: That's just-- that card, when they round up at one point, all the Jews to clear it up. That card helped a lot of eh, people to leave that, ah, gathering because they had that special card. And the rest were shipped to Ausch-- to Auschwitz. That's when my husband's parents were on this gathering, and that's when they were shipped out. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: There were three types of cards, you see? There was one card, a red card, which was, um-- or a pink card, which I had, was the, the least desirable. That was when you work for a Jew, or, or, you know, anything that isn't very important. I work with a dentist, a Jewish dentist, so I had the red card and I had to watch out for the round ups which uh, were quite often. When I went to work on the way, um, they closed the streets and um, you had to try to make out of it-- your way out of it. 

And there was a blue card, this is we're working for a Polish firm. And then there was a yellow card, which was the best, because it was working for the government, I mean for the Germans. Now my father, being the head of the family, secured a yellow card. He went to work in a brick factory. It was terribly hard work and he had to carry loads, but he wanted to be secure because that was for the, uh, for the Germans, for the ah, war efforts. And I was, as a teenager, for about three years I was escaping, you know, the, the fate that was happening to the young people, you see, because most people were already away. 

INTERVIEWER: What I think your young students might ask is, you could be any religion, either of you could be any religion, any nationality. Why couldn't you leave the confined areas for Jews and lose your Jewish identity? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Mm, OK. Uh-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Hold on one second. You asking about that, my sister didn't look Aryan. And to try to escape, or go on a line for milk for my younger siblings, you couldn't get milk. So my sister took off the arm band to try to be an Aryan. And she stood in that line for the milk to bring home. 

Suddenly, she's being kicked out. The maid that we used to have before the war, she had a daughter my age. That same girl that my parents helped, dressed, while her mother was a maid, whatever we got, she got. During the war, she bec-- she beca-- she thought she was bigger than us. 

And when she saw my sister in that Aryan line, she pointed that she's Jewish and my sister was kicked out, almost killed, from that line. So how could you go? Where could you go? People would point the finger and they-- you would be caught. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: You see, the penalty for taking off the armband-- at that time armband, and then there was a yellow star-- was death. Now people take chances when there is a possibility of, to succeed. As you know, before the war ah, there was no real friendship. I mean, the people had personal friends. And some of them hid out. 

Ah, my cousin, uh, had a friend who uh, kept her behind a ah, door, you know, a secret ah, room, all these years. She was lucky. There are man-- there are few others, not many but there are some cases. But in general, that was impossible because in order to hide everybody had to have a identification. You couldn't ah, go on the street. 

As a matter of fact, this was one of the things that uh, that uh, kind of surprised me and, and pleased me when I came to the United States, was for the first time I didn't have to carry a identification card. I just couldn't believe it. You had to have always an identification card. So that to-- you see, when people ask these questions, and I explain it to them, you go by what you see in the United States, you see? But this life is absolutely different from the life in Poland. And that's why it was impossible. 

You see, going back to those cards, ah, I was lucky. And I thought I'm going to escape. I was a young fellow and we-- I had friends and we did some crazy things. Even before the war we took chances. I had a girlfriend in Sosnowiec, where my wife was, and uh, we had a group there. 

And although there was only one tramway, you know, that uh, went every three or four hours, and everybody wanted to go in that wagon, we never missed a date. Even if we had to go, to stand on the top of the um, you know, car. But uh, we took chances. And I-- I-- I believe that somehow I'm going to get out of it. 

So I tried to get out of being sent away to camp. And I escaped many dragnets. And I don't know what would have happened if I wouldn't have gotten a ah, a, uh, notification that according to their records, Jacob Birnbaum who was going to be 20 years old in-- on April 15, is still here and he is supposed to go to a labor camp. And ah, if he won't go, his father will be taken. So here I had a dilemma. 

I didn't want to give in to the Germans because it-- it was like, uh, a fight between a teenager and-- and-- and the power. You know, not unlike what's happening today, you know. People like to do different than they are asked to do. But I couldn't let my father go because he was the head of the family. So I went and, and ah, by doing so I have sometimes mixed feelings because uh, if I would have stayed and my father would have gone he probably would have been alive. I don't know. But this made-- this was the decision I made that, ah, you know, since I have to go, I could never live with uh, knowing that my father went for me. And ah, three months later, you see, all this game playing was over. And then there was no escape because this is when the Final Solution was implemented. You know, when the gas chambers in Auschwitz were ready so that the first aussiedlung that took place in August of 19, ah, 42-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: End of August. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: End of August, where it was simultaneously in the three towns connected in ah, near Silesia, Sosnowiec, Bedzin and Dombrowa. And both my parents were rounded up, my father with his yellow card. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: He had a-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: And that was a-- also betrayal because some people were buying better cards. You know, you had to have connections and I never found out the truth. I only know that they went on the first transport to Auschwitz. Now my sister, who was blond, you ask about hiding out. She hid out. 

And-- and she contacted me that she is alive. And later on, when I was sick, and ah, I had the contact with her. I didn't want to let her know that-- what was happening to me because I knew that she will volunteer. A friend of mine wrote to her that I'm in very bad shape and she better ah, come to see me, either help me out or so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: I guess what is confusing to many of us-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes? 

INTERVIEWER: --is that with all of this-- this breakdown of normal life as you're describing it, that the postal system was still working, that somehow or other there was some kind of communication. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yeah. Yeah, well-- 

INTERVIEWER: And that this game playing-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yeah, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --that you're talking about for two years before '43, I think it's unclear. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: OK, to qualify it, you have to go back to the German plans, you see? Now it is quite clear because the documents are here, you see? At that time we just assumed. The plan was, first to make the Jews pay for their destruction, you see? So all the economic ah, measures that were set out in 1940 and '41, before the outbreak of the war between Russia and Germany-- these are two periods as far as Jews are concerned, because the Project Barbarossa, which started in um, on June '41-- 

INTERVIEWER: The project called? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Barbarossa. This was the attack on Russia, was also the attack on Jews. The final taking off the mask, you see, killing Jews openly. I mean, up to that point Jews were killed you know, in camps and labor camps and ah, in the streets. But they were not rounded up, you know, for complete annihilation. 

So that ah, these are two periods. Now when, in Dombrowa, first they took all-- they took the businesses away. And they-- they asked the Jews to go into a quarter. There was no ghetto. 

They created a ghetto, you see? So a Jew couldn't live in the center of the to-- uh, on the city, just a small ghetto. And these ghettos were created in every town, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: Were they physical ghettos or were they just-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: They were physical ghett-- there were no walls around it, but there were few streets where a Jew could live, you see? 

INTERVIEWER: But he could come and go? Within the-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Within the limited confines of the-- of the town. So he couldn't work outside of it. Even if he had a business, it was taken away by a treuhander, that is a administrator. The Germans confiscated it, the business, so that they were limited to push carts and, you know, living uh, among themselves. Now they were sending laborers-- this is, this was another way of taking advantage of the economic uh, possibility of the Jew. 

First he had-- ah, had gold, or uh, jewelry. They want to take that away. They want to take away his possessions, his father's business. And then they wanted to take his uh, energy. And they started ah, labor camps, zwangsarbeitslager, forced labor camps, where the primary goal was to exploit them. 

And when they were unable to work they were sent to death camps. Now in the beginning, when I-- it was what I was afraid of was the forced labor camp because nobody came back, you see? When I was there, I could see what was happening, you see, because I was sent to six different camps. You see, when-- when I was exhausted in one camp they made their selection and they transported people and by a miracle, you know, I was taken as not ready to go to Auschwitz. 

So that if people are uh, not aware of ah, why there were some conditions, you know, that sound normal, for example, like the postage and so forth, it depends at what time. 1940, 1941, the post was going, packages were going. In fact they allowed packages to be sent to the camps, except that when they called us, all we got is the package. Nothing inside, because they took everything out. At least we knew by the package that this was to show the Red Cross that there are packages. We never got anything from ah, inside the package. 

Either it was taken by the Germans or by the Jewish kapos and so forth. So that, ah, there was also a clandestine way of reaching um, your loved ones. And I had the intricate, you know, way of ah, sending a letter to somebody who will you know, contact and so forth. So that it wasn't clear-- you know, it wasn't a clear cut thing that you could send letters by mail. You could send it to a certain person to deliver it to another person and finally to reach uh, the final destination. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Actually, you would work with a German that would-- you would send him-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: That's right, that's right. And I-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: They told you you were going to get through. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: At one time I was caught sending a letter and I was punished with 25 lashes. Uh, I sent a letter to my sister. But my sister was hiding out, you know, among gentiles, and uh, for about a year. And then when she heard that I ah, now I'm very ill, ah, she decided to volunteer. 

At that time they still allowed people, they like, amnesty. They said, well, if any Jew is hiding out and he won't make it, so let them better come clear. He can-- he or she can ah, choose their camp. That was one period, you know, 1942. So she-- I was at that time in Graeditz and uh, that was already-- I was in a very bad shape. 

And she contacted me through channels. You know, it wasn't direct-- ah, she sent a letter to somebody and so forth. And um, I was expecting her. And Eichmann gave out the order, no more volunteers. And they took them all to Auschwitz, or-- you know, I just don't know where. 

I know that she never arrived and I've been searching for her ever since. I don't know positively because uh, nobody seems to know what happened. You know, when you were among the gentiles you were isolated from uh, from the Jews, you see? And when I transferred from one camp, came to another camp, there were always people who would ask, did you see my sister, you know, or my brother? And uh, if that person didn't see it, somebody else. But we, you know, communicated among ourselves. 

INTERVIEWER: The town of Piotrkow. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you witness what happened there? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I, as I said, I witnessed the first week of um, the German entry. But my whole family uh, perished there. My father took a chance. And although it was not allowed for a Jew to travel by train, he traveled. And he uh, took off his ah, armband because he wanted to know what was happening to them. 

And he brought us reports about Piotrkow. Piotrkow was a special case, you see? Firstly, since it was one of the oldest towns or cities in Poland, the Germans ah, took a special um, vicious design on it. They wanted to punish not only-- not only to kill the Jews. 

There were only, in the beginning, 25,000 Jews. I mean, it doesn't compare with other cities. But because it-- it had a beautiful synagogue. Ah, it was, uh-- I described it, you know, it was visited by the Tsar, and by Napoleon, and they choose that synagogue to humiliate the Jews before they kill them. So I knew about that, what was happening, because um, you know, my-- I have a cousin who lived all through that. 

And ah, it-- it's a matter of record, you see? There are so many eyewitnesses that um, that this story in itself shows, is a microcosm of what happened to Jews in Poland. First of all, they did exactly what they did in Dombrowa, you see? They took Jews to work. They had uh, glass um, factories. 

So they took them to the glass factories and ah, over there they had a real ghetto. But uh, the ghetto was from the medieval times. But it wasn't completely closed. There's a judengasse and is a-- they had streets like the, um, Jerusalem Street and Peretz and so forth, which identified with uh, Jews. They made a ghetto there and ah, there were-- they, they had some sadists, you know, who, volksdeutsche, these were eh, German um, Poles of German origin. 

And they were, you know, because they knew the locale. So they, they really uh, used their sadistic designs on, on the Jews. See, killing somebody-- uh, you can only kill somebody. But when somebody enjoys doing it, and this is what they were doing there. They enjoyed killing the Jews so they rounded them up in that synagogue, in that beautiful synagogue. 

And you know, this I can say because I remember everything. In fact, we have the ceiling there, ah, which-- which was a wonder. And they kept them there. And they were shooting through the-- through the windows. And the local police was helping out. 

They were killing babies, burning them on the stack in-- in front of the synagogue. They're taking out the holy scrolls and burning them or just leaving them outside. And that was, to many Jews, was worse than that. And then they slowly took them out of there and marched them through the town, weeping and praying, to this uh, forest, where we used to go, in Lag Ba'Omer to play. 

I mean, this was all designed, you see? It was part of the Jewish folklore, you see? On, on Lag Ba'Omer, Zionist organization would go there with their banners. Well, they marched them there and they asked them to dig their graves, and they shot them. And a few Jews resisted. 

And uh, that's why, you know, when a tree falls in the forest and nobody sees it, does it make a sound? And this is exactly what happened with the heroism of the Jews. There were many heroic acts. There was one as-- who escaped from that forest. That's why we know that the people took their spades and they attacked the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know him? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I didn't know him. But he was alive and he was telling the story. And they shot them anyway. I mean, they shot those resisted anyway. You see, after the war they brought the gra-- the-- they dug up the graves and they brought them back and they buried them on the Jewish cemetery. So this is no legend. This is what happened. And-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: The Jewish cemetery is still there. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: The Jewish cemetery is still there. In fact, my cousin went there and uh, they made a special-- ah, it-- it-- it-- it was really something that, ah, if you read this story, you know, y-you can see what happened to other places. When they killed the last Jew, they put out a sign, Piotrkow-- Petrikov in German-- is judenrein, cleaned out of Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see what was happening in the synagogue? Were you there, or were you just-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: No, I wasn't in the synagogue. I wasn't in the synagogue because I, you know, at that time, I was in another section. But uh, there were people who escaped from the synagogue, you see? And my cousin was there and uh, his wife escaped from the-- there were some people who escaped through the windows in the beginning. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: She escaped and she cannot talk till today. You ask her, she won't be able to answer you. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: It was a-- uh, as a matter of fact, whoever lived through, you know, in Piotrkow, and there are quite the few survivors because the final group of Jews was sent to um, a camp within the town and then to other camps. So there are quite a few survivors. And ah, that's why I said, ah, there are many things I remember from memory, you know. There are some things that I know, I researched the facts ah, about what happened. And there's no doubt that that happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Well then, what happened to you, sir? When you were in the labor camp in Graeditz-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --you were very ill. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes, I was and-- I was sent to the first camp when I got my um, notification, as I said, I was ready to go. But the Germans didn't trust me so they came a day before. I was supposed to, ah, go to the headquarters April 16th, and April 15th, which was my birthday, I was preparing to go and they barged into the house and they just took me out, you know, arrested me. 

And they send me to Anhalt bei Auschwitz, which-- at that time, Auschwitz wasn't, you know, as infamous as it is now. It was a camp and uh, they didn't have the crematoria yet, but um, when I went, uh, I don't know how far I was from Auschwitz. Must have been very close. And I was there six months. And while I was there, you know, I didn't know that my parents were killed there. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- um, people talk about Auschwitz and we hear about it. You have such an extraordinary memory. Can you paint us a picture of Graeditz first? What it looked like? What it felt like? What it smelled like? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: OK. Well, I cannot-- uh, I cannot tell you about Auschwitz. But I can tell you about two camps that will give you a pretty good picture. Ah, one camp was my second camp, ah, from Anhalt they sent us to Markstadt bei Breslau. 

Markstadt was a typical hard labor camp where people were working 12 hours a day. They were walking an hour to work and an hour from work, so there was practically no time to uh, sleep, or eh, take care of yourself. Uh, the work was such a ah, tedious job, like loading uh, dirt on wagons, that with the food that we were getting, which was a very ah, small piece of bread once a day in the evening when we came back, with soup, which had to last for a whole day, the following day. It was absolutely impossible to ah, stay-- stay alive, stay healthy. 

INTERVIEWER: But what did it look like? What did the-- the actual physical surroundings? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there trees? Were there-- was it barren? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: There were no trees. There were no trees. There were barracks lined up, lines and lines of barracks. And in Markstadt, uh, when it was raining there was mud. And you had to watch out not to come, you know, uh, soiled, because in the morning there was an inspection where the head of the camp lined up the people, about 2,000 people. 

And before they marched out they would ah, say this group goes to Schauhohlen, where I was working, the company. Another one went to Krupp. Um, these were industrial concerns that were using slave labor. 

INTERVIEWER: When they gave you your orders, what did it sound like? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: They didn't give us the order. We st-- we stood up-- we had to get up in the morning. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: And, and, to the appell, to the assembly. And we assembled in the middle of the square. The square was-- every camp has barracks around it and there was a appellplatz, which was the assembly room. Everybody had to stand at attention, and four, or sometimes six, ah, lined up. And the groups were separated, the working groups, you see? 

And then each working group had a um, Jewish kapo, who ah, gave a report-- ah, Schauhohlen has 120 workers today, you know. And the German commandant would come out in the middle. And the judeneldester, who was the head of the Jewish camp, would ah, give him a report. Just, ah, like in the military. 

Was a military report giving the ah, number of people. It was only numbers. And then the, the-- call arms. I recall that ah, you know, groups would march out to the beat, you know, and march to work. 

INTERVIEWER: March out to what? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Well, to the song I had to sing, or, one, two, three, one, two, three-- you know. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Links, zwei, drei, vier. That's the way we had to walk. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Had to walk and-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Links, zwei, drei, vier. This is, was German. And that's the way they wanted us to work. 

INTERVIEWER: Say that again? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: One, two, three, four. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: One, two, three, four. One, two, three, four. And that's the way we to march to our-- 

INTERVIEWER: In German, how did it sound? 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Links, zwei, drei, vier. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Links-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Links, zwei, drei, vier. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Left, two, three, four. Left-- left foot, two, three, four. And if you are out of step-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: You got-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: They could take you out and beat you up. 

INTERVIEWER: You said you were lined up in groups of-- of lines of four and six. Very often I hear the number five, that people were in columns of five. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Ah, well this varied. I'm just saying four because sometimes if this was a smaller group, it was four. Or five I think would be the right-- these are the kind of things that, ah, you know, these details, ah, didn't register as much. As a matter of fact, there were some things that uh, my son wrote a thesis when he graduated Harvard about the uh, the-- the mechanism of, ah, how they call it? Defense mechanism of the inmates of the concentration camp, so he made a interview. 

He interviewed me, too. And at that time I explained to him, as I explained to others, that when I was in camp I really didn't believe that was happening to me. You see? I took myself out of it. I said, this is not happening to me, to my soul. It happens to my body. 

In fact, I have letters-- you know, I've been telling this story for so many years and then I met a friend in the camp, to whom I wrote letters. And she saved them all these years. And about-- was it 15 years ago? 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: 20 years ago. We met in New York. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: 20 years ago, I met in New York and she invited me for dinner. And then she says she has a surprise for me and she brought a bunch of letters, which of course I asked her to give me. And in these letters-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Why don't you say how the letters was sent out? Not by mail. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Oh, yeah. The letters were sent out by, uh, I gave it to one inmate who worked in near ah, the baustelle, that's the place of work, where he could see somebody from the women's camp, you see? And so it went from hand to hand. I just wrote down that I want that letter to reach ah, this person, you see? And which barrack she is, in this camp. And from hand to hand it reached her. There was no problem because people were helping each other. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: We were paying for it, too. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yeah, we were paying sometimes. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: What did you pay? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Sometimes we have to give a piece of bread or a soup, you know, but it was worth it. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Or your portion of butter for the day. People were-- that was at risk to take a letter like that. So you had to sacrifice either your bread or butter. You were asked, you want to send the letter? 

Give me your bread. Give me your butter. And this is how people were surviving. This is how my husband wanted to get through to me. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: That's right. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: By, he saw me and the camp, like Sunday afternoon. And when the Germans went out dating for an hour or two, we knew. And the men's camp was on the one part of the wires and we were on the others. So when we knew that the Germans left for the-- for an hour, we decided to have, like, entertaining. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean they left you completely unatt-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: They went out, not too far. But you couldn't go any place-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: That was an-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: --because you were in the woods. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: That was an unusual situation. I'll have to explain first what-- what happened. Will you allow me? 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Yeah, go ahead. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: OK. This was a unique situation where ah, we worked in a specialized camp. Ah, it was called the Flechner. That was Langenbielau. That was the camp that actually saved me because um, if it wouldn't be for about a year in that camp I wouldn't be alive today. And uh, the-- there was a factory, a textile factory. 

And ah, the owner of the factory had good relations with the upper brass in the Nazi party. I think he was a friend of Himmler. So that he allowed to have a, one barracks with specialists like ah, electricians and uh, you know, people that he needed in the factory. And this barrack will be built exactly like the others and will also be surrounded with barbed wire and will have a commandant, you see? But it won't have the rigor of the regular camp, you see? 

The women were also in the same factory. So they were working in the women's camp, which was a larger camp. The men's was only a small camp. And when I, by a miracle and in the story, you know, that ah, tabloid about me, um, ah, I explained this story, how I got into it um, by asking-- I was asked to fix the uh, ah, barbed wire. 

And there was a German carpenter who ah, was sorry for me. He saw I was all, uh, you know, boils on my legs and so forth. And he asked me to-- to go into the barracks, which wasn't finished yet. And he helped me, bandaged my legs and brought me some food. And I used this occasion to ask him to do something for me, to work in this camp. 

You see, we prepared, we came from Graeditz, from ah, the big camp, and, just to work on that. And he, uh, you know, there was something very, you know, almost impossible to ask for just a laborer. But somehow or other, he managed to do that. And this is the way I came into that camp. 

So when I saw her-- you see, in this camp on a Sunday for about an hour or two, the German-- t men, watchmen, would date the girl watchmen-- watch people. And for about an hour or two, we had a relative ah, the camp for ourselves because they would-- they were just not ah, going around as regularly as uh, they did, you know, regularly. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone try to escape during that? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: No, no, no. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: No, no. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: No escape. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: No, you couldn't, no. No escape. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: The conditions were just that they didn't go, you know-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Watching over us. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: On their paces, you know, as well. And they ignored it because they were busy with their dates, you see. So-- so the girls would come out and sing, you know. These camps were separated. There was a space between them. 

There were two barbed wires. And the girls would come out, you know, and-- and lift our spirit so that uh, they sang some Jewish, Polish songs, and ah, Hebrew. And my wife, ah, danced, you see. And I saw her. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: With my Sister 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: With her sister. And I found out who she was. And I found out that she had an uncle. And, uh, 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: [INAUDIBLE]. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I asked the uncle if he wants to communicate with her because I could-- I could ah, be the liaison. So he said, yes, I want a send her a letter. You see, because I met-- he was working with me, in a different place. You see, people sometimes worked together but they didn't live together, you see? They were moving. 

So that, ah, he says sure. Ah, I'll write a letter to my uh, niece, and says, what do you want for it? Bread, whatever? I said I don't want anything, which was a surprise to him. But I wanted to meet her, so I took the letter and I was preparing, you know-- I asked the girl from the other side and, ah, um, I told her to call her out. 

And uh, I gave her the letter. You know, I threw it through the-- and she just picked up the letter and ran off. So I was a lost cause. I couldn't communicate with her until after the war. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: He sacrificed-- 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: But this was-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Risking his life with the letter and I gave him the cold shoulder. [INAUDIBLE]. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: But this was only a short period, you know, of that. You see, that gives also a-- some people say, hey, if you could do that then it wasn't so bad. But that was only a small period of time before the SS came in, you see? 

And then they took us out of that paradise, you know, which lasted as far as ah, labor camps are concerned, you know, it was a very short period. And then they took us to the um, concentration camp, SS ran concentration camp, in Langenbielau. They called it the sportschule, where, you know, all that was in the past. 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: But before you came to the paradise, you were in a camp not with barracks. Was a different kind of camp, where most of them are dead. They were sleeping in like, like, straight on-- they had not like bunk beds, but, uh, stories of flat things. One story, two stories, and they were sleeping about 30 people on one flat thing, the lice biting them and finally typhus broke out there, yeah? Yeah, 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yeah. Well, this is a story that uh, I also describe because this was my link with the extermination ah, centers, you see? Because I went through different periods in camps, you see? I had some ah, periods of relative um, well, better conditions, like this camp, you know, this limited camp. But before I came to this camp, I went from Markstadt, which was a-- of the worst camps in Germany. And when I was ah, sick, I caused a crash of uh, trains. And ah-- 

INTERVIEWER: You caused it? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: Yes, I caused it. Well, uh, I'll make it short. Um, I was working in um, loading wagons with um, sand, all day long. And it was a-- I-- my strength didn't-- you know, gave up. My legs were all ah, full of boils, and I was falling down, you know. The next step would have been um, just complete exhaustion or gangrene, and people were dying, you see? So somebody uh, took pity on me. Or I think I had a friend because my state, my mental state, was at-- at that time at the lowest points so I don't even remember who intervened. 

But I found myself in a different-- on a different work detail, you see? Here I was loading these wagons with sand and then they took me for the night shift to um, direct uh, the, the uh, train uh-- 

MIRA BIRNBAUM: Rails. 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: --the rails. In other words, to shift the rails so that the train's won't-- won't collide. And uh, this was in the winter of 1942. Was, ah, I was completely exhausted, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: How were you dressed? 

JACOB BIRNBAUM: I was dressed in rags because I had a pair of shoes that my father sent me, leather shoes, and a kapo took them away from me and gave me wooden shoes. And, ah-- this is what, this they could do. I mean anybody ah, on the higher ups, could do it. Either the Germans or if they saw that you had something desirable, they took it away from you. 