[TONE] CREW: Rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: From childhood on? [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER: It's easier to look at him and think he's 17 than I am. 

SUBJECT: When the war broke out in 1939, we had a norm-- I had a normal childhood. At that time, I was in third grade. The next two years, I was still in school. The Russians entered our part of Poland. 

Then when the war broke out between Germany and Poland, and the Germans came in, the first, biggest trauma to me was not being able to go to school. I watched, every day, children walking, my friends. Some of them were not even students. 

[CRYING] But they were allowed to go to school, and I was not. That was the biggest problem at that time. It was very hard for me to understand. 

Then after that, they were other-- first, the attitude was of passiveness. My girlfriends would bring me home the homework. The friendships still existed. 

Then I would notice a difference in their attitudes. Evidently, the Nazi propaganda got even to the children that age. And less and less of them would come to the house. Some of them even avoided me in the streets when they saw me. 

At that time, I felt deeply hurt, because at the age of 11 or 12, you just cannot understand, suddenly, what happened. Some of the friends that I had, we used to do homework together. And I would be the oldest one to help them. And when the war started and I was not allowed to go to school, as I mentioned, you know, suddenly the friendship dissolved. 

Many times, you know, I would come to their homes to see, just to say hello, or be with somebody my own age. Since I lived, primarily, in a non-Jewish neighborhood, I didn't know too many Jewish youngsters. And then I learned to, after a while, to live with my own thoughts, my own ideas, and by myself. 

I spent most of the time with my family. And my parents were always able to get me books to read. My mother would always select the reading material for me. Then after that, it got progressively worse. 

Not only did they show the unfriendly attitude, but actually hostility. Most of them were of Ukrainian background. German-- Germany-- Hitler gave them, promised them, that if they helped him fight, the Ukrainian people-- he formed a certain-- a Ukrainian army, which was called the Black Police-- that they will have a free Ukraine. Of course, he used them as far as the same way as he used everybody else, because they were the first one in line when it came to fighting. 

And they do-- did realize it after four years, that they are being actually used. There was-- a lot of the young people were sent to work in Germany in factories and forced laborers, while they were telling them they are doing-- they're doing it for German government and they will have special privileges working for them. But it took them almost four years to realize, actually, that they're being used. And they were very helpful in-- to the Germans, you know, in solving what the Germans called the Jewish problem and killing them. 

And after this, I came more and more across, you know, from ghettos to concentration camps, only across people that felt the same way. That obedience-- uh, they followed orders without questioning. Some of them even without any pang of consciousness. They were afraid to speak or show any sympathy towards Jewish people. Or so as I was-- grew older, matured from 11, 12 to 15, there were many times that, when I was in concentration camp, for instance, in Auschwitz-- this famous walk that we walked in January of 1945-- many times, I would have really doubts that there's an existence of God. 

I would all be, one minute, as we walk those icy, slippery-- slippery roads from early dawn till late at night- we walked because there were no transportation for us, to take us out of Auschwitz. Whoever fell or slipped, they would kill that person on the spot. And they were all young people, because we were already selected, and so many times, that they were all between the ages of 16 and 25. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were you walking? Where were you walking? Can you explain that a little more fully? 

SUBJECT: Yes. When the Russians were approaching that part of Poland, and that was Auschwitz, they wanted to move us. And they had no transportation. So they took us to-- so they made us walk. And as I said, there was no food, and we continuously walked from early morning till night. 

It was in January-- snowy, slippery roads. And many, many people died that-- on that-- the three days that we walked. We walked for three days. Both sides of the roads were scattered with bodies. As I said, whoever slipped or couldn't make it, they would-- shot that person automatically, if you were a man, young men and girls. 

And I would find myself many times in conflict with my own feelings. I would pray and to plead with God for giving me strength, to give me strength to keep on walking. And the next minute I would threaten to kill myself for praying. 

Looking around on both sides, I would say, how could there be God-- so many times. And then, also, this feeling of-- even the part of the Nazis-- this inhuman feeling. I couldn't understand it. 

Always I felt so-- like, in a trance. I couldn't believe that people, at this point, could feel so much hate in them. Many times I would-- couldn't understand it. Why was the hate there? 

They had-- some of the guards were young guards from different countries. Some of them were from Hungary. And one, especially, Hungarian boy that showed a little compassion. 

And he kept-- I was at-- I started at the beginning of the line. At the end of the day, I was at the end of the line. I had difficulties keeping up walking. I was helping somebody else who could not walk so well. 

And I remember distinctly, because that was one of the very few kindnesses that one of the uniformed German soldiers has shown-- he wasn't German. He was Hungarian. But he wore a Nazi uniform. 

And quietly, he said to me, I will yell, but don't get scared. I will pretend that I am pushing you. But I will hold you up with the butt of the rifle. 

And somehow, with his help, the two of us made it, this girl who I was helping and myself, the last two hours of the day. Then as we walked, by that time we were so exhausted and tired. They brought us into a town in Niedersachsen put us in cattle trains, and brought us to Bergen Belsen. 

And there, also, I couldn't understand the inhuman treatment. How-- sometimes I would wonder, is it-- is the-- the guards-- are they human or actually animals? 

INTERVIEWER: How old were these people that were guarding you? Do you have any concept of how old the people were you were with, and how old the people were who were in charge? 

SUBJECT: The people that I was with in concentration camp were mostly about two, three years older than myself. Since I was 15, as I said, they were anywhere between 16 and 25, 26 years old, the whole group of women that I was with. The guards that were guiding us were mostly young people a little in their 20s. There were a few old timers. As I said, the Hungarian guy-- guard-- was only 19, that tried to help me 

Otherwise, as I said, Bergen Belsen also-- the hunger there was-- by that time, we were slowly being starved to death anyway. I was only skin and bones. As a matter of fact, when I-- when the war ended, I had to be on a special diet, because my intestines shrank to the size of a one-year-old child. So-- and a lot of typhus, typhoid fever in Bergen Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: What had shrunk to-- what did you say? 

SUBJECT: That my intestines shrank to the size of a one-year-old child, because of, systematically, hunger. And I had to be on a special diet. For a year after the war ended, I had to be on baby food. 

Everything had to be creamed. Whatever I ate, it had to be creamed. Because my stomach could not digest regular food. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to ask several questions. One is, why do you think the Ukrainians-- when you were in Poland, before you went to the concentration camp-- why do you think that the Ukrainians were cooperating with the Nazis in terms of hurting Jews or suppressing-- changing Jewish life? 

SUBJECT: Well, for years, they always wanted independent country, Ukraine. And if you read any of the old Ukrainian literature, poets like Taras Shevchenko they always, you know, towards the country, the mother country. But they were always either under the Russian domination or the Polish. 

Hitler, knowing that evidently, promised them an independent Ukrainian state. And they believed him. That he was-- as I said before, he was using them. And he had the perfect material in them, because they themselves were under-- always under somebody else's government. Also considered, you know, not always the first class citizens, because in Poland, there were always class distinctions and so forth. 

So he used them in that form, by promising them a free country, they cooperated with him fully. And you don't need too much of you repeat over and over again in school to children, and that the Jews are at fault we are in this war. Jews are at fault because there is hunger. Jews are at fault because there is no unemployment-- because there is unemployment in this country. 

Jews are the ones that have all the money. Which, you know in Poland, there were, I would say 95% of Jews that were really poor. Things, you know, like these, over and over again, combined with the strong religious beliefs at that point. 

You know, I remember myself, that was before the war yet, I was about eight years old. And I went into a church with my girlfriend. As I said, I lived in a non-Jewish neighborhood. And she went. So I wanted to see what the church looked like. 

She says don't-- if you promise not to say you are Jewish, I will take you. So I went in, and I was shocked to hear a priest from a pulpit repeating that Jews are Christ killers. When we came out, she couldn't look at me. She was embarrassed or whether she really believed it or not. But yet people there that did not have the best of education or were not actually people who could read and make a-- determine that their own minds, believed that. 

I remember coming home, crying to my parents. And my first reaction was, why did Jews kill Jesus Christ? Did you kill Jesus Christ, I asked my father. Because he was in World War I, he was an officer. So I thought maybe-- at this point, I couldn't understand it. 

To me, it was such a-- you know, something that I was not aware of. Of course, I had to admit to my parents what I did, that I went into the church. So instead of getting angry, which I expected them to, because as I said they were deeply religious orthodox people in themselves. There was only one religion, and that was theirs. 

But I remember my father-- I demanded explanation. I wanted to know what happened. And I remember my father saying that, after all, Jesus Christ was Jewish himself. And I wasn't there, I don't know what happened. But my opinion is that his ideology was not exactly to that of that era. But he was preaching, evidently, the government-- and at that time, the Romans-- he went into details explaining to me that the Romans killed him, actually, not the Jews. 

But to me, it was such a terrible feeling to find out, you know, that it's taught differently in a church than in a Jewish religious school, which you know, we never had a mention actually. If we mentioned-- if there was any mention, it was that he was a rabbi and a very gentle man and a teacher. That's it. So that's the difference, I always felt was between the Christianity and Judaism until I actually came across that statement in the church. So combined with this religious teaching and the feeling of frustration, not being able to have their own culture exposed, their own country, they took it out on the next person, which were Jews. 

And as I said, they were very cooperative. It took them about four years or so to realize that they are being used by Germany, that they are using them as their tool of actually doing all the dirty work for them. Because in our part of the country, you know, most of the killings or so were done by the Black Police, which is the Ukrainians. 

So by that time, already you know, was like, whoever was guilty ran to-- to Germany. Many of them came to the United States here. And whoever didn't, when the Russians entered, you know, they took really-- they were very revengeful. 

So it's still this way now. Right now they are under the Russian government and their culture is the Russian culture. So they do not have, actually, still, a culture of their own. Even so, the similarity there in the language between Russian and the Ukrainian exist, there is still not-- it's not their own country. 

So therefore, you know, he had a perfect tool in the Ukrainians, that he used them. And after the war, many of them had camps in Germany. But they would not admit to being a Ukrainian citizen. They were either Russians who didn't want to live under communist regime or Poles. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you-- why do you think it's important that you tell what happened to you and that young people listen to the awful things that you went through? I mean, you're living a good life now. You have a good family. Why do you want to think about it again? Why do you want others to hear it? 

SUBJECT: Well, I feel it's important that people should be conscious. That there are certain ideologies that are not-- that they should question, actually. Am I right in following this blindly, without actually asking any questions about this idea? Should I believe everything that is said in the newspapers? Should I believe everything that my leader tells me? 

As has been proven in this country, already, too, that not always the leaders are perfect. That they should, young people especially, should read a lot, should be aware of the fact that not always the truth comes to the surface, and not always the truth is told to the masses. And they should be aware of it and not to believe-- first of all, there isn't a nation that is perfect. Every nation or every religious group has good people and bad people. 

You cannot declare a whole race or a whole na-- religious group as bad, because it's not so. There are good and bad in everybody and everyone. And therefore, they should be aware of it. I think young people should be more aware of the fact. And before they point an accusing finger at someone, they should actually know the facts about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you think they should learn about what happened in the Holocaust? Why go back to that terrible time? 

SUBJECT: It's because the young people at that time, as I said, did follow blindly. It was such a fool faith. You know, I spoke to many German kids afterwards, after the war. I did ask them, you know, youngsters my own age or older than myself. 

My English teacher was a German young man. I was 18 at that time. He was 21. I asked him. He was in the Hitler Youth. He admitted to it. And he says that, you know, never actually was that-- he had never a choice of ideology. Nazism was-- he was taught from childhood on, and he firmly believed in it. 

At the age of 16 and 1/2, he was sent to Russia, to the Russian front. And he was wounded there. So 16 and 1/2, that's hardly, you know, a child. But in desperation, they didn't have manpower. So they used children. 

There was no-- you know, that's when he realized, and actually the truth hit him, that the leader he believes in so faithfully is not at all what he was taught as a child. He realized that he's not for the good of the country. He did not actually-- he used just the times of upheaval, of economic poverty, to come up. 

And always, he never-- the country was never actually stable. He always used some other maneuver to make people believe, the German people believe in him, and in the country. It took him about six months to realize it, he said, how wrong was the ideology that he was taught as a child all along. 

He never-- he claims he never knew about concentration camp. And after the war, it became more and more shocking to him as he started learning the facts about concentration camp. People his age I can believe, sometimes maybe, you know, they were not aware. 

People who were mature adults are the ones, actually, that I blame to this time, and always will blame. Because many of them, even in areas like Dachau-- my father died in Dachau. So few years ago I went to visit his grave. He survived the war and died three weeks after. 

So his grave is on the outskirts of Dachau. And every place I went around the town of Dachau, I heard one thing-- we never knew about it. Now how can you not know about it, when you can, 30 years later, the smell of human flesh is still lingering on in that place? 

But you know, they just took-- they were well off as far as economically. The fact that their sons and fathers were being killed on the Russian front or captured by the Russians or so, somehow didn't-- never affected them. They had full stomachs, plenty of food, and that's all they, at this point, that they were interested in. 

And many-- you know, as a matter of fact, I stopped in a grocery store. And the owner was a man in his 50s, late 50s. So he was in his 20s during the time this was going on. And he says he didn't know. 

So I say how can you tell-- look me straight in the eye and tell me you lived in this town and you didn't know there was a concentration camp which existed from the 1930-- early 1930s. He says, well, I looked upon it as a camp for communists and criminals only, not actually innocent people. He was never aware of it until after the war. 

Whether he was telling me the truth or not, I don't know how much was kept away from-- from-- from them. But even if they were communists of a different ideology or criminals, they must have been aware that they are being burned, that there were crematoriums working daily. Even the mayor of the city, of the town of Dachau, when I came to inquire about my father's grave number, was very polite, a young man in his 30s. Went with me, to show me even, more or less, so I wouldn't get lost, where it is. 

And his first reaction was, I knew nothing about it. So you know, it's something that when you start looking into it-- and yet, when you read about the leaders, the leadership, the German leadership, it's amazing. How many, you know, actually they were-- in my opinion, mentally distorted. 

And yet, people followed them blindly, without questioning. There were a few exceptions, as we have heard about Paris and other generals who objected, to realize that the man is insane. But the rest of the country-- he killed a lot of-- by trying to save his own life, to live two days extra, he flooded the subways, where thousands and thousands of Germans, wounded soldiers, died. 

They were out in the subways. They set up hospitals there and in Berlin. And he wanted to live two days longer. So this gave him, you know, stop the Russians from entering the city. So he flooded the subways, regardless of the fact that these were the soldiers that he-- that fought for him, that were willing to give their lives for him. 

INTERVIEWER: When you were in Auschwitz, you had a friend. You later marched in this terrible march with that friend. Did you plan for your future? Did you have a hope that some day you would meet her again, see her again, she or others? Did you talk about it? 

SUBJECT: Well, we quite often-- we did have hopes and not specific plans. We, really-- you lived from day to day. And every day you would get up, you would say, thank God another day passed and we are still alive. 

I did hope that my father, brother, and sister survived. So after the war, of course, I found my father's grave in Dachau. But my brother and sister survived. And that was something that was really beyond my dreams, ever seeing them again. 

I never even-- I didn't dare hoping that there would be someone alive. And of course, with me, my brother felt the same way. Because he didn't think I would survive because I was a child, the youngest. 

INTERVIEWER: But I was really referring to the people that you were with every day. Did you talk to them about someday seeing each other again somewhere else, different circumstances? Did you ever discuss or-- or in any way talk about that? 

SUBJECT: We did. Our hopes were there. But yet, we didn't dare hoping, really. Because, as I say, when you see death on daily routine all around you, you don't think so far ahead. You think only in terms-- how could I survive for the next day or so. 

Many, I remember one young girl. She was married to a dentist, new, married only one year. She said, you know, when I survive the war, I know how to be very economical. You can live on potato peels and survive. 

Or you know, every time we saw a new transport come in, our first concern was maybe there is someone who knows about my sister or my brother or my husband. If there is, you know-- that's what we are concerned about. We would run to the wires to see if we can contact somebody. 

Where do you come from? Where are you from originally? Are you from this town in Poland? Do you know anyone from this town in Poland? Did you come across such and such person? 

We were hoping that-- like, I knew definitely, for instance, for myself, at the age of 16, even. The war ended. I knew I wanted to come to the United States. I wanted to come to the United States since I was a child. 

When I returned to Poland to look for my family, I was told that my part of Poland where I was born, is occupied by Russia. Now my fear of going back there and not being able to come out again was so great that I didn't even go back to my hometown. I just sent a telegram to the Jewish community there letting them know I'm alive, in case a member of my family comes back home. But my only hopes were to come to the United States. 

INTERVIEWER: The girlfriend that you were with, that you talked about being with his girlfriend on the march. Did you ever see her again? Did you ever hope to see her again? 

SUBJECT: I-- sometimes we would discuss that-- that maybe after the war we would meet. And she was originally from Krakow. She was about 22, I think. So-- and she had some kind of a disease as a child that made difficult for her to walk. 

Now the girlfriend that I was very friendly with was my age. She was 15. Her father was a rabbi. Her whole family was killed. And she was also from Krakow. 

When I first came to Krakow, I did look for some soul, somebody, even from concentration camp that I knew, to-- some familiar face. And I was told that my girlfriend, the one that was 15, the same age as me, [INAUDIBLE NAME], is in a children's home, an orphanage. So I went to visit her. And we did get together. 

Of course, she came out with tuberculosis. So they were sending her to a resort. But she had to stay in a TB, tuberculosis sanitarium until such time as they felt she was able to function again, you know, normally. 

So she told me about this girl, Lola, the 22-year-old. She told me that she survived. And she said something else. She said she came to visit her in the orphanage. 

And she said that every-- Fri-- she's going got with someone steady. She met a boy. And every Friday night that she lights the candles, she says a prayer for me because I helped her during that march. 

And we spent a nice time, of course. You know, that was already after the war. And we had such high hopes and plans. 

And she wanted to go to Israel once she is cured. And I wanted to go to the United States. And she asked-- you know, she was very much against it. She-- she felt very Zionist type. 

She asked me why-- why United States? There was no simple explanation. It's just that this country always fascinated me. And I wanted, you know, to come to the United States. 

I lost complete contact with her. My feelings always were-- always up to, you know, the first thing I was hoping that if my father's alive, which was after the war, to go back to school. And I did in Poland, right after the war. 

But we didn't last long in Poland. Because the seed of anti-Semitism that was sown there already by the Germans was left over. The Poles felt that too many of Jews returned from concentration camp. Can you imagine? Out of 3 and 1/2 million Jews, they think some less than 50,000 returned to Poland. I remember, even after the war-- when the war ended, in Mauthausen how bitter I was. Certain countries sent in trucks to bring the citizen, Jewish, of Judaic background back to their countries, except Poland. It was an indication. Stay where you are. We don't want you. 

I still found a way of getting back, because that was my only hope of finding my family. I knew that anything, you know, they would try to get back home. So there was a reason for me to go back to Poland. Even so I knew, I'm not going to stay there all along. 

INTERVIEWER: What would you feel now if someone told you that Reny was going to be able to see you again, that she was going to go somewhere where you could meet again or Lolo. What would you think? Would you be eager to meet her, to see them? 

SUBJECT: I certainly would. I would be very anxious to find out, actually, how they have managed-- how did their life treat them over the years. I accidentally came across someone who was with me in concentration camp. And strange thing is she doesn't remember me. I remembered her, but she didn't remember me. 

And when I told her. I remember-- I remember you. You were with your sister-in-law. You were so protective against her, her husband's little sister. She was also 15. 

And she says, that's right. And she looked, every thing I mentioned, she realized that I was there. But she did not remember me. She lives right now in Colchester, in Connecticut. Her husband just died recently of a heart attack. 

So I was very happy to see, her to see that she has two children. They were well-educated. She was happy that the life treated her not badly. 

Of course, I would love to see what happened. There are not too many remaining from our group, because you know the train trips that they were carting us from one concentration camp to the next, plus typhus or so, took a great toll of most of the girls. I remember when we started out from Plaszow, Poland in April 1944, there were about 3,000 of us there, maybe less. I will not exactly go there. But there were about-- between 2 and 1/2 and 3,000 people. After the war, from our group, there were about 180 that-- known to me, that stayed alive. 

INTERVIEWER: I pursue this question that, if you knew that the 180 were all going to gather somewhere, and you had an opportunity to join them, what would your feelings be about going and meeting them once again? 

SUBJECT: I would love to see them, as I mentioned before. I do not avoid the past. I do face it. Some actions or so are very painful to think about or to go back to. But this, you know, I would not mind seeing them again and find out how they are doing, what happened to them over the past 30 some odd years. 

As a matter of fact, when I met this person at the bar mitzvah, I was in concentration camp, we would reminisce, go back to certain incidents, and we would say, did you ever think that you would survive? Did you ever hope of survival? 

And of course, we-- the hopes were there. Otherwise, we would not survive. The only thing that kept us going is the hope of survival. The only thing is that the future looked so bleak at this point. No way could we even hope that actually the war will end, and we will lead normal lives. 

Even after the war, many times, you know, as a result of it, we would have nightmares. Or to this day, you know, there are plenty of times that psychologically, if I have some worries or something that goes wrong, I have nightmares about concentration camp. My doctor explained to me that, sometimes if something bothers you, you go back to times that were worse, to compare them to today's time. 

But I did, then when we got to Germany, I also was hoping that the normal hopes of a young girl. The only thing is, and it's true, that I was more appreciative of everything around me after the war. I would look at winter scene, and to me it would look absolutely beautiful, the snow, and the trees, and the ground, and my favorite season of the year. Because I never thought I would see another winter. 

So this was-- I lived in Bavaria in 1947, '48. And as I said, these things that I appreciated very much. Then, of course, things that I was always hoping for, like school, and-- not always did that they materialized after the war. I would ever-- I would get a course here, a course there. I did get the equivalent of a high school diploma. 

And of course we were exposed to a lot of cultural life in school after the war and operas and so forth, which I always hoped. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that you-- 

CREW: [COUGHING] 

INTERVIEWER: --you didn't expect to-- you-- you hoped that you would survive, yet life didn't look very promising if you did survive. So why this clinging to survival? 

SUBJECT: Because there was still this little hope that maybe-- maybe my family, my entire family, entire family will survive, too. That I might lead-- have a normal teenager's life. I had a phobia about it-- I didn't have any hopes for my mother. I knew that she did not survive. But yet, I deeply, secretly, I was always hoping, maybe by some miracle, she would be alive. 

I resented the few kids that I knew who had mothers who were hidden and underground, or if they were in some way disrespectful to their mothers. I felt very strongly, you know, almost a point of jealousy that they had a mother. As I said, you know, I was 16 or so, there was no-- at that time 15, 16, you do need parental love and guidance, which I missed tremendously. 

INTERVIEWER: Your son, your son knows about what happened to you. What are his feelings now? 

SUBJECT: Not in details, not in such details as I have mentioned here. My first reaction was I want to spare them from knowing about the past. But as they went along, and they learned in Hebrew school, and they have seen the film, Let My People Go, or so, each one of them would react differently and come home and ask questions. 

Susan, the oldest one, was always very inquisitive. And she would-- I remember when she was 10 years old, she came home. And the first thing that came out of her mouth was mom, is it true that my grandparents-- that lampshades were made out of their skins? And soap out of their fat? 

Or-- you know, these are the things that all of a sudden, they became aware of. This girl had nightmares for days afterwards. It hit her suddenly. Because while the other kids took it as part of past history, it hit her close to home. 

Because she realized, you know, that I was in a concentration camp. That her father was in a concentration camp. The uncles and aunts she has-- they were all in concentration camps. 

So she became very conscious of it. She wanted to know exactly, how did her grandparents die? What happened to them? 

The youngest one never asked any questions. But she came from school with red, swollen eyes, so I knew, you know, that it affected her, too. Stuart, when he was shown that film, came home-- as a matter of fact, my neighbor's daughter brought him home, Susie Goodwin. Very-- and walked with him. Because as much as he was ashamed to cry, he watched the film and cried. And afterwards, she mentioned to me that she says he was trying to-- not to show any emotions. He was embarrassed, because the other kids watched, and as I said, to them, it was only past history. To him, it was more than just history. To him, it was something that actually happened, home, that he lived with in the house. 

Then I started, more or less, telling them a little more and more about it. They became a little more and more conscious of it. They became a little more appreciative, as far as the parents. 

They were trying all throughout their life very hard to make up for the hurt and the pain that we had suffered-- suffered in our childhood. And to this day, you know, find that many times, like Susan, the oldest one, always ask me questions about what happened to this one? What happened to that one? 

She's pregnant, she expects a baby. So she ask-- asked me. You know, you had so many relatives that died. Who should I name it after? Tell me something about that person first. 

And I find that, to a certain point, I'm finding out now that it did affect the children. But they are a little bit more conscious, too, of what's happening around them. They don't take orders blindly. They question. They want to know-- why should I do that? What's the reason behind it? 

Of course, all the dreams that I had as a child I did transfer to my children. My-- like, for instance, the importance of education-- I always stress the fact, because I-- my education was interrupted. I made them aware of it, how lucky they are by being able to go to college and-- 

INTERVIEWER: With your feelings about the importance of education, do you remember that while during the war, in the concentration camps, was there any effort on your own part, or on the part of others, to learn or to teach? 

SUBJECT: There were no facilities, none whatsoever in concentration camp. There were no books. Sometimes on a Sunday, we would sit around, young people, and discuss certain things, books that we read in the past. Compare the authors, ideas about those books, our own feelings. How did you feel about this particular story? 

I remember we were discussing Shakespeare's Merchant Of Venice, I believe. And I was very young when I read it. And the only impression it left, that story to me, is the fact that I found the anti-Semitic description of this merchant and automatically, I disliked him. I disliked all his books for that reason alone. 

And we were comparing it between ourselves and back and forth. And I remember this dentist's wife, who was in her 20s at that time, said these are the times that he write the material, when he was with in the times. I couldn't understand it. Times or not, I still felt that he expressed anti-Semitism in this particular book. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe this more fully? You're in a concentration camp. Who was there? Where were you sitting? Do you remember the day? And you're having this discussion about Shakespeare. 

SUBJECT: Well, we were not sitting. This-- I remember particularly the incident was in Plaszow. And we had bunks. But it was summertime on a Sunday afternoon where we were not working. 

And we were sitting and talking, and comparing, as I said, what we had read, the material we had read, and what we have thought about certain ideas. 

INTERVIEWER: Plaszow was a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: Plaszow was the concentration camp outside of Krakow. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were talking with whom, sitting with whom? 

SUBJECT: It was a group of girls my own age or a little older. And also we had that-- we were separated from the men, but we had privileges of spending an hour or so with a father, a brother, a husband, or you know. So sometimes we would just sit around and talk. And there was nothing else, you know, to do as far as there no food. 

Or of course, as the time passed by, from one concentration to the other, you did not-- sometimes you saved your breath. You didn't discuss things because you were too tired mentally and physically, like Auschwitz. Seeing what was going on there, hearing about the French camp Fort, which was a prostitution camp. They took young, beautiful girls and used them for German officers. 

This camp, they even pointed out to me, is the camp where they are using the girls as guinea pigs for medical reasons or so. It was each incident, each story, I would hear about those things left me completely drained. 

You know, I couldn't think at this point or dream, even. Because there was so much-- not only drabness. But such tragic events that I-- my mind couldn't comprehend or understand all of it. I would wonder, am I going to be next many times. I would volunteer gladly for any work there was, just to be out of the compound of the concentration camp area. 

INTERVIEWER: [SIGHS] You mean we used up an hour? 

CREW: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Wow. 