INTERVIEWER: The beginning of it. You don't have to pick it up at that. 

SUBJECT: Oh, OK. 

INTERVIEWER: It doesn't matter. OK? All right, go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Well, I was telling you about processions, which was the worst fear, because you had to raise your hand and salute when the flag passed, and Jews weren't allowed to do it. If you were recognized as a Jew, your goose was cooked. But if you weren't recognized as a Jew, not to be-- you know, stick out, you raised your hand. So sometimes I did. Sometimes I just stopped and I went behind a tree or something, the best way I could, and I raised my hand, my arm, in the Hitler salute. 

But most of the time if there was a house with an open door or a store, I used to go into the store. And, uh, you know just to avoid seeing the flag. Because you had to do either one thing or the other, either salute or not to salute. If you don't salute, you immediately were recognized as a Jew, and you really were left to the mercy of the people who saw you, what they would do with you. They could perfectly well kill you on the street and, you know, nobody really would say anything because there was no such thing as a court, and after all, it was only a Jew. 

So we were-- we knew that we were in constant danger, that if we would stick out, if we do anything, we were at the mercy of people. There was nobody to complain to. You couldn't complain to the Jews. You couldn't complain to any courts. You couldn't complain to the police. 

Because the head of the police was a man called Heinrich Heine. Heinrich Heine was a famous man. He was the police commission-- the head of the police in Breslau. And Breslau was a hotbed of Nazism. 

Now, Heinrich Heine was an accomplice of Rome. Rome was the head of the SA, the Stormtroopers, in Berlin. He was one of Hitler's elite. And Heinrich Heine and Rome were associates and friends. And it turned out that-- I don't remember the year, but there was a putsch in the making, a kind of a revolution within the Nazi parties, in which Rome, Heine, and other people were trying to take over the party. That doesn't mean to say that they were less brutal, but they wanted to get rid of Hitler for some reason, and they wanted to put themselves into power. 

And this thing was detected, and you can read this whole story in The Night of the Black Knives. It's the book which has been published here-- The Night of the Black Knives. And you can read the whole history of this thing in the book. It's very good. It's available in small-- in pocketbooks. things came back to me when I read the story. 

That night, Hitler's gestapo was swarming all over our streets. And my mother told me, don't go out. Don't anybody show themselves in the street, because the slightest little notice that you create, you're in danger. Don't go out. That night these people were arrested, and they were subsequently shot that same night as homosexuals, and whatever, and-- and it was a big deal. It was a revolution. It was the first one of its kind. 

The other one that I know of was towards the end of the war where some German generals tried to revolt and overthrow Hitler. These are the only kind-- the only two internal revolutions inside Germany that I was aware of, ever, in history. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you aware of discrimination against homosexuals? Was that a prominent-- 

SUBJECT: Well, homo-- you see, you must understand that the Aryan race was a very pure race. People who were cripples were automatically not within the pure race. People that were Jews, poets-- poets were like pigs. And we were constantly told in school the poets are inferior, other people were inferior. We learned that in school in race theology. The Aryan race is the only pure race. 

Roosevelt-- President Roosevelt was called Rosenfeld. He's a Jew. He's an enemy of Germany. And it was always pounded the excuse for re-arming was always the peace treaty of Versailles, the shameful treaty of Versailles, and we must have lebensraum, we must have room to live, and we're suppressed and we're held back, and the German race is the best race, and the Jews are all-- there was a joke going around in German among the Jewish people. And one fellow would ask the other-- would tell the other-- you know, he says, the Jews and the people riding a bicycle are at fault with everything that goes wrong. So the person would ask, why the-- why the person that rides the bicycle? And the answer to that is, why the Jews? 

So this was the joke that was coming around, because anything was blamed on the Jews. The Jews had all the money, and the Jews had all the business, and the Jews were everything, and the Jews were where-- it was the Jews' fault that the war was lost, and it was the Jews' fault-- the stab in the back. That was the big theory, the stab in the back. That was the internal strife, the revolution, and that was in 1919. We had a revolution-- in 1918 we had a revolution in Germany, which, which failed, and the Weimar Republic. There was all this stab in the back. 

There was all those people who were defending the Treaty of Versailles and saying, now, don't let's have any war. We want to be at peace with everybody, and we'll have our army that is only allowed to have 100,000 men, and we will live in peace. And from the beginning-- from the end of the First World War, the German generals who were defeated were planning revenge. And Rome, who was later on killed, was a member of the Black Reichswehr. It was called Black Reichswehr. It was the inner circle that created Hitler as their man. 

INTERVIEWER: You talked about the cripples and the homosexuals. What other elements were not considered Aryan? And the Jews, of course. 

SUBJECT: Well, other people, the Nordic people, were respected, the Swedes, the Scandinavians. They were respected. The Slavic people were animals, OK? The Poles were the lowest of the lowest, and the Jews were the lowest of the lowest. You couldn't go any lower than Jews. And they were the most dangerous. And the Jews-- we heard about the final solution, and when we get rid of the Jews then everything is fine. 

But we thought this was all talk. It was all things that he would try to rule it with, to keep people in tension. And we never thought that people could react the way they did as actual enemies of the Jews, that people who talked to you before and who were your friends would turn around and hate you. Because there was a mass hysteria, and we heard this-- these radio broadcasts of the 1st of May. Was always-- the 1st of May was traditionally, I believe, a Labor Day, a day of the communists. They were marching. He turned this around-- no, not communists. It was the unions, I believe, all the trade unions would march on the 1st of May. And it was international, I believe internationally recognized. 

And Hitler very cleverly turned this around into a Tag der nationalen Arbeit the day of national work. So everybody is proud of his job on the day of the national work. That was the 1st of May. So that he would rule out any kind of opposition that could be created within the working masses, or whatever. And I remember that. 

Other than that, I remember that the Czechs, for instance, were regarded as inferior. And of course, you know, he concentrated on the Sudetenland as the people who had to be freed from the Czechs, and there was a great preparation to take over the Sudetenland. 

INTERVIEWER: Where it was the Sudetenland? 

SUBJECT: The Sudetenland was a-- is a part of Czechoslovakia which is adjacent to Germany in a mountain chain which is called the Riesengebirge, OK? It's a mountain chain, and this is the Sudetenland, which was part of Czechoslovakia. But it was a German population in this-- German speaking population in the Sudetenland. At one time or other, it belonged to Germany. It's one of these, um, places, lands, that were disputed by two nations. When Czechoslovakia was created, it became Czech. 

Same as Alsace-Lorraine-- there was a dispute between France and Germany. It changed hands many times, and the Saar, the Germans Saar area, for instance, came back by Plebiszit. That came back by peaceful means under Hitler. He created so much trouble there that the Saar was an area which came back by peaceful means to Germany by election from France. So this was the first one, I believe. It was even before Czechoslovakia and before Austria, before anything else. 

INTERVIEWER: You were talking about a push, or a putsch. 

SUBJECT: A putsch. A putsch is a, uh-- a putsch is-- a putsch is a revolt. It's a revolt. It's like we have in South America. What do you call these when they have a-- when one Colonel throws-- 

INTERVIEWER: Coup d'etat? 

SUBJECT: Pardon? A coup d'etat. That's what it was. It was supposed to be a coup d'etat which misfired because Hitler's henchmen found out about it, and they prepared very thoroughly. It's a very-- it's a detective story of the first degree how they found out and organized that to punish these people and kill them. They shot them right away without a trial or anything. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see them? 

SUBJECT: No, no. But our president of the police, our head of the police in our town was the associate, and he was killed. And he was one of the worst Jew haters that were in existence, Heinrich Heine. 

INTERVIEWER: He was killed by this putsch? 

SUBJECT: He was killed by Hitler, personally. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, he was-- he was part of the putsch. 

SUBJECT: He was part of the putsch with his associate, Rome. 

INTERVIEWER: You were-- and you said that there were some humorous moments for you as an apprentice while you were still in the-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, well you must understand that I built a psychological wall around myself in which I protected myself from being hurt. I was constantly being abused, physically and mentally, but at the same time I learned. I couldn't help learning, because I was helping this man and, after all, I was an apprentice. So I learned to trade. 

But while I was learning, when I was doing wrong, I was being yelled at, the mildest form. I was being yelled at. And I was nervous because whenever he wanted something I made sure that I would run, because if I wouldn't run immediately and give him a pair of pliers when he wanted it, then I was being yelled at, and I'm slow, and I'm no good, and you Jews are no good anyway, and you've got to make money. You are no good as apprentices, and so on. 

So we were working in some kind of a mansion with very high ceilings, and we had a stepladder, a extensional ladder leaning up against the wall, and a parquet floor, which was very slippery. And he put me in front to foot the ladder, which means to stand in front of the ladder. And he's says, don't go away, because if you leave this ladder, I kill you. And I'll fall. It was quite high. It was about 20 feet high. 

So I was standing there, and he was working there, and then he yelled, give me the pliers. And in my instant reaction, I ran for the pliers, and this ladder came sliding down on this parquet floor, and he came down and landed on this behind from 20 feet up. So there was a big chase. He chased me through this whole mansion from one room to another, and finally I went out in the street and I ran all the way home. 

And I didn't go into work the next day until my father found out from the master, who was the boss, my boss, that it was all right to come in. And he lectured me, but he didn't do anything. He didn't kill me and it was all right after that. 

INTERVIEWER: Was the master still Jewish at the time? 

SUBJECT: No, no. The master wasn't Jewish. But he was not bad. He was not a bad one. They weren't all bad. The Germans weren't all bad at all. There was some, especially among the labor-- the working class-- there were some people, they didn't talk much, but you could feel by your relationship and by the way they talked to you that they weren't with it. There were quite a few. They couldn't do very much, and they weren't organized. Some of them might have been. 

But on the street they were all Nazis. And you didn't dare anybody to ask anybody, are you a Nazi or aren't you a Nazi? You know, everybody was a Nazi, because God forbid you're not. Then somebody might walk next to you and hear the remark and immediately you get arrested, because they were training people to listen in. 

The Hitler Youth was trained to give their parents away. They were trained to listen at home. And there were quite a few families where the parents, fathers or mothers, were arrested for something they have said against Hitler because their own son, their own child, had given them away. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know any of these families or did you just hear about this? 

SUBJECT: I heard about it in school. 

INTERVIEWER: So you knew some-- 

SUBJECT: I heard about it in school. 

INTERVIEWER: How? What-- 

SUBJECT: Well, that people were saying, my father was arrested. He was no good anyway because he was always making remarks about Hitler, so I told-- I told my group leader something about it, and he got arrested. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they have evince-- did they express regrets? 

SUBJECT: No. No. I guess this particular guy didn't like his father, or whatever it was. Maybe he wanted to get back at his father. But they were officially trained. I heard about this training that they were talking about in school. Because all these kids were belonging to Hitler Youth groups. At that time it was Jungvolk, it was the smaller ones up to, I believe, up to 12, it was the little ones that were running around in shorts. After that they became into the teenage group that was Hitler Youth. 

But they were being taught in these groups, and the kids brought that back to school to tell me about it, that they were said-- that it was said that they must give away anybody, even their own parents, if they say anything against The Fuhrer. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you respond to that at all, or did you-- 

SUBJECT: Did I respond to it? No. I was very quiet. I would not say anything to that. I could not say anything to that, because I was a Jew. You know, anybody who would say anything was immediately-- you know, you don't say anything like this in a situation like that. I was a kid, you know? I was very busy protecting myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else that you can share with us at this particular moment, that you feel? 

SUBJECT: Yes, another humorous story. When I was pulling my material back some night-- this was from a different place-- I had the-- this was a wagon, a short cart that was about six feet long and about four feet wide with two handles. And our extension ladder, which was about 24 feet or some-- it was about 24 foot, it would be about 12 feet long, so it was sticking out beyond the handle. So I had to pull the wagon by the front of the ladder, and I had a red flag in the back. 

And I was going through a narrow driveway, and a cart and a horse came towards me, a delivery-- they had very few trucks at that time-- came towards me, and I wanted to get this out of the way, and I swung this ladder to the side to get out of the way. And I swung it a little hard, not knowing that my journeyman was pushing back on the opposite side of the ladder. 

And as I was swinging that ladder around, I hit him with the ladder and he flew to the side. And I was very happy about that fact. It was the only time that I had my satisfaction. It wasn't my fault, so he couldn't do anything to me. I stopped, but I was very happy. This was my apprenticeship, but I did learn something. Germans are very thorough. 

And I do want to emphasize that even with all these things that were going on, there were some Germans that were good to us. And I'll never forget them. There were some personalities that were very much in the minority. There weren't very many of them. The majority of Germans were our enemies, but there were some that were willing to help us, and I will forever be grateful to them. 

INTERVIEWER: I felt badly that I was keeping you. Can we just stop tape and then I have-- just switch people? Because I know it's-- 