HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Because I know the Hungarian-- we were together with the Hungarian Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Hungarians were sent to Auschwitz? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So you remember the arrival in Auschwitz, and the picture? 

CREW: OK. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: When we arrived-- 

INTERVIEWER: In Auschwitz? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: --to Auschwitz, we saw women with no hair, skin and bone. Constantly, we saw they carried stretchers with-- wasn't even covered, and were skeletons. And one looked at the other bewildered, how do we get out of that? The inmates said, it's too late. We were hoping that you people in ghetto will do something for us to help us. This is the end, there's no way out. 

But like, Warsaw ghetto had few concerned people who helped them. But in Lodz, you had nobody to help you. There was no help from nowhere. 

INTERVIEWER: And then on the train, you left Auschwitz? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Left. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel leaving that behind you? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: We had no-- 

INTERVIEWER: When the train pulled out? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: --no feelings whatsoever. It didn't matter one way or another. Just praying for death. Because we saw what's going on in Auschwitz. The three days, there were constantly beatings. They had us sit on our knees with our hands up. You know, if you just-- you couldn't take it anymore, you were beaten clubs. 

There was-- we were dying from thirst. And now I remember, they brought a big, like a big milk can-- it was back home, they use for milk-- with water. But there was no-- they had nothing to distribute with it. And that was a Polish woman. And she finally got so aggravated, and took that can of water, and spilled it on the ground. And we were licking it, whatever we could get. And for that, we were beaten. 

Like we had to march once a day, you know, to use facilities. And it's undescribable, the facilities, what it was. And you could only stay like a minute. It looked like a faucet. It wasn't a sink, it was a wooden thing just. And you tried to rinse your hand or a drop of water-- for there was no water or anything like that. 

It's unbelievable. Like right now, I can't believe that things like that could have happened. But it is the truth. 

INTERVIEWER: But the pictures are clear in your mind? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Very much so. Nights-- most of the nights are still during the war, seeing Mom and everybody. And horrors-- many, many nights constantly screaming that I've been you know, followed, or threatened. And I wake up in a sweat. 

INTERVIEWER: Threatened by what, in what way? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: No, but you know, we-- while we were in camp, they call them those women who were watching us-- we call them Aufseherin. And they weren't any human. There was no humanity or anything like that. They were told one thing, you know, it's death. There's no mercy. 

INTERVIEWER: But at night, what do you feel threatened by? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, constantly, you remember the horrors, and you are afraid. 

INTERVIEWER: Specifically what is going to be done to you? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: You're going to be taken away. 

INTERVIEWER: From home? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: From home, or whatever. Or let's say you're reading the paper about the Klan, that time it was in Skokie. You go through the house constantly. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- like things happening here in Hartford or in Maryland? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Whatever, you hear about it. 

INTERVIEWER: What can you-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, it's very painful. You can't believe that in the 20th century, the United States, where it's-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, you personally, when you read about the Klan, or the Nazi movement, what does-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: That it's-- I can't believe. Even though it's freedom of speech here, but I don't believe that this is freedom of speech. You could express, I believe, freedom of speech. There was the march, Martin Luther King. There was a reason people wanted freedom, and it was justified. 

But to march for a Klan, to give them a permit that they could have their rally, I don't believe that it is right. No matter how they describe it, that everybody could express themself. You could express yourself if you have a point. But I don't believe that that should be allowed, because it brings those horrors back. 

INTERVIEWER: So living here doesn't feel safe, or does it? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: It's safe then no. 

INTERVIEWER: Safe and non-safe? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: It's safe and it's not safe. Because you have that constant reminder. It's a constant reminder. 

INTERVIEWER: It can happen? I mean, the Klan will-- what do you begin to imagine? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, they got a lot of followers. And it can happen. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you personally afraid of? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: The same thing. I remember when they showed the Holocaust on television, I didn't watch it. Just the last part, the liberation. And after that, there was a discussion on the radio. And I heard a man. He sounded elderly. And he said that he thought it was justified. 

And he was asked why, and he said, because there are too many. Who are the doctors? And who are the lawyers? And who are the dentists? And who are the bankers? 

He said, well, as far as I know, everybody has a choice. If you want to study, and if you want to learn, you could be whatever you want. But he said that the same thing should happen here because there are too many, and everybody got good positions, and everybody is rich, and that it's justified to do the same thing all over again. As long as they have followers, there's a threat. 

INTERVIEWER: To you, living in Hartford now? That's what I want find out. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, it's-- I have-- I am grateful to this country. I really have a lot to be thankful for. The only thing bothers me, things like that. 

Because when we came to the States, we came with nothing. Me, my husband, and my daughter-- the one-- I was about to give birth to a child. And we went to Nashville, Tennessee. Because we had no relatives in the States who would take us out. And at that time, Jewish Federation was sponsoring, paid our way. 

And every city took in so many people. And like, we were sent to Nashville, Tennessee. When we arrived to Nashville, there were a few people waiting for us with flowers and food. And I remember we were given a room, and there was a new crib for my daughter, and baby clothes. And we were given some clothing. 

And for like a month, they paid our rent. They gave us money for shopping. And they asked my husband what he could do. He said he could do tailoring, and they took him to a tailor, custom tailor. And he got a job for $25 a week. 

And we made out very well. We stayed in Nashville for like three years. And he didn't make much more. He made like $40 in the end. But Nashville at the time, food was cheap. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. I understand that you made it, and then you came here. When, if ever, did it come to feel like home? Does it feel like home? And if it does since-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: It feels good to be here, because I brought up three beautiful kids. And they were very well-educated. They all three went on scholarships to school. Two of my kids have master's degrees. 

Like you say Hartford-- my son-- both of my sons are graduate from Weaver High School. My son was president of Weaver High School. He did work for human rights for a while. He was Arthur Johnson's assistant. He was very well known in the city. 

And I'm very proud of him. He did a lot of good. He's a graduate of Syracuse, highest honors. He's a graduate of Pratt Institute. He's an artist, now in Israel. And he's still a very good man. My daughter graduated from-- went two years to Washington University. 

INTERVIEWER: But does it feel home? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Well, I'm happy here. But it hurts to see those things. Because after all, this is a country where you have people from every corner of the world. There is not such thing as Hitler wanted. No, his own people, they had to be pure Germans. 

Here you have people from all over the world. And I think that everybody is equal. And I don't believe that because I'm a Jew, or you're a black, because all right, we are the ones who are-- we are marked, no Jews and no blacks. And that hurts. I can't take that. And it hurts very much when I hear that. 

INTERVIEWER: You also said before that you went back to the grave. Why did you do that? You went back to Poland. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I went back to Poland. I thought if we would recognize the grave, which we didn't. We just cried. There could have been 200 people thrown in. I went back a few times to the cemetery while I was in Lodz. But there was nothing I was able to do. 

They also would like, we owned our own house. That was a building had 20 families, and they said we should register for that. And I went like to City Hall. And the guy said it would cost like 200 zloty, which I didn't have anything. 

And 200 zloty, at that time, you bought a loaf of bread. And I didn't have that. And it didn't even matter to me, because I don't want the house, and I don't want anything. Because there was nothing left of anybody. And it didn't make a bit of difference one way or another, but whatever. 

Like the apartment we lived, there was nothing left. The whole house was-- even the windows were taken out. Because right after the war, the Poles went back. They thought they'll find gold or whatever. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever go back to Poland again? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: No, no, no, no, no I wouldn't go to Poland or to Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: It's closed? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Right. Right, there's nothing to go back to. 

INTERVIEWER: Who-- why are you doing this today? This is like going back. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Why? Really, when I had that phone call, I thought I couldn't do it. But then my daughter called me that she read about it in the paper. And she wrote a letter, and gave my name. And she said, Mom, I want you to do it. And I'm proud of her, and I'm-- and 

The same thing my son-- my youngest son was home for Mother's Day. And he said, Mom, please do it for me. I want you to be strong and do it. 

And I'm also very proud of my kids. They joined the second generation of survivors. And I'm doing it for them, and hopefully, won't be forgotten. And I pray to God that nothing like that would ever happen to any people. 

INTERVIEWER: Just one last question. When you see Mother at night, what do you say to her, and what does she say to you? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I would-- I've seen my mother a few times, and it would be-- if something happens I mean my son, the one who is in Israel, after he's graduate Syracuse, he was very ill. He had the regional enteritis. Like a month before, I saw my mother. 

And she kept holding me and hugging me. And right after that happened, my youngest son was very ill. And every time that I'm constantly scared something is going to happen, that's like the only times I would see my mother would hug me, when there was a tragedy. 

There's no-- I don't have a picture of anybody. After we got back to Lodz, I remember we went back, people told us where they have like their unemployment, where we used to go to register. Before the end, they get at us all day to take pictures of everybody. Those were the certificates of death. 

And I found-- it's a tiny little picture of my mother. That's the only thing I have. And it's so hard. She doesn't even look anything what she was looking, but that's the only thing I have. 

INTERVIEWER: So the feeling isn't-- or the dream, it's not as that she's alive? And when you're frightened-- 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: --she will hug you? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Right. Sometime I have to-- really, I can't remember my brother looked like. So the only way I would see them it's in dream. Otherwise, I can't picture. 

INTERVIEWER: Cannot? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: No. Just the horrors, what we were afraid of or talking about. During the journey to Auschwitz, my brother kept looked at my mother, how pale she was and frightened. And if we should get liberated, we will never go back home. We would go to Israel or to America. 

And my mother kept shaking, turning her head. It's impossible. But even the journey, we kept dreaming about. And when you asked me if we had any idea-- no but, when we were in the train, there were writings from people what they left before. But it was too late. 

INTERVIEWER: Writing? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: In the train. Wherever anybody could, they made notes. We saw the notes, but we couldn't help ourselves at all. 

INTERVIEWER: About what was going to happen? 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: What was going to happen. 

INTERVIEWER: Notes about Auschwitz. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

CREW: Yes. 

HANNA GOLDSTEIN: I'm glad I made it. 