INTERVIEWER: So then they said we-- the Lithuanians loved the Jews. The Lithuanians were good to the Jews. The Poles were bad. 

SUBJECT 1: That's not true. 

INTERVIEWER: I'll just tell you what they said. So, you know, there I am. They're my guests on my program and I'm not going to let this go by, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: They worked together with the Germans-- close, like this. And they-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Now came the war. Or now came-- excuse me-- the two weeks are over and-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. The people-- the police came and throw out us from our flats in 15 minutes. And we-- 

INTERVIEWER: And what could you take? 

SUBJECT 1: We only can take things-- back. Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said you knew from before. 

SUBJECT 1: We know before. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And did you put anything away? Did you hide things? 

SUBJECT 1: We put away, we hide things. We put to some Polish families, but not all families give it back. That is because we are out of the law. That is one of the problems that when I have a first contact with it. Because when they saw out from the house, I have not such a terrible feeling, like my parents, perhaps, because they worked all their life to have all that what they have. And I was only a child. 

So I even didn't understand why they are so brochen. So I always said-- and that is, perhaps, one of the things that a young person look from another point of view on the life, even if it is a very, very terrible situation. But you look, always, for another point or way. The way I understand it, my mother was always afraid that something can happen to me. 

So I even have some gold rings. So she took it from me and she put it in a-- in a coat where-- because the Germans gave-- to take all gold, and all silver, and all the radio things, and everything to bring them back. No, some things you must bring back, but some many things, people hide. So I remember our-- in our house, my mother gave me all our knives and things-- all the-- from the silver. 

Because we have two choice-- to give it up to German, but to take it-- we cannot. And she told me, give it to the man. He is cleaning the house, you know? Some Polish. So I give it to him. And even he told me, you know, that your flat will go-- they will be here-- Germans will live here, because it is on the central street, near the railways. So I will tell you something. It is some two pictures-- it was some two pictures of our walls. 

One, it was my mother with my brother, when he was a very small boy, and one picture was me, when I was, perhaps, 11 years or something like that. So he told me, when they will tell me to take out the pictures, because it will be Goering, or Hitler, or somebody, he said, yeah, I will hold that, I will hide that. Perhaps, one day, you will come back. So-- so one day after, I am running after threes. 

We survived and I had turned back from all the house. We only survived half the family-- I and my father. Because my-- my mother was killed in-- after the ghetto and many other thing. She was taken in a concentration camp in Lithuania, in Latuania? 

SUBJECT 2: Latvia. 

SUBJECT 1: Latvia. And it was near Riga. It was a camp. And they worked there some year. It was at the time when the Russian army was very close coming, but they have no other choice what to do with the people-- or to break them to the sea or to-- or to kill them. So they make-- after that, I found a girl. She was together with my mother because her mother was-- it was one German. 

Even Vilna was in the hand of Russia. That I was survived and my mother was in that camp. And he took all women from 40 years-- 40 years. And even they were children, so he took the children. It was a selection. So it was the last word of my mother was a girl told me she was here. She said that she was happy that, in that moment, I am not with her, together. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother said this? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: To this girl. 

SUBJECT 1: To the girl. Because she took them to a car. It was a special-- that it was not such thing like in Auschwitz. It was very-- they make the gas, but it was special, new made. In that camp, it was a car. 

And they put the people in the car-- in a closed car-- and the gasoline came to the car. And they made them dead. That was the way my mother was killed. That's what the girl told me, but-- because her mother was killed on the same way. So no places and no-- I only know some time when that happened. 

INTERVIEWER: And when was the last time you saw your mother? 

SUBJECT 1: I saw my mother a year before, because we-- I was on the other side-- time. I went from the ghetto. It was interesting. Why I went from the ghetto is [INAUDIBLE]. When they put us in ghetto, we came in very small streets, in very old houses. So in one of room was 30 people, 25 people, laying like this-- in such condition. 

And they began to send us to work-- to very hard work. Men were out of the ghetto, some women out of the ghetto, some women in the ghetto, and so on. And one day, they make-- I remember my father, when we came into the ghetto and we were the happy people, because from 70,000 Jewish people that were in Vilna, only 30,000 came in ghetto, from the first-- from the first moment. 

So after a few weeks, they came in Vilna-- 40,000 was killed. It was a special place in Vilna. It is Ponary out of the town. And there were graves, like this. So they put with guns, people. And they killed them because-- we didn't know it, but after that. It-- it became-- when it became action every few time. Every two weeks, they came in the ghetto. So it was a reason to take people. They give us some documents. 

So some was documents-- yellow document was-- who has a yellow document is to be-- to live. He has another document-- is to be taken. So they broke us inside. So from the first moment, they begin to turn one on the other. So you are not more together with your family. Your father is no more father, the child is not-- you are taking one from the other. And it can be a fight for the surviving. 

INTERVIEWER: A fight for the documents. 

SUBJECT 1: For the documents, for-- for-- to-- to run away. Some people want to run away. Where to run away? Because the population outside was not so ready to help us-- the Polish population, the Lithuanian population. Only a very small, small percent. I know them because I was, a long time, out. And I was in touch with that people. The-- the Christian, really Christian, the religious, they were-- yes-- ready because Christian religious are told to help. 

But not all people populations. They think they're religious, they are really Christian, like this. 

INTERVIEWER: What was last vision you had of your mother? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. The last vision was-- when it came, I was, part of the time, out of the gate, because my father got yellow documents. On the yellow documents, it was a document from his work. It was told that he can-- it is on the same permission his wife and only children up to 13. I was 16. So they-- one day, they crowded us-- the ghetto. And gestapo came to the ghetto, to the tower. It was some tower where they stayed. 

And all the people has to go out, one after the other. They have the yellow documents. They took us out of the ghetto to the places of the work. The others they have not, they were staying in the ghetto. They close, they took us to killed. Who was hiding, was hiding and was hidden. It was some luck to-- to stay. So my brother cannot go with that because he was older. So he'd built on the roof, with some boys, a wall from wool-- from wood. Some hidden place. 

And he survived in that moment, from the action. But I want-- I make myself to be 13. So I make some-- 

INTERVIEWER: Pigtails? 

SUBJECT 1: Like-- like a child. But I have another friend of me that her father asked my parents to survive her, to take her. So they take all boats? But then happens a very interesting thing-- the German-- the head of the Germans-- I don't know who it was-- he was looking everyone. So I-- my father was black hair. And my-- my mother was brown hair with blue eyes. But I, on my-- I was the one really blonde. 

And that was always very specially because I always looked like not Jewish. So and my friend was also black. So I give her-- so the German looked in the document of my father. He take-- give him the permission to go out, my mother, and then he give the friend. And when he came to me, he looked at me, like this. He took my face-- in ghetto-- there's not to asking questions in ghetto. He took my face like this and asked me, you are Jewish? 

You know, a German gestapo in ghetto ask somebody he's Jewish-- he must be Jewish when he's in ghetto. So he-- and that is your father and your mother? He didn't believe. Then I said, yes. So before he ask, he looked at me, like this-- very careful. My mother was trembling like this, because he was afraid that something happened to me. So after the question, he told that, yes. It was my first time. And he gave me the permission to go out. 

Then I decided I will no go back to ghetto more. And I stay-- I have a big help from some Christian woman. She was a good friend of us. She helped us a lot. And she took me and my friend in her house. And it was many, many things happen, because the population in the house-- so my brother came after that with some friend. And they saw him, and they-- they make some pressure that they will go to the Gestapo and tell. 

It was very difficult to stay out, because you have all the population against you. It was, perhaps, sometimes more difficult than to be Jewish and to be in ghetto. Because my mother never wanted to go out of the ghetto. She told me always, it was a time that I want to prepare some paper-- papers and documents for them, like not Jewish, to give them the possibility to go out. My mother was-- didn't want. She was afraid of the population. 

She was against the Jewish. And she said what will be with all the Jewish people will be with me. And she didn't want to go out from the ghetto. But I-- after a time, I was out. I was in between the-- in the cloister in the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Convent. 

INTERVIEWER: Convent. 

SUBJECT 1: And after that, I have some girl. She took from me some things, some many, very important thing. And they have to get rid of me, so they sent me to other place, because they were afraid to hold me. And they sent me to some farm. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see your mother again? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. I returned after all-- I was many months out of there. I had no contact with the ghetto, only with the-- through the Christian woman. She, really, was very brave. And she was very-- really-- she even entered the ghetto to my pants and-- with letters and with many things. So one day, somebody looked at me in the farm and saw that I am not looking like a farm girl. It was a really even a prisoner-- a Russia prisoner. 

And he told that one of the woman-- that she's looking like a girl from a town, and she has too much intelligence, and so many things. So they decide-- it was many things-- I must leave there. So the Christian woman came to me to take me back to Vilna. And what was very difficult to go back because it was-- it was not allowed between-- go between-- it was Belarus and White Russia. 

SUBJECT 2: White Russia. 

SUBJECT 1: White Russia. And that was Lithuanian. So it was really-- 

SUBJECT 2: There was a border? 

SUBJECT 1: A border. So on the way there, I went with a horse and with some man. He didn't know who I am. And because some people were killed on the way, when they know that they are Jewish. And they took all these things. So he knows that he took a girl from the Christian religious people and he has to bring me to the farm. But back, it was-- he must have a special permission from the government. 

So there was one-- was one way to go-- by German car. So you go back from the front. There were some wounded and so on. And they go. So some Polish people hold them on the way, paid them some money, so they took him by the car. So it was one way not to be-- to look the documents. Because I have some documents. They made me a document. I got a document. I was older-- 10 years. And that girl was very-- it was difficult. 

Because today, 10 years older is-- but when I was 16 and then I must be 27, it was difficult. And it was made the stamp on a very bad way. When you looked at it under your light, you saw it. But I have no other choice. I have the document on another name. And they walked with the document. So when I go back with the document-- and I was in that car. The German-- some soldiers came and so they put all the people-- it was some big car, some Auto Masse. 

SUBJECT 2: A truck. 

SUBJECT 1: A truck. But me, they put near the driver. And it was another German. Then-- and we went on he way. So on the way, they spoke. And I-- I must-- I do it-- I don't understand. I understand everything what they talk about me, but I-- I did-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did they say? 

SUBJECT 1: Because Polish-- because Polish people, they-- it was not good to know German, because they know the German must know somebody, perhaps, Jewish. Because Polish, very seldom, know German. So on the way, it was very dark in evenings. They make some-- it was a joke. But a joke-- I think when I didn't get a heart attack in that joke. I-- I must be very strong. 

So they decided, on the way, it was-- trick tracks, like this, with people-- these German soldiers. So they decided to hold in the one place when they crossed the border, and to go to some people-- country to people to drink something, to eat some something, because they were hungry. So they told all the people to go together with them to the house. It was some-- I don't know. We saw the houses from far away. And they will eat something. 

But I didn't want to-- to go out from the car. So they all went and I stayed, in the middle of night. What it is-- I don't know if it's evening. It was December, so we have very cold. So I sit in the car, near the driver. The driver went also. And then, after a quarter of an hour, the two German-- one was the high officer-- came back and told me, you know, we want to see your documents. So you must go to police together with us and to look your documents. 

INTERVIEWER: This was the joke? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. So I know that, in the moment they took me to the policemen, that is the end. What-- because they will see the documents and [INAUDIBLE]. But they were very-- they didn't laugh. So they were very strong. 

SUBJECT 2: Serious. 

SUBJECT 1: Serious. It was dark. And so they took me. And one take out the gun. We don't know who are you. Perhaps you are a stranger, you know? So one-- they give me to go like this. And they are going with a gun, under me. So we walked, and walked, and walk. And you can understand what happened to me inside. To run away-- they will kill with a gun. What to do? 

So I-- I hope-- I hope, like one, you know-- in that moment, you believe in some-- something would happen to you. That is one of the reasons why the Jewish community went to-- even to such to kill. They always believed that something will happen. Something. A miracle. And then they brought me to that house. It was there. They opened the door. And all the people began to laugh. That was a joke. 

And you can believe what-- what kind of a joke it was. So that is one of the-- of this. After that, I-- I was some time in that farm. And then I returned back to ghetto. And I worked for the German people, but, always, when I go out-- went out in the town-- and because we are not allowed to go on the-- only on the street, like horses. But I always went with dark glasses. 

I bought special, dark classes, like here, on the sun, because I always want to have the possibility, if I want, one day, to go out, that somebody will not recognize me as Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. And then it came the situation-- '42. '42. My mother worked all the time. 