SUBJECT: Hello. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. I feel as though, you know, I need your help how to wind this up. I don't know how. It was very graphic, and she did [INAUDIBLE] the way of telling it, the man [INAUDIBLE]. 

SON: One of those. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. We're in how much? 

CREW: 40. 

INTERVIEWER 1: We're going to 40? 

SUBJECT: It looks like the whole family's here. My son. This is my son. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you mind if they're there? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, no, you just stay here. And one bullet went in the one girl through her-- now I don't know-- through the hand. And the same bullet went through a girl down here through the eye. And it didn't touch the eye, but it went down here, here. One bullet, and then they stopped to shoot. 

And we were trying to call doctors or somebody, well, who was there back there, or somebody-- nobody to help. But she was dead, she just, she just died, and she didn't say yoy! Or nothing. And we took her, with her sister, with her sister, and we put her on the pile of the rest of it. With the rest of the dead. 

SUBJECT: 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your four sisters, though, you were still together. What did you do then? 

SUBJECT: And then the next day, how was it? And next day, this is-- they were just wonderful, the English. They did-- how should I tell it-- they even did what they probably are not even supposed to do. They've brought in so much in cans, food, and they gave us all that food. 

And those sick people, they ate, and they couldn't digest it. Very sick people, they were like fly, they would die. Everyone was dying, everywhere. They were like, they were undernourished, they were sick people, they were-- everybody was sick. But who was there for months in Bergen-Belsen, they didn't get nothing. And they were just existing. And some the English, they give-- brought in [INAUDIBLE] food. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they do to those Germans who kept shooting at the very end? 

SUBJECT: Then they were, they got them together, they gathered them together-- I don't know, next day, or two days later, somehow like that. And they put them in one place, and they were guarding them. They were guarding them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They were counting them? 

SUBJECT: Guarding. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, guarding them. 

SUBJECT: And then they had-- they did-- they had to-- they made some graves, and they made them to bring all those dead to one, to graves, on the trucks. They work, and they made them to work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They made the Germans work. 

SUBJECT: The Germans, yes, some of the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And bury the dead. 

SUBJECT: And bury the dead. And by the ways, it's not far away from there, they had some army, some Hungarian army and every kind of-- some, those where the army lived, you know? And they made empty, empty those houses. And they were trying to bring out everybody from the Bergen-Belsen, where we were. They were putting up what they were-- we had to go through, they've were giving us every kind of-- to kill the lice. You know, they were blowing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Disinfectant. 

SUBJECT: Disinfectant. Some of them I can't remember-- think of the words. And it took them I don't know how long-- for weeks-- to get the sick to hospitals, and from Belgium, and from everywhere-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you? What were you doing? 

SUBJECT: I was-- I was healthy yet, but the sisters of mine, they got sick. And they divided us, they-- we couldn't find each other, we totally getting crazy. We were looking for each other, and then we find each other. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you find-- 

SUBJECT: But they were sing-- we went, we went, we, we, we, we-- we made sure. We went, and we looking for each other for days, for weeks, and we find each other. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: In Bergen-Belsen, yes. But already they took us out. They took us out. I was healthy and then they took me-- I was starting to work, again, on a kitchen, to cook everybody. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now you had muscles. 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes, and they were sick, and they put them separately, to different hospitals. And then we got everybody together, and we went in, even me-- and all the sisters-- we went again, together to one hospital. And from Belgium, they came, some volunteers and doctors. And from everywhere, they came, really, it was unbelievable what was then. We were there for three months in the hospital. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You talk about all of this with your sisters now? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you ever talk about it now? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you talk about now? 

SUBJECT: We not talk, never, the concentration camp, together. We just-- my nephew what was here the other day, I was telling him. It just happened I was telling him. This is his mother in Israel, he's-- he's from Australia, he came for the wedding, too. And I was telling him, telling him story. 

When the children were smaller, uh, they just couldn't understand. Anyway we were telling him, but they couldn't understand. I make sure I tell him all the time. They should remember. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You talk about it with your sisters? About what you've experienced together? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

SUBJECT: No. Nothing to-- nothing to talk over. This is-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: With anybody? 

SUBJECT: Uh, how you mean? We bring up. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Anybody in your family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Besides the children. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think that you survived because you were together? 

SUBJECT: We were survived because we wanted to survive, who didn't want it, they died. We wanted to survive. Who didn't want it, it just-- who gave up-- it just, just died. It was no other way. We survived because we wanted to survive. 

INTERVIEWER 1: End on that note. 