CREW: I'm taping. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. Well what happened was that I knew that-- I noticed one thing, when I came back to Bratislava, that there were no more transports. There were no more gatherings. And the transports used to terrify me. 

Because the speed of them was so horrendous, where they were trying to force-- they would yell at the people and say, get out, get out, quickly, get out! Gather together. You can't take this suitcase, you can take this suitcase, only a little bit with you. No, you mustn't take this blanket. And they would just force the blanket away. 

In the process also there would be a lot of hitting, especially of old people and of sick people and children and shoving and pushing. And various gatherings of people just terrified me. I really-- it was a way of behaving which I could never experience except in-- not even in nightmares. I even remember my nightmares as being mild compared to this. 

But what was terrible is that it was the behavior towards the very people that the Jewish religion says you must have a great deal of kindness, which are the sick, the old and the children. And I saw everything being done, which was opposed to what I believed in and what I had grown up in. And most-- many of these people I knew very well. And I could imagine the kind of devastation that experience was for them. 

And one thing that always hurt me was during those transport is that they wouldn't acknowledge my presence. I would stand there and watch. And the reason that I wasn't just collected along with it is that people were collected on the transport according to colors of their cards. That certain-- if you had a certain color, you were called in by the transport. And if you had a certain-- another color, you were not. 

And my father always managed to get a certain color until the last one. Because he was a jeweler and he had a job as a goldsmith for their church, which was using all the gold and the silver which was gathered from the Jews and melting it down and reusing it and redoing it for Christian churches because there were chalices and things like that. And I remember my father would come home with designs that he was commissioned to do by the firm that employed him. And my father had a job up till the very end, practically. 

But obviously one day he-- the card just ran out, and he was called in. And I remember when I came back to Bratislava, one of the things I noticed that those transports had ceased. So it was really in one sense a relief but in another sense a terribly scary thing. Because I suddenly realized that I-- we might be the last, one of the few last Jews left in the town. That they all had been taken except for the three or four people I knew who were on forged papers. 

And the thought of being one of the last Jews was terrible. I couldn't bear it. I kept thinking, no, I don't want to be the last one alive. And I must have realized that many of them went to death. Because otherwise I wouldn't have said that I don't want to be the last one alive. 

And finally after three weeks of living on the streets, being terrified of the thought of meeting the man who had chased me again, being terrified of meeting anyone who knew me, as a Jew I had been away from the town for about nine months. So I had hoped that somehow I in growing I had somehow become less noticeable. 

But after three weeks of living like that, the man said the people had gotten suspicious because they found bread crumbs. And they were complaining and they thought that the owner of this workshop had harbored some fugitives. And so he finally told me he couldn't keep me. I had to find some other accommodation. 

And I took my suitcase and my sister looking for a place to stay. And I would go to places where I knew people who were Christians. And I knocked on the door. And they slammed the door right in my face. And not saying a word, not explaining, just as if I were just a beggar at the door, and they just closed the door in my face. 

And finally I went to the home of these friends of my parents who were living on the forged passport. And they did the same thing. And then I knew that indeed I was the last Jew left. 

There was nothing for me to do two days. We were scrounging. We had no money. We were scrounging around, trying to find food. 

And finally I said to my sister, we can't live that way. We will die on the street. So we might as well just go to the police. 

And I went to the police. And I said my name, and I said my parents' name. And I said I'd like to join them. 

And the police were amused. They first laughed. And then they realized that I was perfectly serious. And they-- suddenly I realized that I had presented them with a problem. They didn't know what to do with me. They didn't know what to do. So they told me that I could sit on the bench. And I spent the night in the police station on the bench, while they were trying to find out what to do with me. 

They didn't explain anything to me. One of the policemen I remember said, well, we are trying to find where your parents are. And they finally must have found out somehow, because I was immediately put on a truck and driven into Hungary. And that was in Sered, which was a gathering point for the last remaining transports coming out of Bratislava. Because nothing was going directly from Bratislava. 

I arrived there to discover that the-- two weeks before, my parents had been put on the train to Auschwitz. This was the first time I heard about Auschwitz. I didn't know anything about it. 

And there was this very nice woman who immediately took me under her care. She said she was going to see what she could do for me, to make me join my parents again. And for two weeks, I was in Sered and she gathered food for me. She gave me two blankets. And she said, do not let anybody know you have that. 

And I was finally put on one train. And it was a cattle car. And I, in some ways, was terribly relieved to be there. Because here I was among Jews again. They were all strangers. But still, the fact that they were Jews was very important to me. 

INTERVIEWER: Say how old you were during all this time. 

SUBJECT: I was-- at that time, I was nine years old. And I had my sister, who was 7 and 1/2 and to whom I had to explain everything, who had to be basically taken care of. Because she only knew the sign language. And I could sign with her, but she didn't know how to communicate yet with the hearing people. 

And so I was really constantly having to hold her by her hand, so that-- because I couldn't call her, I couldn't do anything. I couldn't ever lose sight of her. Because in the milling of the people, we could have been separated. 

And we finally were put on the train. And I was told that I would be going to Auschwitz. And to me, of course, it was just an image of my rejoining my parents. 

We were on the train for five days. And during the whole process of our trip, we would have to stop because there was bombing going on. Sometimes the bombs sounded as if they were very close, and we thought that they would get the train. 

And we were-- I would say, maybe 300 people in each car. And my sister and I sat on the suitcase the whole five days that we were in the train. And at one point, the bombing at one point sounded as if it were the front of the car had been hit. It was so loud, and the car itself jumped tracks. And we were stuck there for what seemed to me forever. 

And one day, as we were sort of sitting in the car, we were told that we would not be going to Auschwitz, that we would be rerouted. And I remember having to get out of the car because it had jumped the tracks and there was no way for it to move and crossing the tracks, going into another car, then spending another three days in the tracks. 

They did-- the Germans did provide food for us. But it was so minimal. It was just a slice, two or three slices of bread and water. And that was all. 

And some of us were so weak we could barely make it across the tracks to the other. So we had to help each other. And for some strange reason, my sister and I-- maybe because we were so young-- we were, we somehow had managed to get through the ordeal of being eight days cooped up in a very tight space. 

And after about three days, we arrived in Bergen-Belsen. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you in Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: We arrived in Bergen-Belsen, it was at night. The-- I remember spending the early part of the night looking out through an opening in the car, which for some reason they had opened it because they didn't want people screaming. There was some screaming going on for-- because of the tightness of the air, to let in fresh air. 

And I remember seeing houses and you know, just rims of light because there was blackout. And all you could see were the rims of light from some of the windows. So I knew we were in a town. And I thought maybe, just by hope against hope that maybe we had been sent back to Bratislava. But it turned out not to be Bratislava but it was Hanover, Germany. 

And then a little while later we arrived in camp. And then there was a long march. And the march was the most horrendous thing I have ever experienced. 

Because after eight days, the people just were in no shape to walk from the station to the reception house of the camp. And the-- that march which was-- seemed endless. It was-- looked enormously long, maybe-- in my mind now it seems almost three hours. But it couldn't have been. But there we would slowly walk. 

And the Germans kept shouting and yelling. There were truncheons and dogs. And they would fall on the people and asking them to hurry and hurry. And it was strange because I had heard dogs barking when we were in the train. But I had never seen them, because they had never opened the car doors more than this much. 

And somehow the image that their dogs had traveled with us all this time seemed to me so strange. And then I realized no, there were totally different kinds of Germans who were in the camps. They were much more brutal. They were much worse than those Germans who had gathered us together. 

And we finally arrived in the camps. And we were just totally exhausted. We were assigned a block. 

And I remember thinking to myself, I'm so exhausted, I must sleep. but at the same time, noticing everything, noticing where the-- how it was laid out, where we were supposed to go to the bathroom, what we were supposed to be doing, where the exits were, where the windows were. And I-- noticing all this somehow made me decide that I wanted to be near the door but not near a window. And I never could figure out why I had this instinct and I with my sister I ran towards the top bunk. 

There were three layers of bunks. And each person was told that they could not take the bunk themselves, that they had to wait for their assignment. And there were four people to each bed. And I remember not waiting for the assignment but rushing with my sister and claiming the top bunk. 

And I thought in some way I would be punished because I had disobeyed. But I wasn't. And I went up there. And curiously enough, after everybody else had been assigned, my sister and I managed to be the only ones to have that bed. 

And I remember the first night falling asleep. I had nothing to eat for a long, long time, nothing to drink. But I fell asleep. 

And I remember thinking life had played a terrible trick on me, because I wasn't in Auschwitz with my parents. And I remember saying to myself as I fell asleep, I will never stop looking for them. 

The next morning I woke up. And I immediately started inquiries, found out everything there was to find out. I asked everything about the life in camp. And people did consider me a pest. And I pushed my way around, in the meanwhile, always holding onto my sister. 

And I very quickly found out the routine of the camp, which as you know, started with the morning appell, which was to stand to be counted. That lasted forever. And then would be breakfast. 

And then there was nothing doing until people were assigned jobs and they-- all kinds of arrangements were made. People inquired where we came from. We got acquainted with some of the older members. And at that time, the children were sort of randomly milling amongst the adults. 

And it became very clear that the children-- something was happening to the children. And all I was interested-- I wouldn't pay any attention to anything. I did everything I was asked to do. But then I would go wandering all over, just like I had done in town, wandering all over, asking everybody whether they knew anybody who had come from Bratislava. And that way, it sort of kept my hope alive. 

So as we were getting adjusted to it-- as we were getting adjusted to the brutality, which I had never experienced in my life. I had never seen anybody-- I'd seen children quarreling and hitting each other and spankings by parents. But nothing compared to that which was happening in Bratislava. 

And the reason I discovered that there was so much physical brutality was that Bergen-Belsen was in a state of flux all of the time. And there were all these political situations going on among the guards and the soldiers and the Blockältester who were in charge of the blocks. And it was a horrendous situation, which was eventually cleared up by three groups. 

And one of them were the communists. The others were the orthodox people. And finally there were three people who had decided amongst themselves they were going to gather all the children together and have a block just for the children. 

And I didn't find out about it until very late because most of the children were Polish. And so there was a language barrier that I had immediately upon arriving, because most of the people they were Polish. And then I discovered that there were transports coming from other camp, especially from Auschwitz. 

I was in Bergen-Belsen for a whole year. For me it was very lonely. Because I was-- I'd eventually learned the language, so I could communicate with many of the people. 

But I was-- when I was there, the first three months I couldn't communicate with them. Because most of these people who were there didn't know German. They knew Yiddish, I didn't know Yiddish. And I only knew German. And it was the language which the soldiers were using, those people we hated. 

And it became so that I found myself thinking I would love to learn any other language, so I would never have to speak this language again. And this is one of the things that I did. Just very quickly, I learned how to speak Polish. 

But I remember the first few weeks coming there and being there with the other children. And we would look at each other. We would share things. We would talk the way children talk. But that was insufficient for the situation. And then I had to watch over my sister. 