CREW MEMBER: Whatever you want to say. 

CREW MEMBER 2: Anytime! 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

EVA: I'm Eva Benda. My-- in Czechoslovakia, in the early-- actually, it was mid '30s, my family went through a discussion of what kind of language school I should go to. There was a big cleavage between the Czech language and German language schools. The Czech population was often angry at Jews for going to German schools and speaking Germans-- German. This was a carryover from the Austro-Hungarian Empire, when to go into public service you had to speak German. Otherwise, you couldn't. 

And when I was to enter secondary school, high school, a gymnasium, the discussion in my family raged which school should I go to. I spoke both German and Czech equally fluently. It didn't seem-- to me, it didn't make any difference. And the discussion then went, there would be more-- the German literature which I would learn in a German language school was much richer than the Czech one. 

And my other uncle opted, who was very consciously Czech, just wouldn't hear about the German language school. And it was kind of a toss-up. I don't know why I did land in the school in which I did land, a g-- a private gymnasium, lyceum, girls' lyceum. 

Uh, the-- one third of my class there was Jewish. And I don't remember any discrimination from my school days. I know in the last years and shortly before the takeover, we had one teacher whom I hated well before this time. She was a spinster, taught history and geography, which was not my favorite subject, anyway. Sported a little swastika on her lapel, but it was very discreet. And that was the only sign we had in school of any political activity. 

I don't know what year that was, when she started wearing that. I was still in public school. It must have been early '38 or '39. I don't know. 

[SIGH] The o-- then another vivid memory in my-- is of the-- a gymnastics meeting in 1938. This was kind of a national holidays, when a group-- gymnastics organization that was all over the country, had little cells all over the country, came to Prague and performed in unison at the stadium in Prague. It's kind of a really large Olympic stadium. 

And then there was a parade through Prague, there. The different districts came in their national costumes, very, very beautiful, flamboyant national costumes. And it was a celebration of Czechoslovakia. It was a celebration of the 20 years of the existence of the country. The country had been carved out of the Austro-Hungarian Empire by its founder, President Masaryk, who was married to an American and spent the war years here and founded it. 

Czechoslovakia is located in the center of Europe. Bohemia is really almost perfectly the geographic center. Although-- and it borders in Germany in the north, and Austria and Hungary in the south, Poland and Russia on the far east. [LAUGH] My geog-- geography right. 

Um-- the orientation was completely to the West. Czechoslovakia was very democratic. It had a constitution modeled on the French constitution, and the schools were modeled on French schools. There was even a law in Congress, somewhere, that anti-Semitism was illegal, was against the national interest, and there was no official support for it. 

There was-- the only restriction I know of for Jews was that, in the professional army, they could not go beyond being a captain, I believe. I'm not quite sure of the rank, but there was a limit beyond which they couldn't go, arise, in the armed services. Other than that, I know no restrictions. 

INTERVIEWER: That was accepted, the idea that Jews had a limitation-- 

EVA: In the army, that was officially accepted somehow. That's the only thing I know. My uncle was a lawyer, and he was a friend of the president's son, who was also a lawyer. He had graduated with him. 

And, uh, really, there was-- no of-- no official separation, certainly, no official-- there had never been any pogrom like in Poland, in the history of Czechoslovakia. It had never existed. The Jews were freed from the ghettos by Maria Theresa, several hundred years ago. And it was re-- I-- my history is weak [LAUGH] on the dates. 

So I really was unaware of it. As a matter of fact, when I came to this country and heard about restricted hotels or restricted this and restricted clubs, I didn't know what that was. I never-- it was-- I never heard of anything like that before. We could go anywhere we wanted to, really freely. 

I remember one instance of some catcalls on the street, when I was going to school. I don't know how that came about. 

INTERVIEWER: So when the Germans came in, what was your reaction? 

EVA: Well, there was old enmity between the Czechs and the Germans against a historically grounded-- and I should say that the Germans really resented the-- I said this before. I'm not sure I said it before-- resented the Jews for speaking German. The German-speaking Jews were really resented. Anybody speaking German in Czechoslovakia was resented, because of this old historical enmity. Um-- 

So, at first, when the Germans came, it was us Czechs against the Germans. And really, we considered ourselves Czechs. Um-- and I never expected-- I don't know what I expected of the Czechs, come to think of it. Of course, the expectations, I didn't know what was going to happen, so expectations were a little vague, anyway. 

Well, after this high-- height of national enthusiasm in 1938, at the 20 years' anniversary, there came the Munich crisis of 1939, when our allies, with whom we had an agreement that they would defend us in case of need and we would defend them, the French and the English, deserted us and told us that we had to hand over the Sudetenland-- because it was German-speaking, which Herr Hitler demanded at Munich. The Sudetenland also happened to be the mountains and the fortifications. 

The fortifications and those-- those mountains, against our old-age enemies, were as good as the Siegfried Line in France. They were superb. They could never have penetrated them if they had been defended. 

In 1939, my husband's brother was an officer in the Czech army, posted there in the Sudetenland. And the nationalism ran so high in those days, he said-- he told us that the officers had to turn their bayonets against a man when the order came to restore. They didn't want to restore. 

And the Czechs in general, at that time, were prepared to fight the Germans, although we had an army of 1 million and the Germans at that time really were fully armed and very strong. But it clearly didn't make much sense. So they decided to comply with the restore order. 

But, to my mind, this somehow broke the spirit. It broke the spirit of the nation. It broke-- it's hard to believe that a nation has a spirit, but I think it does. 

And after that, they become very cynical, very self-centered, very opportunistic. Everybody looked out after their own hide. Nobody was willing to do anything for anybody else. 

Black marketeering during the war while the Germans were there was accepted. It helped the German war effort, so that was lauded. 

And it was a real change in attitudes, a real sad change in attitude. And also, during the war you hear of occasional stories from Poland and Slovakia that Jews were hidden and-- by local population. It didn't happen in Bohemia, not once. There was nobody who helped anybody, as far as I know. I think I would have heard about it, if it had happened. Well, I guess that's jumping the gun a little. 

In-- so the Czechs never hurt us, the Jews, when the Germans came. But they didn't help. They just stood by and watched. Um-- and that, in a way, of course, was bad enough. 

When the Germans first came, I-- I think the cynicism prevailed. Nobody was very surprised when they marched in, because everybody knew that after we had given up our fortification, at that time we had a standing army of 1 million people, 1 million. So it was fully equipped, up-to-date, trained, willing, very willing to fight. 

Um-- it was kind of expected that this was happening. So this-- at some level, as Jews, we-- we wouldn't-- wouldn't face the truth, wouldn't face the possibility, I suppose. 

Czechoslovakia has a lot of armament factories, very advanced technology, has uranium mines that are famous, has coal deposits that are endless. So it was-- for war material, it was a real prize for the Germans, I'm sure. It prolonged the war, to a certain extent. 

So, when the Germans marched in, nothing much happened. The Czechs just stood. They certainly didn't get a welcome the way they did in Austria. Nobody hailed them as, uh, liberators. But, uh-- 

They just stood by and watched. There wasn't really much else anybody could do, at that point, either, I suppose. 

I-- I experienced, personally, no anti-Semitism before the war, or during the war, from the Czechs. Um, after the war, [LAUGH] I felt it was different. I felt that the Czechs had accepted the German anti-Semitism as the only German legacy there was. I felt they were anti-Semitic after the war. I don't know that that's what we are talking about here, so-- 

INTERVIEWER: When were you first, uh, separated from your home, your family? 

EVA: Uh, I-- 1942, I was in Prague, living in an apartment with my mother. My father had died before the war. I was an only child, til '42. 

My mother's family chose to move to the countryside. She had four sisters and two brothers. They were all married, with children. And they chose to go to the countryside, so they had left Prague by that time. 

I mean, they were not allowed to work anymore. The lawyer wasn't allowed to practice. My other uncle had a shoe store. They had taken that. You know, so there was no reason for them to stay in Prague. 

And we stayed. So, in that way, I was separated from them, at that time, because I really grew up with some of my cousins. And they had moved. But I was with my mother in Prague, till 1942. 

INTERVIEWER: And then you were taken--? 

EVA: In October '42, I-- we were called up. We got a notice, and we were called up to meet in the fairgr-- fairgrounds, kind of an exhibition hall. It was covered. On a certain day. 

And the transport had, at that time, been going for, like, two years. I mean, we were aware they were going. They were going to Theresienstadt, which is a-- um-- there is a fortress Theresienstadt, which is outside, and there's also a garrison town, it was originally, which had housed, like, 30,000 people before the war-- soldiers and people, normal people. And that's where we went, from Prague. 

INTERVIEWER: And what was like-- life like, in Theresienstadt? 

EVA: [SIGH] Well, I was very young. There was lots of young people there. [LAUGH] So I-- ex-- except for the transports, that were nightmarish, but we had lived with them for two years, from Prague. So, somehow, as a young child, you go with the day more. And I didn't really face the danger of those transports as directly as I could have, should have, I don't know. 

And during the day, I worked. And in the evenings we were not all-- there was a curfew, but within the block where we lived was all little houses. We could meet in the courtyards and spend time together. And, uh, I enjoyed it. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any of those young people that you were friendly with, in Theresienstadt? 

EVA: Well, in the last years in Prague, I had a group of 13 people my age. They left Prague at different times. They didn't, or we didn't, all go together. And some of them I met in-- in Theresienstadt. 

As a matter of fact, I had a boyfriend who was kind of a high-school sweetheart since I was 12. By this time I was in my middle-- older, middle teens. Yeah, 17, 18. And he was still there. He went-- he went on an earlier transport than I did. Out of those 13, only 1 survived-- and not my boyfriend. 

Um-- it was very crowded. There wasn't enough to eat. Old people were dying, very rapidly. 

I remember we were living in a-- I said it on the other tape. And I watched a woman die, while we were having lunch, and we kept on having lunch. why interrupt our lunch, because that was such an ordinary occurrence. Every day, the, they had kind of carts the peasants used for collecting hay or straw. And they would just load the dead on it, and there was a pile of them every day. 

But they died of natural causes. There-- there were no Germans within the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that, um, of the friends that you had, one survived. Was that a girl, or a boy? 

EVA: That was a boy. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember-- have you ever seen him again? 

EVA: I saw him after the war, once, in Prague. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any desire to see him again? 

EVA: I never thought about it. Not really. We weren't the closest ones. I-- I don't even remember his name. I am sure I wouldn't recognize him, at so many years. 

INTERVIEWER: When you saw him after the war, did you speak about, someday, meeting again, when things were better for each of you? 

EVA: Well, I met him in Prague after the war. And I thought, this is it. I'm going to live here, and I'm going to see him again, you know? And it never occurred to me that I would leave or that he might leave or that this wasn't a stable situation. So I didn't see any need of making long-range plans. 

I mean, it was kind of a shock when we found-- you know, we had lived all through the war being "Czech." This the hope-- this was the belief, more than the hope-- this the belief that we would be back in Prague and live as we lived before. Life would go on. That it wasn't going to go on was just not one of the thoughts that occurred to me. 

INTERVIEWER: When they took you to Auschwitz, you were with your mother, but you were also with a friend. 

EVA: Yeah, a girlfriend. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to her? 

EVA: She was in my transport, and she came back with me, into Germany, from Auschwitz. Um-- I, I-- she had an uncle and an aunt, after the war, in Prague. And she lived with them, because she had lost her parents. I think that-- 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever seen her again? 

EVA: Not since-- since Prague. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any-- 

EVA: But I remember her name. [Lotte?] [Adelberg?] was her name. 

INTERVIEWER: What would you feel if-- if you-- if there were the possibility of reuniting with her, seeing her again? 

EVA: [LITTLE LAUGH] That's a really strange thought. I was pretty close with her. As a matter of fact, I always used to go to services with her, because my mother didn't. 

Her mother had been on the transport with us, and her mother had very poor eyesight. That's why they took her. It would be so strange, I really don't-- can't imagine. 

I mean, when I said I didn't remember that boy's name, I only remember his nickname. We always called him by a nickname, and that's why I don't remember his real name anymore. [SIGH] 

I don't know. She-- I think she went to Israel. [LIGHTLY LAUGHING] I'm not even sure of that. I don't know where he went at all. So we were kind of dispersed, again, after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: But if you thought there were the possibility of running into her, what would you think about that? What would you feel about that-- talking again about what happened to the two of you in Auschwitz? What-- what would that-- how would that make you react? 

EVA: I really can't say. I really can't say. Because, when I did the first tape here, you know, I didn't expect to get as upset as I did [LAUGH] get. I thought it was such a long time ago, and, you know, while I hadn't talked about it very much, I was aware of it. 

It wasn't that it was buried and forgotten. It was there. I was aware of it. It wasn't subconscious. It was very conscious. 

And I really thought I had dealt with it and I didn't-- didn't need to worry-- worry about it anymore. I think partly because, it just being my mother and me and my mother surviving, I haven't lost anybody as close as other people did who lost-- you know, whose parents were killed before their eyes, or lost brothers and sisters. 

So I thought I had an easier time of it, in some respect. Um, I can't imagine what the reaction would be. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think, at the time, that you would survive? 

EVA: Yes, I always thought I would survive. Somehow, when you are in your teens, the thought that you couldn't survive doesn't occur very easily. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you make plans for your future? If you thought you would survive, you must have-- 

EVA: Oh, we were going to live in Prague, happily ever after, obviously. What else? We were just living for the day to go back. Nothing but good memories of the place. 

It's a beautiful city, and I loved living there. I had a good time, as a teenager. And I wasn't aware of discrimination and could do what I wanted to do. [SIGH] It was a real-- 

In some ways, in many ways, the year after the war was the hardest one, psychologically speaking. To come back and find that nobody had survived, of my mother's family of the five-- four aunts and two uncles. Married, with children, my cousins I had grown up with. 

Nobody came back. We were the only two, from-- we were-- again, [LAUGH] 13, 13 of us went into camp, and the 2 of us came back. Um-- so that was my-- harder on my mother than on me, obviously. It was her siblings. It was my aunts and uncles, but I wasn't that close to them. 

Then, then there was anti-Semitism, after the war. And I always said that's the only legacy of the Germans the Czechs accepted willingly. [DRY LAUGH] And when we came back and wanted to claim some property, I saw that-- that wasn't welcome at all. They didn't want us back, no way. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you account for the Czechs accepting that legacy? 

EVA: Uh, well, partly there was blatant anti-Semitism, always. As long as it was not supported by the government, you know, nobo-- and nationalism was an outlet, [SIGH] there didn't seem to be any need for it. And they hated the German. That was the scapegoat, then. You know? So, every day. 

After the war, communism was very strong between '45 and '48. Before they came officially to power, it was a strong minority party. It wasn't really a very big party. 

And I think communism, in itself, carries anti-Semitism, within it, as a seed. While we were there in 1948, you know, the way communists always try their own stooges, there was a lot of prominent Jews higher up in the Communist hierarchy. And I don't know whether you remember the Slansky trials in 1948-- '47, I think. 

And there were 13 people executed-- 13 high-ranking communists. No, it could have been '48, after the takeover. It must have been after the takeover. And out of those 13, I think 11 were Jews. They have now been exonerated and made saints, practically, but that was under Stalin. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any thoughts about, uh, since the-- the Czechs did adopt this German attitude toward Jews, as the legacy they did accept, do you have any thoughts about, once something terrible is allowed to happen, that it can spread in ways that are-- 

EVA: Unpredictable, certainly. Yeah, I really believe very strongly that, in '38, their spirit was broken. And in '48, again. You know, I mean, again, I mean, the-- the, the Russians marched in, and the election in '48 was-- I voted in the '48 elections, and I went out on a limb and voted against the communists, which was really making a stand. 

But, between '45 and '48, there had been a democratic regime, and there had been freedom. Three was freedom to travel. I went to England and, uh, on a trip. And, you know, you could move! As much as finances allowed at that time. 

And I wasn't really aware that I was being dangerous, putting myself into danger, by very ostentatiously voting against the Communist Party in '48. Because it was, you could vote for them, or you could vote against them. That was the election. There was no choice. 

And you had a Yes ballot and a No ballot. And if you-- and the ballot you didn't use, you had to put in a bin next to the communist official standing there. So. Um-- the-- the elections was 99%, in the usual communist fashion, although they had only had 32% in the election before, you know? So. 

And then, after I left this polling place, I was really kind of scattered. That was really damn stupid of me. And what do I need this for? And when they-- 

In '48, when they took over, that was then I decided I had had it and I was leaving. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you feel about the importance, or your desire, or the necessity, for relating the story or the events of the Holocaust? You said it affects you, you don't-- you wanted to put it behind you, yet you're willing to talk about it. You were willing to talk about it, even before. Why? 

EVA: Well, in, uh, in some ways, my son had always been urging me to put-- to tell him the whole story, or to put it on paper, or to tape-record it. And every time I'd start talking about it, he'd run away. [LAUGH] It was very typical. 

So I had some need to put this all on paper. I even started taping it once, but I didn't get-- I got-- beyond the first five minutes or so, doing it on my own. Um-- so there was some need to record it. It's a worm's-eye view, and I know that it does not give the overall picture, but then a worm's-eye view has its own values. Um-- 

When I asked to do it, I had the-- the first taping on the Holocaust-- I had become aware that it was much more alive in me and much more burdensome to me than I had realized. I really thought I had it good and buried, and it wasn't going to ever come up again or bother me again. [SIGH] And, uh, so I, in a way-- it was some-- somewhat of a confessional, maybe. Something I needed to do, to get it out of my system, I hope. 

I hoped. I don't know that I ever will really get it out of my system. But at least to live with it more peacefully. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any thoughts about those that hear it, the effect on those that hear it? The potential for learning lessons. Teaching. 

EVA: Hmm. I've heard discussions about this that, uh-- the young in Israel, for instance, I heard, for instance, I heard for a long time were not interested in it, didn't want to hear about it. I suppose they've suffered from overexposure. In this country, certainly it seems so far and so far in the past. If you talk to children today, I mean, it's-- it's really history. And they are about as interested in it as they are in history in general, which is not very much. Um-- 

People who had a personal link with it probably are, like our family was really involved, Jewish. I-- I f-- [SIGH] I found the disinterest of the American Jews really pretty shocking when we came here. I came here in 1952. And we were pretty lonely. 

So we went to services at Cornell University. My husband was there doing a PhD. And on Yom Kippur, there is a passage in the services for the martyrs of-- of the Jewish religion. And in 1952, that rabbi at Cornell omitted that passage. I didn't set foot in the temple for the next 15 years. 

So that was a very American community. Cornell is mostly New York American Jews. And, um, I thought, that's-- that's what the attitude here is. So don't ever mention it. 

Because in Prague, when we came back from camp, and everybody said-- and we would say, oh, we were in camp, or we were in camp or this-- and they would say, oh, yes, but we suffered here. We were so afraid the Germans could come-- while we were black marketeering and getting fat and happy. That, they didn't say. But that was what happened. 

So they always interrupted us when we were talking about camps. And I had the impression here nobody wanted to hear, either. So I never talked about it. I never mentioned it. 

People don't know. People I play bridge, here, with, for the last 10 years, they don't know that I've been in camp. 

INTERVIEWER: They never-- 

EVA: I never, never mention it. They say, oh, you were in Europe doing the war? I say, yes. They don't ask where or what did I do. 

INTERVIEWER: They never said "Auschwitz"? They never said-- 

EVA: They didn't even say, were you in a camp, or where did you live, or how did you live? Never mind Auschwitz. No interest. 

INTERVIEWER: If you were to explain to a young person, a young-- a teenager-- who was not Jewish, perhaps-- or even if he or she were-- who was perhaps not even-- you know, was a minority person-- what would you say about-- 

EVA: As a matter of fact, I had a black teenager coming to interview me about the war, yes. I don't know how she knew I was in camp. She-- they-- is-- I don't know. 

I know her parents. He's at Yale, in the medical school. And they were at our house, the parents were, as guests at our house, and the girl came to interview me. And I felt-- I told her, you know, capsuled outlines what had happened. She had needed it for a school report. This was a high-school girl. 

I didn't feel any reaction, any spark of-- I mean, I thought that a black could somehow-- the way the Jews go out to help the blacks, because they can empathize with, um-- god, I'm looking for a word. 

INTERVIEWER: Discrimination? 

EVA: Discrimination and persecution-- persecution, more than this. So I thought this black girl, who must be aware of black history, could do that. She couldn't at all. She was asking me some questions that she had probably prepared in school, and she asked me about Skokie, you know, the march in Skokie. And I-- how did I stand about that? 

And I said, well, that's smack to me. It had nothing to do with freedom of speech. That seems like provocation. And, uh, I was for freedom of speech but not for-- no reaction. 

INTERVIEWER: But if you had to tell a young person who didn't have an assignment why they should know about the Holocaust, why they should make an effort to understand and learn about it, what would you say? How would you justify your desire to tell them, or your idea that they should know? 

EVA: I'm not sure. I have no desire to tell anybody who doesn't want to know. I am not sure that historical lessons can be learned and mistakes not be made over. Some mistakes, probably. I'm not sure that this particular one, I mean, is a study of how it could-- how the Ger-- it could the-- Nazism could arise in Germany. I mean, the economic situation and the social situation, and all this, still doesn't explain it. It, uh-- um-- 

And I don't know that-- people say, it could happen here. I know my husband was worried about it happening here during the Nixon years. I mean, that we were going into fascism. His political consciousness is a-- was a lot higher than mine. 

Um-- I don't know there's much to be learned. I mean, it was really a-- a very unique set of circumstances. Um-- that it should happen in the most so-called cultured and advanced technologically and sophisticated nation really seemed incredible, and still seems so. I have no explanation. And I'm not sure the lessons can be learned. 

INTERVIEWER: But if somebody said to you, don't talk about it anymore, just like the people in Ithaca, we don't want to hear about it, or indicated they didn't want to hear about it because let bygones be bygones, how would you counter that? 

EVA: I don't know. I don't have it, even today, in me to get angry about that. I have heard it, time and again, it helped the American Jewish community. It raised their consciousness. It reunified them. 

I thought that was a rather crude remark and a high (LAUGHING) price to pay, but if that's what-- [SIGH] I don't feel that, uh-- in some ways, I feel like it was a natural disaster, you know, like a landslide or an earthquake or-- it had that power and that momentum. It seemed like it couldn't be stopped. If-- 

There are lots of things I am angry about. I'm angry that, in 1945 and I have applied for an American visa, I couldn't get it, and now they're letting 60,000 Cubans a day in, you know? And they didn't let the Jews of Europe in after the war, never mind during war. 

Or when Switzerland was trying to negotiate trucks against Jews, that didn't go over. They didn't want-- you know, there was no money for that. And, you know, I mean, there's lots of things I could be angry about. 

I am angry about that, I, in 1948, I didn't have a visa yet. I had applied for a visa in 1938. In 1948, my quota wasn't up yet. So there's lots to be angry about, if-- if that's what you're looking for, if I should be angry at the American Jews for not being interested. 

INTERVIEWER: If you wanted to find a lesson in all of this, is there anything you might say to young people about being aware of-- of discrimination, possible persecution, doing something about it? Or do you feel that it's not possible to-- to, uh, remind people of things like that or enjoin them about things like that? 

EVA: In some ways, I suppose I have instilled some kind of independence in my children, independence of official judgment, independence of, uh, law. I-- I tend to take the law into my own hands a little, and I think I'm right. I don't much care for the laws, as [LAUGH] like, um-- 

Uh, because, uh-- I certainly learned in 1939 to say, they know what they are doing, meaning the establishment or the government or so-- doesn't carry any weight with me. They most of the time don't know what they're doing. And I think what they're doing now in Iran is so ridiculous, it's just beyond-- 

My daughter is-- just started working for agency in Washington that is, um, a public watchdog on the CIA. Which I think is an appropriate occupation for her. 

And my son, for the longest time, and still to this day, is-- intends to, uh, revamp or redo the educational system in this country. He thinks the educational system in this country is in need of an overhaul. Which I think lots of people agree with him. But it really is-- has, for many years-- been his life's aim, and I'm sure he's going to do it. He's, at the moment, getting a graduate degree in Philosophy, so he is [LAUGH] going to stay in education. Um-- 

And they, I think, have a certain amount of ability to form their own judgment. They will not follow the crowd. They will not be swayed by public announcement. So. 

And that's what I would hope for people, that they can make their own judgment and follow their own common sense, horse sense, and not be swayed by public speeches or public pronouncements. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you see any parallels between the black experience and what happened to the Jews in Europe? 

EVA: Yes, I do, to a certain extent, in that so someway I don't know to what extent, like the blacks stand out by their color, in some ways Jew-- Jews-- being Jewish is more than a religion, it's a race. At least Hitler told us so, and everybody has accepted it. I think previously that wasn't that clear, but by now it is. 

[SIGH] And just being persecuted for being-- for being what you are, for being the way you were born. I mean, certainly the blacks didn't get a fair share and a fair start. And, uh, the protection for the minorities in jobs now that they, I think, are necessary to bring them up to the level. 

Uh, well, Jews never had that. Nobody ever had them breaking into a new field or breaking into another way of life or-- they always had to do it on their own. 

But there-- there is this innate brand. Being Jewish is something you can't shed. You can't-- 

I mean, you can get baptized, but it doesn't change anything. You're still Jewish. You can convert to Catholicism, but it makes no sense because nobody would accept it anyway. That was so in Europe. And I suppose there's not that many Jews do that. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know people in Europe who were baptized and who were then still labeled Jewish? 

EVA: Oh, absolutely. Oh, in-- in 1938, there was a lot of people that thought it would protect them. They became baptized, and then baptized again, so when they'd say, what were for formally they could said Episcopalian, and now I'm Catholic. You know, it was that kind of thing. Nobody cared. 

The Jews in Czechoslovakia were not religious. It was very-- it was called "liberal." Um, not nearly conservative or orthodox, anything. Reform, if anything. And, um, it was not an issue. 

Religion wasn't an issue. I mean, we had some kind of a consciousness. Israel was supported. It was a race consciousness. It wasn't a religious consciousness. I never belonged to any temple, I never went to any services, um, but I did belong to the Maccabi. 

I went there for gymnastics, and my uncle, the Czech uncle-- I had a Czech uncle and a German uncle-- [LAUGH] was furious. How could I? He thought it was absolutely disgraceful, to join a Zionist organization, even if I only went there to exercise. Um-- 

So I was mixed up. I don't know how I got into the Maccabi, or where it came from, at this moment. 

INTERVIEWER: But other people, Czechs, saw the Jewish-- 

EVA: Oh, when you got baptized, how did the Czech view us? [EXHALING] Oh, I don't really know that the Czechs in, in, in the cities in Europe-- in Prague, for instance-- were very religious, either. The churches in Prague, Prague has-- has 100 churches and were not very well attended. It was mostly elderly women who went to-- peasant women that had moved to Prague. The younger generation didn't go. 

It's not what it is in this country, that everybody has to belong to a church or what do you do on Sundays? I mean, this kind of automatic enquiry. Am I-- well, are you Protestant? Are you-- and what brand of Protestant, as well, or Catholic. 

In Europe people were very, I guess, after the religious wars, nobody decided that it didn't-- there was a lot of tolerance and not interest. It was a toleran-- tolerance to other religions, born of disinterest. The Czechs were mostly Catholic-- are mostly Catholic, even although the Hussite wars were-- were fought for Protestant. By now, they're all Catholic. 

And I used to go to midnight mass, on Christmastime, with our maid, because it was a nice spectacle, not because for religious purpose. And then she'd-- the maids would go. The maids would go for-- on Sunday morning, because they were-- they came from the country, and the country had more of a hold. The religion had more of a hold on a peasant than on-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: But Jews were perceived--? 

EVA: I don't know how they perceived us, I really don't. It never occurred to me to ask! I saw myself as one of them, and I never put myself away on a side. We were really very irreligious in my house. 

INTERVIEWER: But you knew you were Jewish. 

EVA: But I knew I was Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you say that was racial, in your own mind? 

EVA: Yeah. It was racial, in my mind. And, uh, I-- I don't know that I ever tried to get away from it. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW MEMBER 2: Anytime. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

EVA: Um, this is a song I learned in Auschwitz and was kind of a morale booster, supposedly, to be in. 

[SINGING "WENN DER TAG ERWACHT" IN GERMAN] 

[SPEAKING] That's the first verse, and it's all I remember. I don't think I learned any more. 

INTERVIEWER: What does it mean? 

EVA: The transla-- "Be of good Mut, faith, strength. Keep your belief alive. In the morning, when columns -- the"-- oh, god. "When the ro-- when the groups will march out to work, when the morning is barely greying," and the first-- "we have to keep our spirits up and believe in the future and believe. My friend, my neighbor, keep your spirit up, and help me keep mine, and we have, we are in good faith, because we have we-- we think of our dear ones." 

INTERVIEWER: You were singing it in-- 

EVA: In German. It was the lingua franca in the camps. Because, you know, there were so many nationalities there. There were the Hungarians and Polish and Czechs, and we all knew some German, and that was the lingua franca. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you feel when you, uh, were singing with your friends? Did it really boost your spirit? Could it? 

EVA: [SIGH] I don't know. I-- not much. [LAUGH] Not much, to be honest. But I could see that, if-- if I was-- I never marched out to work in the early morning, because I was there for a short while and I was kept in the barracks the whole time. 

But I could see that it would give you a cohesion. It would give you a feeling of belonging, of being cared for. Because the songs talk about "comrade, be of good spirit." 

INTERVIEWER: Was it composed by someone in the camp? 

EVA: Yes. 

[VOICES OFF CAMERA] 

INTERVIEWER: It was composed by someone in the camp? 

EVA: I didn't-- wasn't taught, I just was taught it by people who were there earlier than I. 

INTERVIEWER: You sang that, or you heard it sung, with people, with other people. 

EVA: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever have a feeling that you wanted to someday see those people again? Was that ever a dream, for you, a thought? 

EVA: No. Listen, Auschwitz was so horrendous that I-- I have-- the faces kind of merge, you know. They were shadows. And again, in that camp in Germany, when I could have come closer to-- we were that weakened, that at any time we were not working we were sleeping. There was no socializing going on. There was no talking going on. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't ever talk about what you would do when you were liberated. 

EVA: Well, if, we talked we talked about food. I talked about having a loaf of bread and being allowed to slice and-- and put margarine on it. I didn't dare as far as going as butter. And I dreamed about it every night in camp, every single night. 

Plans were not really-- we said, oh, yeah, we get back to Prague and things will be wonderful. It was too difficult to plan or think ahead. 

INTERVIEWER: You thought about food? 

EVA: All the time. 

INTERVIEWER: Does that linger with you? 

EVA: Well, I still love bread-- [LITTLE LAUGH] unfortunately. And I have a hard time dieting. I always think I should lose some weight, and I don't do it. So. But I think many women are in that position, so that's not that unique. I don't dream about food anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: You were so hungry, you were dreaming about food? 

EVA: Every night, same dream. 

INTERVIEWER: How much food were you getting, at that time? 

EVA: At that time? We were getting one slice of bread and one cup of soup a day. And then, towards the end, in spring of '45, there was no more bread, just one cup of soup. 

There was 50 pounds of potatoes for 500 people, the soup. I mean, you got your soup, you kind of went in with a spoon to see whether there was a piece of potato in it, by any chance. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER: What did you go into, with your spoon? 

EVA: Into a dish. I don't remember a dish, even, what it looked like. I mean, we were served in dishes. I don't remember the dishes. It's amazing, the things you don't remember. 

INTERVIEWER: And you never had a thought that you would someday want to see these people again, or even afterwards, that you-- when you weren't thinking-- 

EVA: Well, as I said, this one mother and daughter who was in the camp with us, and we kind of bunked next to each other, there, and so forth, I thought we would remain friends with, but then we drifted apart after the war. I did see them a few times after the war, in Prague, still. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you want to see them again someday, if you could? 

EVA: I don't know. No special need, no, really not. I think people who lived in ghettos together for years and went-- you know, and went-- were independent individuals and lived for things they had some input into. 

But we were peons. We were being pushed around and toward, and, you know, we had no input into anything that was happening. So, you-- you-- you don't act on the human level, at that way. 

I mean, we were called to work and called to food and then sent back to-- and went to sleep when we hit our bunks. And that way you didn't, at least consciously, think about food. And there was reason preserving energy. And we did very little socializing. 

INTERVIEWER: Last question. 

EVA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: People have said that they think it's impossible to cry about things that happened 40 years ago, people that were lost 40 years ago. One doesn't cry about losing a parent or a child when that much time has elapsed. Yet, almost uniformly, people's eyes get filled when they talk about the concentration-camp experience or the ghetto or what-- whatever in those years. Why? 

EVA: Well, because the-- the way of losing them was so traumatic. I think usually when somebody dies, you have some kind of a time to make peace with them, to talk to them, to know it's happening, to be there, to attend a funeral. But there was nothing, just nothing. 

I mean, of course, I didn't lose anybody that close. Uh-- [SIGH] although this boy I most certainly would have married, I would like to see him again. [LITTLE LAUGH] Or his sister. We were close for many years. 

INTERVIEWER: Did his sister survive? 

EVA: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember? You know? How do you know? 

EVA: Well, I actually, I met a friend of his in camp. I know that from that transport with which they went to Auschwitz. They went in-- before me, they went earlier, nobody survived. 

INTERVIEWER: Not a chance that-- that someone might have? If you thought that maybe someone might have, would you want to reunite? 

EVA: [SIGH] Yeah, I mean, with these people I would. With him and his sister. And I was close to his parents. I mean, I have a very visual image of them, the way they looked, 1939-- no, '42, I guess. 

[SIGH] He was a pianist and an artist and an engineer. He was a lovely person. It hurt. His death hurt me more than my family. Although I-- I was very young. I mean, more than thirteen years, so it ended a serious involvement, at the time. 

But, uh, he was part of my life for many years. And the understanding between my family and his family was always that we would get married one day. [LITTLE LAUGH] And we wanted it, too. Oh, yeah. He seemed-- he was a loss to humanity. There were many such. 

That one transport that went from Theresienstadt, his parents were called, and he volunteered. And in that-- that transport, there was, like, more than 500 people volunteering to go with parents or somebody else. And nobody-- those-- that was the cream of the crop, that one transport. 

At first, the, the Judenrat in Theresienstadt had tried to hold back the young, promising, healthy people, you know, from transports. And I don't know what happened with that one. They called the parents and didn't call the young people, and all the young people volunteered. 

Theresienstadt after that was denuded of-- of young people. It became an old peoples' place. That one transport did it. 

That, somehow, was terrible. It was terrible. [SIGH] Now, I was going to say-- I didn't have that insight. Then, it would have been terrible for the Jewish community in Prague after the war. But there was no Jewish community in Prague after the war, anyway, so that's that for the Jews in Europe. 

I think Hitler succeeded in wiping out the Jews of Europe. Because there is a fraction left, and those are getting lost. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you think about the fact that there are all those relics of Jewish ritual art in Prague, now? What does that make you think? 

EVA: Well, it's a dead civilization, that's what it makes me think. It's a relic from a past that doesn't exist anymore. It's like you're-- well, you travel Europe to look at treasures at the past. It has nothing to do with the present time. 

It's preserved as a museum, the golem story and the relics from that time, the 13th century, the old-- the Old New Synagogue the 13th century. It's that old. But, um, it's meaningless. It's dead. It doesn't live. It's not a living heritage. Because nobody there to keep it alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Does it anger you that it's there and not in Israel and not in this country, where there are centers of Jewish population? 

EVA: [SIGH] I-- no. I-- I think it would lose a lot of its meaning, if you transport it away, because that's where it belongs. 

INTERVIEWER: But it was brought there under bad circumstances in the first place. 

EVA: No, it-- no, it wasn't brought there. It was developed there. It was grown there, so to speak. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, Hitler took a lot of stuff left it there, brought it there, from synagogues all over Eastern Europe. 

EVA: Oh, I don't know about those. I never saw that. No, I was thinking of that old temple, there, that-- you know, and the stuff in it, and the old, the old cemetery next to it, where I spent a lot of time. That I think is part of it. 

What Hitler brought from something else, I guess, should go to Israel or here. If Israel has use for that much. They have more than they can cope with, anyway. 

I don't know. I haven't toured the-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

EVA: Israel needs the memory. Israel needs something to build on the past. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever gone back to Prague, since '48? 

EVA: I was there for one day in '72. I went for my proverbial walk, my Sunday walk, up to the castle and up the old stairs and down the new stairs, which is what we used to do every Sunday. And I walked back to the synagogue, and it was the Old New Synagogue that was closed. I just was there for one day during the day. 

And the temple-- and the cemetery. It looks much like it had looked. I didn't seek out the temple that my girlfriend had attended, where I'd been a few times with her. I don't know whether it's still active. 

I didn't seek out any Jewish friends. I didn't know of any. I looked for a cousin who was from a mixed marriage and didn't go to camp, and he's somewhere in Czechoslovakia, but he wasn't in Prague. I couldn't find him. So, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you-- 

EVA: My one overwhelming-- I had been scared to go back, for many years. Kind of the emotional impact. And I had happy years there and tormenting years there. And the one-- 

Of course, I was there in '72, and the economic situation was pretty grim. And it was after another disappointment like '38. This time, it was '68. '48, '68-- 20-year cycles. 

And the one feeling, almost of relief, that I'd gotten out, that was all I could think of. Thank god I don't live here anymore. [LAUGH] 

No nostalgia. I went that walk up to the castle, the-- the cathedral was closed, you know, it was all dead-- in many ways, figuratively and really. And the beautiful Charles Bridge that is so well known was under scaffolding, so it was disfigured. Had been under scaffolding, I was told, for eight years. 

It was a strange experience, though I don't know how relevant that is. I had been to Vienna first, then Prague, then Berlin. In Vienna, everybody thought I was from Berlin. In Berlin, everybody thought I was from Vienna. In Prague, nobody questioned me. They all knew I was from Prague. [LAUGH] How this happened, I don't-- what is--. 

Like, I went by train from Vienna to Prague. And, uh, I have an American passport. I am born in Berlin. My father-- my mother lived there for a few years when I was a small child. 

So my passport said Berlin-- was American. The customs official on the border started talking to me in Czech. He had no hesitations, knowing that I knew Czech. [LAUGH] 

I waited for a streetcar. A woman approached me and started talking to me in Czech and said, where did you get this nice suit? This doesn't look like it's local. [LAUGH] Had no hesitations that I could be foreign. My suit was obviously foreign. That I could be foreign didn't occur to her. 

INTERVIEWER: You married a Czech man? 

EVA: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Eventually. 

EVA: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You needed that relationshi-- 

EVA: Yes, I suppose so. Well, I-- yeah. In those-- I suppose that's a fair assumption. I don't think, in those years, I would have found it easy to get assimilated to even an American Jew, never mind an American non-Jew. 

My husband lost his parents in-- in the camps. And I knew where they had gone by, where they lived. You know, they kind of cleaned it out district by district. And I never told him. Because to go into the gas chambers was a lot better than where they went. 

Well, the gas chambers, like the transport I arrived, was, people got there and they didn't know anything, you know? They walked into a shower room, didn't know what was happening, and it was over within half an hour. I don't know how much physically they suffered in that time. 

But the people, like his parents, in middle age, coming from being rather spoiled and pampered, and to have to make their living in a Polish ghetto? I can't imagine what that is like. I can't even imagine the agony of it. 

INTERVIEWER: They died in the Polish ghetto? 

EVA: They probably were shot, I think. Most people from that ghetto were shot. They were in Litzmannstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: They were in the Lodz Ghetto, the Litzmannstadt Ghetto? 

EVA: And he never knew that. 

INTERVIEWER: Your husband never knew that? 

EVA: No, I never told him. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? 

EVA: By where they had lived, what transport they had gone in. He was-- he was-- he left before the war, I have to add. He wasn't there. He didn't know what was going on. Hm. I don't think we should talk that much more. 