INTERVIEWER 1: Please mention your names. 

KURT SCHREIBER: I am Kurt Schreiber. Born on the 8th of May, 1904, in Oelde, Westphalia, which is a small town near the big industrial area of Westphalia. My parents had a two-family brick building with a big garden. And we had a lot of neighbors. We were the only Jewish family in that section. 

There was a Jewish community. And I went to, let's call it, the Jewish parochial school. We had six students in the school with one teacher and three different grades. From there, I attended, after four years, the local high school, first five grades. Then I came to the high school in a close-by town. And I attended the classes there for one year, because I didn't like it there. I used to be a very good football player. I was very well-liked. I was a student with good marks. 

Well, then came the end of the first year was where they had-- in Kaiser times, in the the so-called Eine area, you were entitled to serve only one year in the army. And there was a big celebration. And they celebrated with a Kommerz, they call it, a drinking affair, the class. And for that affair, they made up a paper and gave a description-- a class paper. Or how they call it here, I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was it? 

KURT SCHREIBER: That was 1919, 1920. And this paper gave a story of each one of the classmates. I made the remark before that I was very well-liked because I played very good football and played in the team. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was football really soccer? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Soccer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Soccer. 

KURT SCHREIBER: And the paper-- I didn't go to that thing because I knew this school had a social anti-Semitism. And I know it existed in my class amongst a bunch of guys. Some guys didn't even talk to me. This was 1919 to '20, before Adolf came into the picture. 

So I didn't go that evening. But this paper that they brought out was handed to me one day when I visited the town to visit some friends. And the guy gave it to me. He was the stepson of the principal of the school. And he says, Kurt, I've got something for you. Take it home. But don't look at it before you're in the train. 

So I looked at the thing. And there was a picture of a kaftan-dressed dressed Jew with long peyos, and the big stick in his hand, and a nose about that big that you could build a house on. And it says Schreiber was always a good student. And mathematics was his big thing. Of course, it's natural because all the Jews are good in mathematics and in cheating. You know? So then-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would you say that again? They're good in mathematics and what? 

KURT SCHREIBER: In cheating. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Cheating? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah, people to take the best out of the people who-- Jews were not honest, you know. 

So I left that school. I had already been enlisted in another school. And I spent the last three years in another gymnasium. 

After I graduated during the heights of the German Depression, 1923, and nobody wanted to go to law school or medical school because the doctor would get his pay after he visited a sick man. And he couldn't buy a whore for the money that he should have gotten for his services. So I took a job as an apprentice in a private bank. And I worked there for two years. 

And then-- this is 1925. The inflation was over. I studied law. And I passed the exams in 1928, and. '29. And I was appointed referendar You are for three years a clerk in the courts in all the different positions-- low court, the state attorney, and attorney. 

And after that, I passed the final Staatsexamen, the state examination. And then I was at liberty to choose either to become a judge, an attorney, or a state attorney. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can we go back a little bit about your family, your brothers and sisters, or what the family life was like? 

KURT SCHREIBER: My father had served in the German-Prussian army in normal years, in 1890. And when the First World War broke out, he was in what they called the reserve, or the later reserve. He was 45 years old. He had two children, myself and my brother. And he was called into service in 1915. And he served in the German army till the end of the First World War. He was a front man veteran. He served when he was 47 years old. He was in the trenches in France, and later-- in Russia first, and then in France. 

My mother-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he decorated? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah, he had the Eiserness Kreuz. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The eye of a cross. 

KURT SCHREIBER: The Eiserness Kreuz. What do you call it in English? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: An Iron Cross. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah, Iron Cross. 

My mother, who was a housewife, volunteered to work in the local hospital, where the wounded soldiers were treated when they came out of the big hospitals. And as a matter of fact, I should have brought it with me. I've got a photograph with my father is a corporal in uniform and my mother with the uniform of a sister, or a nurse, or something like that. 

And after the war, my father was very active in local things. He was in the veterans group, non-Jewish. The whole town, they were all together in there. He was in the volunteer fire department. He was an officer there. And he was, of course, president of the Jewish congregation for many years. And he was well-known, well-liked. 

We had connection with all our neighbors. One neighbor from the next house was a Catholic family that had two sons and a daughter. One son was a classmate of mine. He became a Catholic priest. And the second one became a lawyer. And he became superior court judge, the same court that I am supposed to be on now, retired from, rather. And the connections are very close. 

This oldest one, the Catholic priest, did one thing that I will never forget. And I have told hundred times. On the 1st of April, 1933, when the boycott day was, when they stood in front of the Jewish stores-- 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: This was official boycott day. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Official boycott, they stood in front of the Jewish stores and offices, even private homes. This guy, Ernest, he came, rang the bell at our house, and came in. And my mother sat down with him. And he was in full-- you know, in his black suit like the priests where. And mother and he had a long conversation. My mother was very open. 

She said, Ernest, what gives me the honor of your visit today? And he said, Mrs. Schreiber, I just wanted to pay you a visit because I want to show them out there that I don't agree with that what they're doing now. This was a deed that was very courageous. Because he could have gone to the concentration camp just like the other political prisoners and the Jews. 

So this is a little bit ahead of my story. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I know it's ahead of your story. But it's very interesting. And I wondered if you remembered his last name and what became of him. And then we'll go back. 

KURT SCHREIBER: His name was Ernest Pautz. He just passed away a few months ago. So his brother sent me the notice that he died. He became a priest, or he was a priest. And he had a lot of trouble with his lungs. And he suffered through all the years. And he was stationed in a hospital as the chaplain or whatever you call it. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Yeah, he was a chaplain. 

KURT SCHREIBER: He was a chaplain. And he got the title, monsignor. 

And his brother just retired a few years ago, as a-- he sat on the supreme court. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was he ever punished for visiting your mother? 

KURT SCHREIBER: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You don't know. 

KURT SCHREIBER: No, he was not. I don't think at that day that anybody stood in-- of the Nazis stood in front of our house. And the majority of the population in my town were very good Catholics. In other words, they did not grasp, or didn't want to know too much about the Nazis at that time. And Nazi followers were not very large. There was only a small group of anti-Semites. 

It was my brother, my younger brother, who just passed away a year ago, was a little bit of a Republican fanatic. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Republican? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Socialist, OK. 

[LAUGHTER] 

He was born in 1909. So in 1930, he was 21. Right? He joined the German Eisbonner organization. This was an organization consisting out of Democrats, Catholics, Central Party, and the Socialists. They tried, or wanted to defend the republic in any way. They were not allowed to bear arms. But they fought the Nazis wherever they could. And he was involved in a lot of fights with the local Nazi followers. 

One day, I remember, they went into a tavern. And there were two of them, and six or eight of the others. And they took the bottles from the back. And they smashed them and threw them out. And my brother had to be brought home by the police. 

This was before Hitler got to power, mind you. They had still the protection of the local police. 

So he left Germany. When Hitler took over, it was the 31st of January 1933. Right? So it was the burning of the Reichstag. And he and a couple other of his group took off and went to the Alsace. That was the part between Germany and France. And from there, he went into France. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Without anything. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Without any passport, with any papers. And-- 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: The clothes on their back. 

KURT SCHREIBER: And there, they couldn't work. They sold newspapers. They bought papers in the French printing places that printed German papers. And then later on, he got a government permit. Then he fought in Spain for the republic against cost-- What is his name? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Franco. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Franco. And he was shell-shocked. He lost his hearing and his speech. And somehow, he got it back. It's a long story to it. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: We know how he got it. 

KURT SCHREIBER: But then when the war broke out, they were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just bear with me for a moment. Let's to go back. The family was a local family for how many generations? 

KURT SCHREIBER: I can't tell you exactly. What I know, I went with my grandfather to the cemetery. And he showed me the graves of my grandmother's family, way back a couple of hundred years. That I know. That's all I can prove. 

My wife has a family tree that goes-- I don't know how many. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Oh, 16-something and 200 years that can't be proved. But I know what it is. 

KURT SCHREIBER: But my grandfather, he came from a small town also in the same section. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And this was in the town of-- 

KURT SCHREIBER: Oelde. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oelde in Westphalia. 

KURT SCHREIBER: The next closest, bigger town is Bielefeld. I don't know where they were at that place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, the family was in the same place for hundreds of years. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Friendly with the neighbors. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your parents both were in the First World War. Your father was decorated. You became to be a lawyer and a judge. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And when you finished high school, your friends pictured you in a caricature as a Jew in a kaftan who was cheating and stealing just because you were a good student. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah. But don't mind this. This place, where I attended the school, was not my home town. This was a town that consisted more out of a very right-oriented Protestant population. They had also a few Jewish families in that town that lived there for a long time. But the spirit there was a different, completely different from my home town. 

In my hometown, the principal of the school was a Catholic priest. And I was his favorite student, the Jew boy in his class. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The Jew boy? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah, I mean, I said the Jewish boy in his class, I was his favorite student. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you feel some sort of discrimination because you called yourself-- you singled yourself out. 

KURT SCHREIBER: No. But I came from the Jewish Volksschule, or the Jewish-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Elementary school. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Elementary school. So I was actually a little different from the others. The others came from the Catholic school. And two or three were from the Protestant school. So I knew I was Jewish. But he and the other kids had to go to church in the morning. I didn't go to church with them. 

And in spite of all that, that I was different, I was still his favorite student because I did good work. I got my A's in Latin. And that was his favorite subject, you know. So I felt all right there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were happy, comfortable. 

KURT SCHREIBER: I was happy there. The only time was that one year at that one high school, where I felt there was some social anti-Semitism. It wasn't the anti-Semitism of Adolph Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In your home town, it couldn't have happened? 

KURT SCHREIBER: No, it wouldn't have happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember any discussion you might have had with friends after that caricature appeared? Did you talk to anyone about it, people that you felt comfortable with? 

KURT SCHREIBER: I was very active, as I told you, in football, soccer, football. And I had friends who belonged to the local club where I played also. I didn't only play in the school. I played there. And a couple of the guys belonged to the socialist party. And they, of course, were strictly against Nazism and their ways. 

And I discussed this with one guy continuously. But later on, I understood, when I wasn't there anymore, he joined the Nazi Party too. But they didn't approve of it. But they couldn't do anything. The majority of the people were afraid to do anything. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Even at that early time, they were afraid. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Even in that early stage. They just-- that's why I brought out the courage of that friend of mine, the priest, you know, who came over. People would stay at home. They wouldn't bother. They'd let the Nazis walk around, and that's it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were they afraid of? At that early time, what did they fear? 

INTERVIEWER 1: We are talking of the '20s, 1921, '22. 

KURT SCHREIBER: '33. In the '20s, there was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The caricature was given to you in 1920. 

KURT SCHREIBER: Yeah, but I said, this was-- 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: More of a singular thing. 

KURT SCHREIBER: It was a singular case of social anti-Semitism, not Nazi anti-Semitism. Nobody would have dared to hit me or kick me or anything of that kind. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: May I fill in something at this point? You said why were people afraid? It's no excuse what had happened in Germany after the last war and the immense separations and unemployment. And this started at this point sifting through-- there is a new movement. And they would take care of things. They would get work for people. I don't know, maybe a hungry man will cling to just anything. So maybe that was one explanation why they had no guts, no personal courage to see the beginning of it. 

KURT SCHREIBER: He made such big promises, as Trudi said. Germany had lost the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The First World War. 

KURT SCHREIBER: The First World War. The colonial empire was gone. All the colonies in Africa and in Asia, what have you, were gone. The Russians took the trains from Germany. Germany had to pay reparations. 

Thousands of guys that had served in the army and the navy were out of jobs. And they were professional soldiers, officers and way up. And they all wanted to eat. And there was no unemployment insurance like it is now and like we have it here. 

So when Hitler says, I'll give you work, I have work for you, they were glad. They joined those SR and SS, the brown or the black uniform guys, and they marched. And they looked forward to a better situation under a new regime. That's what the people-- 

Now, the people that had their business, the people that had their jobs, they didn't follow them right away. They came only later when it had to be done, or they felt that it would be better for them to do it. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: There was a good joke making the rounds at that time. What a good Nazi consists of. It's like a German steak, brown on the outside and red on the inside. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's go back a little bit, Mrs. Schreiber, to you. Where were you born? What was your name before you were married? What you did, where you met your husband? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: I was born in Wiesbaden. It was quite a famous and still is a spa place. And-- 

KURT SCHREIBER: Your name. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Pardon me? 

KURT SCHREIBER: Your name. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: [LAUGHS] I'm Trudi Schreiber. My maiden name was Kronenberger. And my first memory as a child is sitting high on top, as a very, very young child, high on top of a moving van when my father marched off to the war, the war that was to end all. My brother had just been born. He was eight days old. So an aunt of mine took me to wave goodbye to my father going off to the war. And life at that time was quiet, with the exception of-- well, normal war routine of life. 

When I started going to school-- this was a few years in the war already. We lived near the bridge heads on the Rhine. And they were the first attempts to bomb them, to stop the troop transports and material transports to the front. So we had quite some air raid alarms in school. We had one actual bombing. And I think at that time, children got a little more aware and frightened of what was going on. But we were so very young yet. 

The war ended. And Wiesbaden had first French occupation, then the English occupation. And when the occupation was withdrawn, Wiesbaden was the only place that kept the high inter-allied commission. This was a combination of French, English, and American troops. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember that time? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: Or the headquarters. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you remember? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: There were soldiers on the street. But at that time, this was not the common soldier. This was the organization. There was the passive resistance that came in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is 1919? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: '20, '20 and '22, wasn't that the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were how old? 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: '22, how old was I? 

KURT SCHREIBER: 13. 

GERTRUD SCHREIBER: No. I wasn't 13 yet. I was 12, 11, 12 years. 

That was frightening. There were-- 