SUBJECT: --one day that, um, all girls under 16 should report to the-- certain tents to have their heads shaven, because, um-- supposedly for-- you know, lice developed and so on. Uh, and-- and anyone who-- who doesn't obey this, uh, the fathers would be punished. And, you know, we began to hear the stories and see the people who returned from being punished for such things. 

So I went immediately to the certain tent. And, uh, had long hair, long blond braids. And sat down, and the guy took his clippers and shaved me bald. And came back to my mother and, poor thing, she took a look at me and-- and gave me one of her kerchiefs. And, you know, she was also like an Orthodox woman. Her head was shaven, and she had-- had it, um, covered at all times. She gave me one of her kerchiefs. And, um, from then on, you know, I looked like, um, a little-- a little, uh, married woman, or-- you know, with with a hea-- Orthodox married woman. 

Anyway, um, I don't remember that as being traumatic. It's-- it's really-- It's not at all one of the traumas that I recall. My mother was very upset. You know, and she was fighting back tears when she saw me that way. But, um, I-- there was no vanity, or worry that uh, you know, the long blond hair was gone, or that I looked funny. In fact, I don't think I had a mirror to compare or to look. It-- it just wasn't a-- a problem. I just was m-- very much relieved that now my father will be safe. You know the type of thing I mean, that-- um, I-- that was the consideration. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: That he shouldn't be punished. 

SUBJECT: That he shouldn't be punished. And as it turned out, of course-- so and sort of-- it was sort of forgotten, you know. This lasted a day. And those who didn't make it to the tent that day, well, they didn't. And they didn't pursue it. They had these-- you know, sort of sporadic things that happened. But anyhow, I did get caught into-- in it. 

However, to jump way ahead, um, it would appear that because of that incident, I was actually saved later on. I didn't understand it until much later. When we got to Auschwitz and the separation began, um, I stood there with my mother and, um, a younger sister and two little boys, and-- and my older sister. 

We all-- you know, at first my father was taken to the other side of the separation with my brother, who was 17. So when-- after they were separated, and then-- from us, and then the sorting of the women and the children began, this SS who was looking at us first separated my mother and the three little kids. And, um, I stayed with my sister. 

Then he wasn't sure. He-- then he separated my older sister to the living side, and he left me dangling for some seconds, because I had-- my head was shaven. I had a kerchief on and looked like all the other Orthodox mothers who came through with their children. But I didn't seem to have a child. I wasn't holding on to a child. And so I was sort of mistaken, not for a 14-year-old-- or 13-year-old at that time-- but, you know it took him an instant and he-- suppose-- suppose he made a mistake. 

Um-- I was standing there for just an instant in the-- also with my oth-- there were three sisters. So the older one was in-- visibly older. She was 17. She went to the living. The-- myself and the younger one stood there for a minute. I don't know whether he saw the other girl was in fact mine or what. 

Anyhow, another trauma. If-- you know, this is an event of highlight. I look at that as one of my traumas, for sure, that my mother was sent off with two little brothers. And-- and the mob closed in on her, the momentum of the people moving, and she was out of sight immediately. 

And then the SS decided that I too would go to the living side, but the little girl, the sister, would not. And then there she stood alone, away-- my mother left with the children, and she was caught up in the-- in the mob of strangers moving in the general direction of my mother. But again, I thought, will she ever meet up with them? Will she be lost alone in this-- in this mob? 

So I stood there looking after her to see if she had caught up with my mother and the others. And I had no way of seeing, because there were barricades, and-- and-- and they were out of sight. But I hung there wondering, what will happen to her? She's all alone. She was about 12. 

In the meantime, my older sister had gone to the living side, and she also got caught up in the mob and was out of sight. Suddenly, when everybody-- had-- I had-- I had to move on. I realized that I too was alone. Um-- and I was running after my sister. She was way ahead with a mob of girls. Um-- and I started running after her, and yelling after her to-- to stop, and ran and ran and ran. And finally she heard me, and she turned around, awfully surprised, you know, that I am coming. 

And I began to tell her what had happened, that, uh, that, um, our sister almost came with me, but the guy decided to send her after with-- with my mother. And I stood there hoping to see that they got reunited, and, um, I didn't see it. But I-- I-- I hope she did. I was just babbling and yelling and talking, that, um-- um-- as if, somehow, I wanted to reassure her that I waited until she was safe. But I knew that I couldn't assure her of that. 

And, um-- so then I caught up with her, and, um, we went on to the first processing station, where heads were shaven and, um, our clothes was taken, and, um, they issued the, um, prison clothes. And again-- since my sister had to go through an extra process of having her head shaven, she-- um, she was a step behind me. When they saw that I didn't need to be-- didn't-- didn't have to have my head shaven, they, uh, sent me-- separated me from her to the next station. 

One more trauma. Um-- I did not want to be separated anymore. And, um, also, I realized that-- that there were mobs, you know-- lots of doors, people going out doors. Um-- there was no way to-- to know what was on the other end. But anyhow, I had no choice. And so I got through in my prison garb, with my shaven head and the new look, and went out the door where these group of women were sent. And I saw a sea of people in-- in gray sacks and bald heads, as you've seen the pictures perhaps. Um-- unrecognizable, you know. And I knew right away that I was in trouble, because when my sister comes out, I will not recognize her. 

And, um-- I became very agitated. And I-- and there were several doors they were coming out of, and I was running from door to door, and the mob was growing. And, uh, and I wasn't seeing her. And suddenly they began to move the crowd off to barracks, off into a direction of barracks, and, you know, counting off and cutting off people. And I still didn't see her. And I was getting very panicky. Um-- I-- I was crying and-- and-- yelling her name, and-- and-- you know, I was being pushed around to go and not stay and so on. 

And-- and then-- then at that-- at this point, a girl from our hometown recognized me and, um, called my name. And-- and I explained what happened, and she said-- and she knew where my sister was, because they had come through together. So together she directed me to where she was. So we at least began the-- the journey together. 

And I must say that from then on, one of-- really, the biggest-- well, one of the biggest traumas as-- as I can look back was this enormous fear of further separation. It was, um-- I guess that the-- I-- I was saying that I wasn't a child, but this-- this perhaps was the child coming out, this absolute panic at being separated from my sister at-- at this point. 

And that's-- it continued. And there were many, many close calls, I assure you, because it was their-- the German's way to make sure that if they found people together who belonged together, that they would separate them. So there was a constant battle of, um, of this. 

But-- um-- now, I want to say something about-- I don't know if you remember or have seen the, um, Auschwitz album that has come out about a year ago, that is an album of pictures that, um, were put together by-- well, and-- and apparently, the Germans took the picture of the arrivals and the transports, and the separation and-- and all that. And some German SS kept this album. And a survivor later found herself in some German barracks that was abandoned, and she found this album and kept it for years. 

But eventually, in recent years, she gave it to, um, Yad Vashem, and the album is now on the market. And I-- I bought one. And-- of course, very anxious to see what was in it, and who was in it, and if I recognized anyone, and so on. And the pictures are not close-ups, but I-- I-- I came to a dead stop on one page where there is the scene where-- um, at the separation, where as I mentioned before, I-- I, uh, hung around for longer than most to look to see if my sister caught up with my mother. And there I am. I-- I don't recognize the face so well, because it is blurred and so on. But the posture, the leaning into the-- looking sort of sideways towards the direction, the standing there, um, with a sort of, um, um, worried expression. 

I remember myself-- I-- I, in fact, um, sent a request to the Yad Vashem to send me the original so that I could see a better look, just to see if it was really so. And they sent me two copies. But it really is no better than the reproduction. And-- so-- you know, uh-- it may be, it may not be. But I recall the circumstance. And, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: When you saw it, what did you experience? 

Oh, I stared at it for not just hours, but for days. Um-- that album is really the picture story of-- of the, um-- the Auschwitz, Auschwitz story in-- in pictures. It's the actual, you know, it's-- it's the actual happening, the-- the-- the-- 

INTERVIEWER: But when you saw your own-- 

SUBJECT: Um, I was really amazed that I stopped at that, because-- my face is not recognizable. It-- there is-- I recognize certain things, how I was dressed and-- uh, in fact, it looks like a person whose head is shaved, you see. And the scarf is tied not-- not like these, um, Jewish, uh, women who tied their scarves to cover, you know, like this, so that nothing of the baldness would show. I was a young girl, and didn't, you know, pay such strict attention to that. I tied it, you know, like this, so that half my head showed. And-- and that's what alerted me to it, that it-- it-- there was a-- a-- a bald head tied with an uncharacteristic way. And I was standing there alone, with the SS on either side of me and people going. 

It-- I-- I can only tell you that I spent days with that album. And then I gave it to my aunt, who also said she could not put it down. It was-- It was-- well, it-- see, we-- we think, really, that, um, that the whole story is forgotten and so on, and-- somehow, the reality of it, um, the fact that-- you know, we know it happened, of course. 

But even to us, that-- that whole place and time seems like another world. And to see the concrete evidence of it, the way that we really do remember it, the-- um-- but at the same time, we didn't-- we didn't get a panoramic view at that point, you know. When we arrived, you-- you saw what you saw, and you were caught up in it. Um, we didn't see the way the picture showed, um-- the-- you know, the-- the-- the whole route to the ovens, the-- the-- the separation, and so on. Um-- 

Well, I relived. You know, i was searching very hard in the picture with a magnifying glass for days to see if I could recognize others, because if I was-- if it was indeed me, then my father was among the crowd sitting waiting there, um, the-- the crowd of men and boys. But of course, it's-- you know, it's-- it's, um, not a very sharp picture. It's-- it's a picture of a-- of a group, rather than individuals. But anyhow, it-- it-- the significance of it, whether it is me or-- or it isn't, it really doesn't matter. I, um-- but it's some-- it is what-- it is exactly how I remembered my-- that-- that-- that very, um, difficult time of the separation there, the-- the-- the fast-moving event, um, you know, that left-- left a, um, a mark. 

INTERVIEWER: And you keep searching, so to speak. 

SUBJECT: Well, I hope to find somebody else. They are not-- you know, it-- it's-- it's hard to say why, because I know the answers, but um-- 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you know, and you-- and-- but they're not answers. We're You told me that-- 

Yes. You know, but you-- you, um, you do want to-- to, um-- well, you know, it's like-- the problem of-- of not having a, um, a grave has-- for your loved ones. Um-- of-- a place to go and-- and say this is where they are, or sort of a final acceptance. 

I think that has-- has been a big problem in coming to terms with this whole thing, that you-- you never-- you never had a, um-- the-- that fi-- final, you know, concluding thing like a-- a funeral, or a grave, or-- like my aunt, was saying that she would like to go back to Auschwitz now, to-- sort of as-- as Jews visit the grave during certain times of the year to-- to be-- even though it's you know, just a place, but sort of a confirmation. 

Um-- I remember when I went to a funeral for the first time in my life in this country. A-- a husband, um, of a friend of ours. I had absolutely no idea what happened at a funeral. I had never been to one. And, um, I said in the wrong place, and I, um, didn't know when to leave. And I-- I was completely, um, unaware of how one behaves at a funeral. And I thought to myself at the time, my entire family is dead and I don't know how to behave at a funeral. 

But I, um-- and the-- the answer to it is that I did not bury my family. I left them somewhere, and sort of-- you know, it-- it's-- well, it's hard to-- in a-- in a short time to focus in on what is important. But there are-- I think throughout my life there are these, um, ironic things that constantly happen to-- normal events that happen that I always relate to-- to that event. 

And so-- um, you know, people say well, um, oh, you've forgot. You-- you were so young. I'm sure you're forgotten and you don't remember. And it's-- um-- I don't think so. Not only do I remember the details, but it is-- all those events in life are constantly related to very normal events that other people experience. 

Um-- oh, you know, I remember riding, um, in a plane years ago, the first time, flying over Pittsburgh, in the days in the '50s when Pittsburgh, um, you know, was a-- a steel industry, and the big chimneys and the smoke and the fire, and looking down at the-- uh, in the plane and seeing all the-- the flames and the smoke. You know, I saw different things from other passengers. 

It-- it is just constantly-- um, it's constantly-- it's a haunting type of-- um-- so again, I think, just like in the, um-- in my childhood when, um, one had to feel like an adult and cope with adult things, but maintain an equilibrium. I think throughout-- since the-- the camps, I find myself feeling and relating much differently from my-- um, from friends and others. And yet, at the same time, you know, putting that into a compartment and-- and you know, integrate one's life so that one can function at the same time. But-- but that is always there. It's, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can it come back to you in the course of events? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Um-- Well after this, um-- re-- reunited with my sister, um, the first night in the barracks was, um, um, a nightmare, if-- if you can call it that. It was, um, very cold. It was Janu- no, it was, um, it was April-- May. May. It was cold in-- in, uh, Poland. Of course, they took our clothing away, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: It can't-- It can't have been May. 

SUBJECT: Uh, we-- we were taken in April '44. 

INTERVIEWER: You're right. 

SUBJECT: And about a month later-- 

Yeah, Yeah, you're right. 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: It was May. 

SUBJECT: I think it was about, um-- right. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: But, you know, it was spring, and cold and raw. And, uh, as I say we had no, um, coats and sweaters and so on. And we were on this, um, bunk. I don't know, a dozen or more people in these bunks that you've seen pictures of. And of course, nobody could lie down or even sit, you know. There was absolutely no room. And there was one blanket, and everybody was pulling it, and everybody was pushing and kicking. 

And, um, there was-- y-- they n-- did not allow us to get off the bed, or this so-called bed, this bunk. You couldn't stay on it, because there were too many people. You couldn't get off it. Nobody slept at all all night. People were crying. People were kicking and pushing. 

Anyhow, my sister claims that I cried for days after that. I don't recall that. She says, oh, you were crying all the time. Um, if you ask me, I think I was very adult, again. But she-- she must be right. I must have. 

Um, then, um, they, uh, you know, we-- the next day we were, um-- the routine began of being awakened at 5:00 AM and pushed out into the cold, and standing there for hours until they counted. And, um, they brought us some uh, black coffee. And of course I'd never had black coffee, and I took a sip and spit it out. 

And then later on, some-- some, uh, kind of a bread was being given. And so my sister and I both, we took a bite. and we spit it out and said, here, you want it? Anybody who wants it. And certainly we weren't going to eat that. That wasn't human food. Wasn't edible. Well, needless to say, later on it became a delicacy, and we didn't, uh, refuse to eat it anymore. 

But, um, it-- it was, um, a-- a situation where people were angry. There was-- upset, angry. There was a lot of-- people were not, at this point, tolerant and kind to each other. And it was sort of a-- a-- a-- a mad place of-- of yelling and pulling and kicking, and shoving in line. And, um, I-- I recall just very unpleasant, uh, tensions, you know. 

And somehow, for-- for the time being, um, one couldn't deal with the whole-- the total what happened. It was just what happened this morning and what happened last night. But I recall, from time to time, thinking that, oh, I'm so glad that my younger brothers, um, and sister are with my mother, because surely this is not how they have it. Because-- because obviously they went to a family camp, and, um, this is for workers and we're going to be treated this way, but not-- not them. And I remember, you know, from time to time, thinking how happy I was that, um, they were not like this. 

Well, and-- soon we began to be told by the, uh, older prisoners who had been there for a much longer time-- we asked them, you know, when do we see our families? The usual question. And they began to tell us, in no uncertain terms, where our families were and what happened to them. And they pointed to the chimney and they told us. 

And, um-- again, they-- I just-- we just said, you know, it-- this is a place where people would talk like this. I mean, just look, you know, the anger, the-- the rudeness, the-- you know. It dismissed it completely as-- as raving maniacs, you know. Absolutely did not accept it. Didn't even enter into our minds that they were right. We just wondered how can people be so horrible and so mean that they would tell us such things. 

And, um-- so-- you know, and then we began to assess them. And we-- the real-- we saw how th-- th-- if this is how they live for one or two years, you know, we began to forgive them for being such animals, because we saw what-- you know, how this could turn into-- people into that. 

Anyway, um, after a few weeks of, um, this routine, they didn't have work for us. But then, um, we were told that, um, we would be, um, taken on a work shift. And, um, we had to have our, uh, arms tattooed for that, because this was-- this was important for this work shift. 

And so we had to line up and, um, get our tattoos, which we interpreted as-- as a good thing, because this means that they are keeping a record. We are now recorded somewhere-- somewhere, even if it is a number. But of course, um, somebody is keeping track. Somebody knows we're here. Somebody's counting. And that's-- that's good. So everybody wanted the number. 

A lot of, you know, people, um, have asked me lately, wasn't that awful? Isn't-- wasn't-- but that was not the most awful thing. Not only physically was it not such a unbearable thing, but we also thought that we were the ones that they will take better care of, and we will be accounted for this way. 

Anyway, we were-- about 1,000 women were picked. And we were marched to a camp in the morning, which was several enclosures, um, uh, fences to go through and gates. And we came to a place where, um, there were literally mountains of clothes and things belonging to people. 

INTERVIEWER: [COUGH] 

SUBJECT: Mountains of shoes, and mountains and glasses, and huge hills of breads and cookies, and, um, every kind of luggage. Um, everything imaginable that people took with them. And it was all dumped on the ground in front of the barracks, and you literally had to look up as you would at a mountain. 

And the women-- and we were pa-- became part of this, um, team. We were asked to sort these things out, separate them, put them into various piles according to quality and-- in other words, it-- it all had to be processed. And it was hauled away on trucks. 

Um, there was also-- lots of it was hauled inside barracks because of the weather. And the barracks were filled to capacity, up to the ceiling, with-- with various fabric type goods. Clothing , blankets, whatever people brought. And, um, every night we would be marched back to where we came from. And-- because there was a lot of food. There was all kinds of perishable and nonperishable food. Everything. Canned food, whatever you wanted. 

INTERVIEWER: Was that the Kanada? 

SUBJECT: That was the Kanada. Yes. And, um, because we gradually-- well, after the first day, I suppose, we realized where we were, because now people didn't have to tell us. This was-- one fence divided us from the crematoriums, and we saw all that was to see. And, um, we went back, and even though they-- they searched us every night, nevertheless we were able to, you know, put on a new pair of shoes every day, and take it back and come back in somebody else's old shoes. And the same for every article of clothes. 

And-- and we did manage to smuggle food and-- and so on. And we didn't have to eat, so our-- our rations that we did get in the night in the other place, we would give to others. And so-- every time, every night when we this group came back, mobs of other prisoners, girls, women, were waiting for us, you know, to give them what we were bringing. And it became, obviously, the, uh, the place to-- to be assigned. 

And, um, we did this for-- I know for some length of time. But then they decided that, uh, they will keep these-- I think it was about 1,000 women. They-- they will keep them permanently in barracks on the-- on location. And so after that, we never went back, but stayed there. And when we stayed there, um, we really began to see what was happening in this particular place. 

And, um, it was the height of the transports from Hungary. It was the height of what you read about the, uh, the thousands and thousands of people marching into the ovens daily. And it-- it-- just like in this album that I saw, it backed up for miles from the ovens and. People sat down and waited. 

And, um, um, our barracks, my barracks, were on the, um-- facing the road. And-- I mean-- you know, you look out the window and there was-- it was never a clear view. There were-- day and night, people sat or walked or, uh, walked and marched into the ovens. Just day and night. And it was not, you know, something that ever went away. 

And-- and, um, I-- I recall standing by the window and looking out and, uh, seeing the thousands of children and mothers and grandmothers and-- and understanding fully well that that's exactly the path my family took. For some reason-- I don't understand. Perhaps a psychologist could explain-- I could not get any tears. There was never a tear staring, as if it-- it was perhaps an, um, uh, uh, um, an inability to really admit what I saw, or-- or to relate it. It-- there was a wall, somehow. There was an-- I saw it, and I could not get the reaction. 

Uh, or-- you know, I often wrestled with that aspect. Why-- why weren't we screaming maniacs at-- at that point, those of us who saw it daily? Um, there-- there was no way that we could do anything about it somehow, for sure. And it became the routine of the day. It-- it was always so. 

And they saw us. They saw us-- at this point we had changed into clothes. They allowed us to put on sweaters and jackets. And we looked like civilians. And these people would look at us, and got reassured by the sight of us, you know, that they had absolutely no idea it was a calming effect. 

If-- uh, we worked day and night shifts. Many times at night when the transports came, we were sometimes outside working with the-- bringing the stuff in. Um, we would hear the screams. We would hear the praying, and hear the enormous roar of screams. Was an-- you know, like-- like a-- a mob screaming and praying in Yiddish. 

Because at night when they came, um, the, um, forest where this was hidden in was, um, lit up by the flames that-- the-- the burning in the pits outside, because they were working overtime. And even the flames from the chimneys were-- not smoke, but flames, shooting up high. And it illuminated what was going on. And from certain angles, the people did see at night. 

And, um, there would be this incredible-- you know, terrifying screams and prayers. And, um, I remember, um, putting my hands on my ears and, you know, trying to block it out. And-- and-- but, you know, I ask myself, how was I able to stand it? I-- I have no answer. There was-- it was-- I was like a piece of wood at that point. Um, I knew it. I saw it. I understood it. 

And it was-- I-- I suppose, you know, if-- if one had to really uh, act and accept-- act out what one felt, it-- it would have been, um-- I think we'd we'd have all become mad. And-- and-- there were a few instances-- I recall maybe two when young, um, girls would, um, become hysterical and cry. And-- and-- and they would-- they would be beaten down by the SS and, you know, and taken away. 

And-- in other words, it wasn't the thing to do. But nevertheless, one-- you know, I don't understand that part, how it was possible to look at it. And this went on for about, um, six months that we worked there. And, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever on the verge of-- of-- screaming, or-- or-- or running to the fence and killing yourself? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: It-- it was-- the-- actually, the, um, the imperative was to survive. At-- really, we had, um, a-- in-- we-- we wanted to survive, and we wanted to-- 

INTERVIEWER: I understand. 

SUBJECT: --to tell, and-- no, that-- it-- it was not, um, that feeling at all. That-- um, however, um, on the other side of the fence, um, was my father, um, working in the ovens with the-- with the bodies. And, um, we did not know that. But, um, my aunt who was also with me at-- by this time. We-- met up with her. 

Um, she recognized someone on-- on that side among the men from my village. And, uh, she managed to throw over, uh, a note. And he managed to throw a note back. You know, that was-- uh, people managed to do these things. Um, and apparently, this young man told her that my father worked there, and that he did become unable to do what had to be done. And they shot him, uh, so that he-- he became crazy, or-- or disoriented, or violent, or whatever. I don't know, but that he did not last the time that, um-- he would have died anyway, because they did kill these people every few months. 

But he-- I don't know how long he lasted, but that he could not do that-- that-- that work. And not surprising enough, it is quite possible that, um, he-- so many members of the family, his own or extended family, and so on, because there was a-- a backup of-- well, anyhow, that one doesn't have to-- that doesn't even have to happen for that to have been an impossible place to, um-- for him to work. 

So we knew that he was there. And we never could account for my oldest brother, who was with him at the first separation. No one ever-- he-- he-- we lost track. We often ask, you know-- people reconstruct and-- and try to find, uh, um, someone who was there, or knew him, or knew of him. No one ever knew of him. Apparently he was separated from him, from my father. And, um, since he was alone, a young boy about 17 or 16, um, I don't think he had a chance, you know. 

And, um, so-- after this, then, um, we found-- we f-- we-- we worked with the clothes, and, um, one night, when-- when, um, during a night shift, uh, we opened up, um, a bundle that was, uh, our portion for the day. And there was my, uh, mother's shawl. Um, you know, just-- just out of the 1,000 women and thousands of bundles. Um, we held on to it for a while and then let go of it, because, um, you know, I couldn't keep it. 

But, um, then, later on, the camp was evacuated, as perhaps the story of Auschwitz is known. The Russians did, um, come close, and the Germans decided to, um, empty the camp. And we were taken on a forced march for I don't know how many hundreds of miles. And that was January, in the winter, through Germany. 

And, um, somehow managed to-- to make it to the next camp. Um, almost didn't many occasions. It was-- it was a, um, a very difficult time after enduring that march. Um, and the next camp uh, was overcrowded from emptying of the camps from the path of the Russians. 

And, um, our troubles were not over by any means. This was a time of chaos for the Germans. They, um, did not, uh-- well, they-- they-- fed us really so little that there was constant hunger, and lice, and, um overcrowding, incredible overcrowding. And, um, we lost tremendous amount of weight. 

And, um, selections were made constantly to weed out the sick and the-- just to reduce the numbers. And, um, uh, at-- at-- at this point my sister was, um, down to-- you know, looked like a skeleton, really. She was extremely thin. And then at-- during one selection, um, she was picked out. And, uh, you know, as I said, I was still traumatized by the possibility of being separated. So I s-- I stepped right up, and I said to the guy, me too. I'm her sister. And he said OK. 

So, uh, we were put into this room with, um, all the other sick and, you know, uh, di-- disabled. And you could see that they picked the ones who were-- didn't have much longer to go, and locked us in this room, waiting for the truck to come to take us to, um, to a place-- this camp didn't have a crematorium. 

And, um, uh, we waited all day in this room, locked in. And at one point, um, somehow the door was open. And people looked up and down the hall and saw no one. And the first one would get out, and then the next one would get out. And pretty soon most of the people got out. And before-- you know, there was-- it was sort of a chaos, uh, at this point, because the Germans weren't-- did not have the perfect control they had earlier, because they themselves were running. 

Um, and we-- went back into our former rooms where, um, my aunt was, and everybody else wringing their hands and crying, and saying how the children were taken. They referred to me and my sister as the children. The children were taken, and they, you know, thought that we-- we had been taken away. 

But the truck did come. And those who didn't make it out of the room did go. And, uh, so at any rate, um, this was the place of-- of great hardship and complete starvation for about, um-- from January until May, until the last day of the war. Um, people who almost made it up to this point, you know, died, and-- because of the enormous deprivation and weakening conditions when the war was over. And people had to make their way home in this weakened condition. They died-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel at the first moment of free-- of liberation, if anything? 

SUBJECT: Well, um, it-- it-- we were very weak. We were-- we were, um, very starved. We were sort of-- in a-- a point of sort of an apathy, where you just sit and stare into space. And, um, there wasn't a big change, because you had to make your way out of this on foot, you know. And we s-- we-- we sort of-- we stayed a while. People went into the kitchen and brought back whatever food that there was from the kitchen. Um, the stronger people went into some kind of a storeroom where there was, um-- there were cans of food. 

INTERVIEWER: I want to go back to you. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, um, we-- we s-- we were hungry, and we-- we were concerned with what was in this kitchen. And we-- we-- in fact, we ate whatever f-- and we came deathly ill. So we almost didn't make it, you know. Dysentery set in. Uh, we were weakened condition. We-- we couldn't really-- 

INTERVIEWER: You know, it's almost tri-- 

SUBJECT: --enjoy it. 

INTERVIEWER: It's almost trivial-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --in conne-- in comparison with what happened before. 

SUBJECT: Mm. 

INTERVIEWER: Even the dysen-- dysentery. But-- 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: I-- there's some question which I want to ask you. 

SUBJECT: Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER: Where-- how do you get the strength? 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: Look, you have been talking, and you have been with it for the last two hours or so. Where is your strength? How did you get the strength then? How do you get the strength now? What keeps-- 

SUBJECT: To, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: To-- 

SUBJECT: To function. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, it's not only-- it's more than functioning. 

SUBJECT: To-- well, um, I often think about it, of course, how there is a-- there is a, uh, sort of a-- a-- a-- division, a-- a sort of a schizophrenic division, you know, or a compartmentalization of-- of what happened. And it's kept tightly separated. Uh, and yet it-- as I said, it-- it isn't. Um, there is this, uh, path of daily living that one has to attend to and adhere to, and uh, family and children and their needs, and everyday needs, and work, and so on. And that-- that must not interfere-- the other must not become so overwhelming that it will make so-called normal life, um, unable to f-- to function. 

Um, yet it res-- the-- yet it's always there. And it-- it's-- it's more a, um, a view of the world, a t-- a-- a total uh, world view, if-- if you want to say, of-- of extreme pessimism, of, um, um, of sort of-- one feels, you know, of-- of really knowing the truth about people and human nature, about um, death. Really knowing the truth in a way that other people don't know it. 

Um, and-- the-- all of the truth is, um, harsh, and impossible to really accept. And-- and yet, you have to f-- go on and function. So, um, it-- it's-- it's, uh, um, a-- a-- complete lack of faith in human beings. And-- in-- in all areas, you know, whether it's, um, politics or whatever. You-- you hear one thing, and you believe something else. I mean, you say, oh, well, I know the truth. 

INTERVIEWER: This is wise. You are one of the greatest optimists I've ever met. 

SUBJECT: How do you-- how do you come about-- to-- to that conclusion? Um, no. There is two sides. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: You know, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: We-- we don't disagree, really. 

SUBJECT: OK. Well, I'm glad you think-- yes, it-- it-- um, optimism for, um, the children, the-- the-- the daily routine. 

INTERVIEWER: You know-- you know what I'm talking about. 

SUBJECT: No, and-- you know, well, it-- it-- it affects everything. And it is very difficult to-- perhaps that's another session, you know, because you're-- you're talking about, like-- past experiences, and then how does it-- 

INTERVIEWER: I wanted to ask this question, whether you have ever considered of-- using sessions, of-- 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: You understand? 

SUBJECT: I understand. No, I-- I didn't, because I really, um, felt that I processed it and I understood it, and that I did not know how anyone can change that reality for me. 

INTERVIEWER: No. Nobody can change the reality. 

SUBJECT: Um, so then how would I Benefit? In other words, I-- I don't-- 

INTERVIEWER: Just-- I'm following up your comment. Maybe that's another session. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: So you feel-- this means to me that there is something else to, uh, speak out aloud with somebody present. 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER: That's all. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I-- it's-- you know, one goes through stages in life. I would say the first 10 years, it was out of the question. The next 10 years, um, there was perhaps a greater turmoil, inner turmoil. Um, this is the third or whatever 10 years, as you see, that I'm able to talk about it. Um, so perhaps this is the time, maybe, you know, to uh, examine some of the feelings. 

But as far as, um, mm, giving me another outlook on life-- and I don't-- I don't think that would happen. But-- but there is probably something there that-- well, to my surprise, some aspects of it get more-- get-- get better, you know, in the fact that I can talk about. 

But some aspects of it, um, are worse than earlier, because upon reflection, you-- you see-- somebody asked me, aren't you very angry? If I were in your position, I'd be so angry at-- at everyone and everything. Um, you know, that the price-- as a Jew, you know. This was a Gentile who asked me if-- she says, if I were you, I'd be so furious at everyone. Um, in other words, militant, and, you know, that sort of thing. 

Um, I suppose the anger didn't-- the anger is perhaps there now. It wasn't there then. Not that it was accepted. I don't mean that. But, um, it-- you know, you-- you-- as I say, everything relates. If, for example, somebody, um, uh, brings a suit abou-- of-- in a court of law about, um, some accident, and bodily damage or something, and they-- they are awarded great sums of money, I-- I-- it occurs to me, my god, the law protects so well for minor things. Where was the law whe-- you know, so-- in every-- in every aspect, whatever happens every day, it is impossible to reconcile that there wasn't a law, that there was no protection, that there was no-- there-- there was no recourse. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to, but it is another session. So that's-- 

SUBJECT: OK. Time is up. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. 

CREW: Stop. 

SUBJECT: It's hot under the lights. I don't know. It's, um, uh, it's rambling, because it's-- even-- you know, I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Ms. Weiss There's not one moment of rambling. Please. 

SUBJECT: Oh, there was. 

CREW: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: I didn't experience rambling at all. If there were rambling, I would have interrupted you much earlier. 

SUBJECT: No. Ooh, I'm hot. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: You're welcome. 