INTERVIEWER 1: We'll start, Mr. Rosenberg. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Can I throw this away? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. We don't need it. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape rolling? 

CREW: Tape is rolling. 

CREW: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you start by giving your name and where you were before the war? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: My name is Michael Rosenberg, and I come from Poland. I was born in Dombrowa Gornicza, which is a town on the western border between Poland and Germany. It's normally known as the coal district. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your father do? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: My father was a merchant. We owned a lumber yard in town. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was life like? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, it was a small community, fairly closely knit. Uh, my father would work five days a week. He would come home for, uh, dinner. I normally would go to the next town by trolley, attend In the morning the yeshiva. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old are you now, Mr. Rosenberg? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: 51. I'd come home for lunch, and in the afternoon go back to the same yeshiva and get the, uh, normal public school education. We, uh, had a very nice, quiet, what I consider comfortable life. We had quite a little family in town and in the next town. And, uh, there wasn't really nothing unusual about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did life begin to change? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is the most you cherished, what memories? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, what I really recollect-- what I really recollect about our life is that, uh, the fact that Friday nights-- Friday afternoons, rather, I would come home early, and my father would take me to the mikvah, which was a ritual bath. And he would meet people there and they would talk, discuss business, world events, whatever it is. And they would include me in it. And, uh, it was a very nice get together. After that we'd come home, and Father and I would go to the shtiebel to pray. Uh, on the walk there, we would talk. Uh, I really don't recollect-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What's a shtiebel like? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, a shtiebel is-- consists of 30 or 25 members, where people from immediate surroundings get together and pray. Uh, my father on and off would be as the-- he was called as the leader of the congregation. Sometimes somebody else would do it. It was normally considered an honor to be called upon to pray in front. Uh, that would happen on Fridays, naturally Saturday morning too. We'd spend, like, half a day in the shtiebel. 

Then I'll come home, have dinner. And on some Saturdays, we'd take a walk to the next town, it was about three miles away, where my uncles lived. The whole family would walk. That was my father, and my mother, and I. And we'd come over there, we'd sit down and chat with the uncles, finish off the Sabbath, and, uh, then they would sit down and play cards. I know we would kibbitz. 

We'd play cards-- we'd call that game rummy bridge. In the States, it's known as kalooki. Very few American-born people ever heard of that type of a game. Uh, I'm pretty well mathematically inclined, so on and off my mother would let me sit and play. And the biggest charge I had out of it was when I was winning playing against the adults. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you do now? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I am a vice president of finance working for a subsidiary of a listed company. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And, uh, do you compare winning now to winning then, or? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, uh, there's quite a difference. Uh, right now, winning really doesn't mean anything. At that particular time, uh, being praised for your capabilities meant more, really, than winning. Winning was just a symbol of it. Uh, that's normally how we would spent our school year. 

In winter, in the backyard-- we lived in-- we lived in an apartment house on main street. Uh, we would pool water and create an ice skating rink and would go ice skating on and off. I'd fall down, my mother would come running down and pick me up. In the summer, we would go away to a village. Normally, it would be, uh, my mother and a couple of aunts with the kids. And we would stay there basically the whole summer. Father would come home-- come over there for weekends and join us. So it was a very normal, ordinary life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened, uh, that made you recognize that your life was changing? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how old were you? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I was 11 years old when the war-- Second World War broke out. Uh, at that particular time-- as a matter of fact, even before then we noticed the change. We saw quite-- quite a few German Jews coming to Poland, who were escaping Germany. I really didn't know what they were escaping. And to a certain extent, we even found them, uh, alien to us. We really didn't-- they were different, their habits were different, so. But we noticed that something different was happening. 

Then the war came and, uh, everybody was trying to run away east-- eastwards. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: The war came how? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, the war broke out, really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I really didn't know, because it was during the summer. The only thing I knew was that my father, by hook or by crook, obtained a little truck and came to the village where we stayed for the summer, and picked us up and brought us back home. He said, there's a war coming out, there's a war brewing, and we want to be together. 

Uh, everybody was listening to the radio, listening to the news, what's happening. Uh, we were aware of Czechoslovakia, the partition. Uh, everybody was very much politically attuned, shall we say. Uh, the reason why you-- you ask how do I know, is because in the States everybody's concerned with domestic affairs and nobody really thinks about international. The international come strictly as a by-play. 

Uh, in our area, everybody was cognizant of the international consequences, and everybody was talking about it. And even as a child, one way or the other, you became involved by listening to it. So we knew it. So we started running. It was virtually a mass exodus. Everybody from the west tried to move to the east. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To the Russian-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: To the Russian area. Uh, what happened, naturally, was that the German forces were much quicker than we were. They overtook everybody. And after a week or so, we returned to our town. Actually, at that time, my brother and I were separated from my parents. My parents were unable to hop on the same wagon as we were. We were loaded on the same wagon with our uncles, and by virtue of the traffic they had to move. And my parents stayed at home. So we came back and were reunited with them. 

It changed very simply. As soon as the Germans came in, they took over our lumber yard. They appointed what they called a treuhander. In English it would be called a trustee. And he actually was supposed to manage all the financial affairs, and my father would only help him out. On-- nearly for as long a period of time until the man became familiar with the extent and the nature of the business. 

Uh, it didn't take too long. First of all, the business-- the nature of the business was such that an individual could only run it, and was strictly a temperament of a person-- of the individual that could run it. And the trustee couldn't. And my father just, uh, was pushed out. Uh, that was virtually within two months that the Germans came in. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The trustee was German or Polish? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: The trustee was German. Uh, you had people who were called Volksdeutsche, meaning that Poles who, one way or the other by any stretch of imagination, professed to have a certain amount of a German affiliation. And they were-- they were, uh, accepted as such. 

Uh, a few months later, the-- our apartment was taken over. A German family moved in, and whatever they liked, they wanted, and you were forced to move out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did you go? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, uh, my father went and found-- in the, uh, lower-end section of town, found an apartment. He paid for it and we moved in there. So, naturally, things changed. Uh, later on, we were required to carry bands with-- with a star on it. So-- so we noticed that. Uh, virtually shortly thereafter, travel was restricted. You weren't able to travel. You weren't supposed to take the railroad any place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you feel when you had to leave your apartment, when you had to wear the bands, when you couldn't travel? How did you feel inside? Do you remember? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, I-- I really can't say how I felt. I, uh-- I felt really being pushed, not only as a second-class citizen, I felt being pushed as being a nobody. And that's what we really were. Uh, if you didn't get out of the way of a German quickly enough, they would kick you to the side. You'd get hit at the slightest provocation. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you miss your bed, your room? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, not really, because those were just physical surroundings. As long as the family was together, I didn't mind. We took that smaller apartment. My grandfather owned a big apartment complex in a different area that was also considered non-Jewish. He passed away, so Grandmother moved in with us. And she stayed with us. So, actually, instead of four people, you had five people living in smaller surroundings. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In what town was it? 

MICHAL ROSENBERG: Dombrowa. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Dombrowa. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Dombrowa. So, really, it didn't-- didn't make any difference, because we already stayed together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you hear your mother, though, and your father? Did they complain? What did you-- what did you think they felt, they saw? I mean, your mother was dislocated, had to pack her things. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, we-- we all looked at that as being strictly in a temporary way. In other words, sooner or later, the war will be over and we'll be restored to whatever we had. So it was just, one way or the other, trying to get by. Uh, my uncles in the next town-- we weren't supposed to travel from one town to another but, yet we traveled. One way or the other, we saw and communicated. My paternal grandfather, who lived about 40 miles away, to whom you couldn't go with a trolley, but you had to take the regular train. On and off, we would go and see him too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Uh, basically, by securing a Polish identity paper, and just sneaking underneath the barbed wire, remove the band, and just go. Uh, on and off, you would be discovered, especially by the Polish kids. So the question of-- it was a question of merely running faster than they did. And, uh, it was in my interest to run faster than they did, so I did. Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You seem to have done a lot of dangerous things. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. I merely did anything that was necessary to survive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It wasn't dangerous. It was just a question of self-preservation. Uh, we had to make a living. So, uh, my father evolved into the business of dealing in gold watches, bracelets, rings, et cetera, which we used to sell to the Polish population, or to the nouveau riche Volksdeutsche, and everybody else. Uh, he would contract with a man to make bracelets, and then would go and sell it. 

And, naturally, you would ask me how we would make contact. Contact you would make on a visit, but the delivery normally would be made by means of the young people. In our family, I have a brother who is eight years younger than I. In our family, it was I. In other words, uh, if there was a delivery to be made, you'd tell me, go to Mrs. So-and-so. And I'll just sneak underneath the barbed wire, go over there, deliver it, and bring whatever the exchange was agreed upon. Normally it was money. So that's how we managed to make a living. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And what was it like to sneak with gold under barbed wire and the guards? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: You really didn't give it a second thought, because that was part of making a living. Just like you go to work today. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Day, night? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It doesn't matter. Though-- well, normally we'd make it at around 4, 5 o'clock in the evening before as the sun is setting. You tried one way or the other to go through that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get food? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, number one, you had rations, which really weren't sufficient. But naturally, there was a black market, so you were buying as much as you needed and as much as you were able to afford. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And where did you get it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Uh, there were people who specialized in buying bread, or meat, and so forth. My father's specialty was gefilte. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But he was in the lumber business, though. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: He was in the lumber business originally. He was-- he also used to have years before a liquor distributorship for the equivalent of a state over here. He was in all kinds of businesses. He used to be a sugar, rice, and flour wholesaler initially. The lumber business was the last business that we had, that was expropriated at that time. Basically, if a man has a good enough mind, he can adapt himself to anything. It's just the mind that's necessary. The business is incidental. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What began to change? I mean, what-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, what started changing then was the fact that the able-bodied men were taken to work camps. And each town would be getting a quota. And normally the Jewish, uh-- how do you call it, the Jewish committee who administered the ghetto would, uh, select people. And-- they would get-- receive the quota from the Germans, and they would select people to send. Uh, whoever was poor went. Whoever wasn't poor paid off. An illicit craft, on all stages. 

Uh, my father didn't go because he was married. Naturally, single people went first. I was too young to go. I was-- I was, uh-- in 1942, I was 14 years of age. So slowly but surely, they would clean the ghetto out. About, uh, 1943, uh, my father decided that probably this ghetto will be liquidated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Liquidated? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How-- what would make him decide liquidated? I mean, that's certainly different than going back to the way things were, which was the attitude you had before. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, we knew that we'll go back to the way it was before, provided the war ends. However, as you were receiving stories about ghettos being liquidated here, ghettos being liquidated there, you determined a pattern. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, did you have a radio? Were you listening to the news, or were you-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, you weren't permitted to have a radio. But the underground pipeline was just as good, even better than the radio. One way or the other, you had all the news that you needed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: With-- with true information? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, you always doubted the information, but subsequently proved it was true. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me, when you say liquidated, did you have in mind getting killed or working? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, liquidate meaning getting closed and-- closed up and everybody being shipped out. Uh, nobody at that time really would whisper Auschwitz and what it is, or Babi Yar what it is, or Majdanek what it is. The same way like over here nobody speaks a lot about cancer. It's an-- it's an unknown quantity. Everybody's afraid of it. The same way there. If you does speak evil, maybe it won't happen to you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Hmm. So your father got wind of something? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, my father got wind that, really, people are being-- the towns are being closed, the Jews are being taken and shipped out. How, what, when, and where we didn't know. So he decided that in a town where my grandparents live, where there's a big factory that is operating for the Army, that that town will remain. So he asked us to-- he told us, rather, he didn't ask us. He told us to go to that town. 

So basically, my brother and I hopped on a train, meaning we didn't just stow away. We walked over to the window, bought tickets, went on the train, and tried to be as unobtrusive as possible. And we came to that town. We walked through the town. We knew it quite well, because after all, our grandfather lived there for years. Came to a certain spot that our uncle told us to show, and we hopped over the fence and came into the ghetto. 

The biggest difficulty for us at that time was to find where our grandfather lived, because we didn't really know where he was moved. Just the same as we, he was moved from his regular house to an apartment over there. And we did find him, and we stayed there. The town was very strict on strangers. And we quite often were being hidden in a room that was completely walled off whenever they were making identity checks. 

Meanwhile, my father and my mother, being unable to get to the train, they went to the next town to my uncle and stayed there with him. But, unfortunately, a very short time thereafter, the SS surrounded the town and, uh, started shipping people out. Uh, my father, uh, hid himself with-- with his wife and the rest of our family in an attic. 

It was-- it was an excellent hiding place, but it was in the middle of the summer. And after two weeks or so, they didn't have any water. So he left the bunker. It's being called a bunker, the hiding place. He left the bunker and approached an SS officer offering him a quantity of gold, diamonds, et cetera, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did he have gold, diamonds, et cetera? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It was a stock and trade. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were they, and how did he hide them? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, normally, I used to hide them. But when he took them over there, he took it himself and he hid them. Normally, uh, houses built in Europe are insulated quite well. In our case, for instance, uh, if you take a look at the ceiling. You go in the attic here, you find a certain amount of insulation. Uh, in Europe, it's not insulation. Between the two, uh, poles of wood, it's filled up with sand all the way. So normally, what we would do is we would go up there, dig a hole in the sand, put it in, and bury it. If somebody wanted to find it, he would have to dig all over the attic to find it, because sand is sand. You really couldn't see anything. 

So he went, and he offered them. And-- what he didn't realize that those were, uh, the real, hard-nosed SS from Auschwitz. And, uh, that guy yelled out that if everybody comes out of the bunker in five minutes, he will ship them out. If he doesn't, he will kill them all. So, uh, everybody came out from the bunker. The SS man shot my father. And everybody was shipped out. 

You'd ask me how I know about it. Uh-- I received in my grandfather's town a postcard from my mother. And the postcard said, listen, I'm on a train going for nowhere. Your father's dead. I hope you and your brother did better. And somewhere or another, she threw it out, and I received it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She threw it out? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: You threw it out from the train, and somebody picked it up and mailed it. She didn't-- there was no regular post office box where she was going. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you receive it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Through the mail, addressed to my grandparents. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever hear from your mother again? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Uh, when I was in Birkenau, which was actually, uh, the other part of Auschwitz, I was told that she was there and she lasted exactly four weeks. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you try to see her? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I came much later there. I came about a year later. I was just-- you-- you come to Birkenau, it's a tremendous concentration camp. And you look around, you try to find people from your town, or from your area. And, uh, by virtue of the fact that my parents were prominent people, there were remembered. And they remembered my mother. Somebody told me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did she last so little? Do you think she passed the first selection? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I really can't tell you. I don't know. You know, it's all a question of luck-- anything else. Or maybe she gave up. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to you after you saw the postcard? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, nothing really. Just stayed with my grandparents. And we made contact with a Polish family that my father made a down payment with to keep us hidden there. And, uh, one day, when the ghetto in Siemiatycze was surrounded by SS, and the feeling was this is it. Regardless whether the Jews are necessary for the war effort or not, that this place will be liquidated too. Uh, I was told, well, you and your brother, hop over the fence, take the train, and go to the woman. So, uh, we just hopped over the fence, took the train, and came to the woman. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get on the train? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I bought a ticket and went on the train. No. As long as you didn't wear the identity card, there's no, uh-- what do you call, no [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] on your forehead that everybody sees that you're Jewish, you know, as you walk on the street, everybody tell you you're Jewish. The only way they can say, if they see your identity-- --recognizes that you're Jewish. 

The only problem you have is that there is a slight accent in your Polish, which sometimes people recognize and see. Some Jews didn't speak Polish at all, because they lived in their group completely and they didn't need it. Or if they spoke any Polish, they spoke broken Polish. Uh, my Polish happens to have been at that time quite excellent, so I had a better chance of passing as a Polack as anybody else. 

So we came to a Polish family, and we stayed there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you scared? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah. Absolutely. But what difference does it make? You really didn't have any choice. Basically, what we're talking about-- wherever I went, I had to go. I couldn't go any place else. So it didn't make any difference you was scared or not. You do what you have to do. 

Uh, we came to the Polish family, and my uncle came, and his fiancee came. Uh, there was another Polish family about five miles away that also agreed to take a group. And that Polish family took my younger uncle, my younger aunt, a niece, and another aunt. They stayed there, and we stayed at this-- at this place. 

Uh, what happened was for some strange reason, one way or the other, the Germans got wind of the other hiding place. There were quite a few Jews being hidden out at that time. And they were being hidden out by Poles, as long as the money lasted. When the money-- as soon as they ran dry of money, the Poles would kick them out of the houses. 

In our particular case, uh, we came across two honest Polish families. One of them was a, uh-- uh, what do you call it? Watchtower Society member, which was unusual for Poland. Polish-- Poland is basically Catholic. So anyhow, the Germans came, and took away my aunt, my uncle, and the two boys. And the Polish woman that was hiding them, she said, I'm not going with you. If you want to kill me, kill me here. So they killed her. 

Uh, when the family that we stayed with found out about it, which was virtually the next day, they said, we don't care, you gotta go. We don't want to be killed. Uh, my uncle's fiance at that time left. She left previously looking for her father. So it was only my uncle and my brother, who at that time was about eight or nine. 

So, uh, we left. Uncle said, Mike, you have Polish papers. You have lots of money. You get on the train and travel, and hide yourself as long as you can. The war will soon end. So basically, what I did is I traveled in the narrow area of Silesia, because any place else, if you want to go through occupational Poland-- we were, incidentally, in the part of Poland that was annexed to Germany. It was considered part of Germany. 

Uh, I traveled there, taking all kinds of long distance trains, going into movies, sleeping. And, uh, it lasted for about four weeks. And, uh, one day, I came into a town called Katowice, which was a big industrial town in Poland. And I went to the buffet area, ordered a beer, and I started drinking, when a man came over next to me. He flipped over his identity. He says, Kriminalpolizei, may I see your papers, please? 

I took out my wallet and started giving him my papers. He took away the whole wallet, looked at the papers. It was pretty good forgery. Your name Richard Olszewski? It means you're Jewish. And your uncle is a boxer. Uh, at that particular time, I thought I recognized somebody in the background whom I knew. After the war, the man denied that he denounced me. I don't know till now whether he did or he didn't. 

Anyhow, uh, I was taken to the Kriminalpolizei, which is basically, uh-- well, I don't know how to translate it. The criminal police, really. They had a distinction there between the criminal police and the political-- political police. I was taken to the prison. Uh, I was kept there for-- for quite a while. I can't tell you how long, because I was in solitary. Uh, at a certain time and point, the Kriminalpolizei transferred me to-- transferred jurisdiction to the Gestapo. And they had me under constant interrogation. Where are other Jews hidden? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you resist when he's accused you of being, uh-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. No, I didn't. I knew the jig was up. Uh, I didn't know where the other Jews were hidden. So, uh, after a while, they became convinced that I didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Torturing you? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, some-- a certain amount of beatings. Uh-- he put some matches underneath my fingernails, but he didn't light them. He just threatened me with it He probably saw that I was scared enough that I would tell him without it. I mean, after all, it wasn't a grown man. I was only about 15. 

So, uh, they transferred us to Birkenau. I arrived there-- and normally arriving in Birkenau, you arrive in a big train with thousands of people. The selection goes left and right. Uh, but in my case, it was a small group, about, uh, 25 or 30 of us. And, uh, Dr. Mengele came in, and left, right, left, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How could Dr. Mengele have been in Auschwitz and Birkenau? He was everywhere. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Surely. Yeah. Well, Birkenau and Auschwitz are one and the same, the version next to it. Uh, the real crematorium where all the burnings were done, it was in Birkenau, not in Auschwitz. Auschwitz was more of a political prison. Auschwitz was-- you had the barracks built from bricks, and Birkenau was all wood. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any other names of-- of Gestapo, or people like Dr. Mengele? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why do you know his name only? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, uh, because when I went to the work camp, I was in the barrack with all kinds of human oddities, shall we say. Uh-- what do you call short people? Uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Midgets. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dwarfs. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Dwarfs. And they were there-- and he had identical twins. He had all kinds of people there. And Mengele was experimenting with them. What kind of kids you have when you have sex, and so on and so forth. They were talking about it. 

So anyhow, after the selection, frankly, I want you to know I was disappointed that he put me to this side instead of the other side. Because I thought the people over there will have it easy, and I'm going to work pretty hard. I still didn't know at that particular time. You know, or maybe-- but I didn't know. Let's put it this way, I didn't know. 

So, uh, they put me through what they call [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] procedure. Washing, et cetera. And they issued me my uniform. And I went to what's called a quarantine lager, which was in A lager, I believe. I was supposed to stay there about 30 days. Then I was-- they were concerned that we would bring diseases to camp. So everybody entering camp would stay in the quarantine for at least 30 days. If you didn't develop any diseases, you would go to the work camp. 

Well, within two weeks or so I came down with typhoid, and they sent me to the hospital. That may sound unusual to you that in Birkenau, the real extermination camp, Jews are being sent to the hospital. Uh, contrary to public knowledge, once you were there, you'll be taken care of unless they decided to empty out the camp for one reason or another. So I went to the hospital, and I recovered within a short period of time. And there was some Polish physicians who took a liking to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to those who remained in the quarantine? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, I found out later on that the ones who remained in the quarantine, uh, were transferred to the Sonderkommando. Sonderkommando meaning the group of people who were involved in, uh, gasing and burning the corpses. I stayed there as a attendant helping out the physician. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the hospital? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: In the hospital. There's-- well, it's not really a hospital. It was a group of barracks. Each one was a hospital. Uh, however, learning from the grapevine that on the frequent occasions the Germans come and take all the sick Jews and send them to the crematorium, uh, I told the physician, listen, I have it very nice, et cetera, uh, but they may come any day and clean me out. Why don't you send me to the work camp? Release me as being a healthy individual. 

Because I wasn't there officially in the capacity of an orderly. I was there officially in capacity of being sick. But they utilized me as an orderly. Uh, he didn't like the idea. But, uh, after I badgered him for a while, he says, OK, I'll let you go. So I went to the work camp. And about a week later, all the Jews in the hospital were cleaned out and sent to the crematorium. 

So I was at the work camp. And, uh, normally-- I was in a-- in a block, shall we say, that was called the reserve block. You know, each block has people who were assigned to do various duties. Some would work at the place where you'd dismantle airplanes, you know, crashed airplanes, and take them for spare parts. Some people would work in construction. Uh, some people worked for the orchestra. I was in the reserve block. Whoever was missing somebody to work would come over there and drag us out. 

Uh, so for a while, I would go working. I recollect, as a matter of fact, uh, I went working at that place where we used to dismantle airplanes. And there was one Russian prisoner of war. And he says to me-- listen, he says, you're too small to work. Why don't you just go and bring us water? It was a hot day, so. I was very fortunate on that score. 

Uh, then the Hungarians started being deported from Hungary. The Hungarian Jews were being brought to Birkenau. So, uh, somebody decided to go make a group that was specialized in unloading the provisions off the railcars. And, uh, I was one of the people who helped them with unloading the different railcars. 

I was also fortunate to that extent that some of the people who were taken from the quarantine to the Sonderkommando, uh, were very nice to me. They were very well fed, so they used to give me some food on and off. So that's how Birkenau was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you-- do you remember any thoughts when you unloaded that stuff-- the thing from the-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. I was very glad I was able to unload it, because I was able to eat. And I wasn't worried. If you could, you opened up and you ate. Uh, at that particular time in Birkenau, I developed an inflammation of the eyelids, blepharitis. And, uh, I would get up in the morning, I wouldn't be able to open my eyes at all. There was one physician right there in the work camp who was very good to me. He would just clean them, and clean them, and clean them. till I recovered. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he Jewish? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yes. Yeah. I would get up in the morning. In order to see, I would put the two fingers like this and push the eyelids apart to be able to go and see him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What came next? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, after a while, they came and they decided that they had a farm on the outskirts of Auschwitz that they would like us to work. So they selected about 30 of us from that particular reserve block, and we went to the farm working. 

It was pretty rough over there, because you weren't part of a mass. To a certain extent, in Birkenau, you were able to get lost. So the kapo tried to hit you, and you turned around, and it just missed you or hit you slightly, then he hit the next guy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But who hit you? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Kapo. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I thought so. But the kapo were not the Germans? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. Kapos were not Germans. But basically, kapos were criminals. Incorrigible criminals who were sent over there forever. They normally-- they normally used to occupy the place of honor. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they Jewish, were they German, were they Polish? What were the kapos? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Uh, I really don't remember. But very few of them were Jewish. Because a kapo normally was a guy who was there for quite a while, like four, five, or even six years already. By virtue of his longevity, he was promoted to a kapo. 

Naturally, some people were giving up hope and were just throwing themselves at the electrified wires on and off-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw that? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Oh, certainly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember one-- an incident? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, I really didn't know anybody. All I can describe is somebody goes, yells, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you see? What was it, at day, night? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, normally, it would be in the morning. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah, I don't know why in the morning. As a matter of fact, I never gave it a thought too until you asked me. Normally, it would be in the morning. Somebody would just go and, uh-- Wait, I remember there was a ditch before you'd be able to get to it. They'd go to the ditch, and then just go with both hands on the wires. 

You had-- you had the electrified wires between the various camps. In other words, I was in the D camp, and the C camp was another camp. And you really didn't have any guards in between strictly electrified wires. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So it was very easy to kill yourself? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Oh, certainly. No problem. All you need is to have a little courage, that's all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did it cross your mind? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. Not really. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you saw those people doing it, what, uh, did you think? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I didn't. I didn't. Uh, there's very little thought process that goes through your mind when you try to preserve yourself. All you do is just-- like an animal, you eat, and you sleep, and you-- and you do what you're told to. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever get any medicine to fix your eyes, or it just cleared up by itself? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, the doctor used to give me a certain amount of drops. Naturally, when we left Birkenau, uh, I didn't have any medicine-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did the doctor get medicine? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: They were getting a certain amount of medicine. It's-- it was a contradiction by itself. In other words, if you were very sick and they didn't want to occupy the crematory, or for one reason or another, they would treat you. They would treat you great. All the medicine, as long as the medicine was available. And then when they wanted to clean out, they cleaned you out. Naturally, uh-- uh, you always had the view of the crematorium burning continuously. Black smog, and smoke, and fire coming out-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew what it was? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: --and the smell. Oh, certainly. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: The Sonderkommando slept in-- in our camp. Uh, matter of fact, the way I remember it, part of my group were the ones who participated in it. Periodically, the SS would change the people in charge of the Sonderkommando, because it was known that if anybody will not survive, it would be the Sonderkommando, because they know everything. So every, uh, six to nine months, they would kill everybody in the Sonderkommando and recruit a the new group. 

That particular group, uh, felt that their time has almost come. So they had a small uprising. They killed the kapo in charge, they killed the SS man in charge, shoved them into the crematorium, and they started running. I believe thy were caught within four or five days, every one of them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: They were killed a little bit sooner. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did-- what did you see of that? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Of what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Or did you hear about-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Of the escape? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Of this uprising escape. What-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, I was told about it. It was common knowledge. You know, the sirens started going. You don't have the sirens too frequently, because there were no escapes from Birkenau. The sirens going on, there was a certain amount of commotion. And then the Sonderkommando did not come back. They always used to come back, you know, change shifts. Did not come back. And, uh, then we were told the story. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what did they do to other people in the camp? Was there other punishment besides killing the people that had escaped? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, you had flogging. And you had-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: For that? For that? Because they escaped? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, you-- you really didn't take-- you didn't publish one person for another. The only thing that you did have-- if a person escaped, you had what was standing on appel, meaning standing at, uh, roll call. And you'd stand until they were good and ready to send you back in. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How long? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It depended. Three hours, four hours, five hours, 20 minutes. It's really you were at the whim of management, shall we say. Uh, normally when you went out to work, there was a 50 piece orchestra playing, and you're marching to that. And, uh, when you came back, the same 50 piece orchestra played. The best people from all kinds of symphonies played in our particular camp orchestra. On Sundays, they gave concerts. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Because management wanted it. In other-- in other words, you were there as a toy for the German to do whatever he pleased. If he wanted a concert, he had a concert. He wanted an opera performance, he had an opera-- you know, a couple of arias and and so forth. The man stood up and- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But who were the performers? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Basically, those were Jews who were in the artwork world and were sent in there. You know, the-- the Jews in the music field. You had Jews in every place. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did they have them play before they went to work and when they came back? That wasn't for performance, that was for something else. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I really don't know. But I-- I can sing that song any time and every time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What does it-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It stays in my mind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you sing it now? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah. It goes, pa rum pum pum, pum pum, pum pum pum. Pum pum pum, pum pum pum, pum pum pum, pum pum pum. And again, and again, and again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do it again, would you? I'm sorry. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: [LAUGHING] 

Well, uh. Pa rum pum pum, pum pum, pum pa rum, pum pum pum. Pum pa rum, pum pum pum, pum pa pum. And you'd walk-- you would march, no matter how tired you were, as you came before the gate. It was achtung, attention. Straighten out your lines. Count them. And a couple would march and yell, Kommando number so-and-so, 54 people, 75 people. I don't remember if we were marched in fives, or six, or tens, whatever it was. And we're marching right through and being counted. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is that song that you sang? What is it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I haven't the vaguest notion. It's a march. 

INTERVIEWER 1: German march? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Probably. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the people playing-- were they-- were they treated better than the people that weren't? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yes. They were treated better. The people working in the kitchen were treated better. Now, uh, my-- my normal joke with people who don't know regarding punishment is that, uh, you cannot jump like a swan. And that was the standard punishment. If You had to jump 20 or 30 times, you were really unable to do-- you know, it's bouncing yourself like that, bending down and jumping. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Jumping? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Jumping. Yeah, like a duck. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For-- for what? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: As punishment. And normally, we would jump, uh-- you know, I don't even remember how it was. But I believe the orchestra was in the back, and you had a pool of water in the front. And you had, like, a-- like a line-- what do you call it? A narrow strip of concrete. And when-- when they would punish you, you would jump, right? And if you couldn't, they'd push you over into the water. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And that was it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, if you could swim, you would get out. If you couldn't swim, you would stay. Anybody tried to escape one way or the other, look behind at the entrance. Behind you as you pass by, the people would try to escape. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said there was music. There was an orchestra in the background when you're jumping like a duck. Was it the same music? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, no. The orchestra in the background was merely as you were marching in. Uh, that particular spot was also utilized for punishment. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was the orchestra always playing this one song? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. That-- that particular song was the-- how shall I say it, the theme song of going to work and coming back. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have you ever heard it since anywhere else? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. No. Every-- every camp had something different. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like Buchenwald? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah. I can sing you the Buchenwald song today too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Will you sing it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: My voice is crummy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That's all right. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: OK. 

[SINGING IN GERMAN] 

INTERVIEWER 1: You remember all of that. What does it mean? Will you translate it? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Certainly. It, uh-- it starts sort of on a poetic basis, saying when the day awakens and the sun smiles. The, uh, kolonne and the, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Columns. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: The columns. I'm watching today's work. Uh-- uh, towards the graying morning. And the night is short, and the day so long. And we carry in our sack a piece of bread. In our heart we carry all our sorrows. And then you say, Buchenwald, I cannot forget you, since you are my destiny. Who leaves you can only determine how wonderful freedom is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, who taught you that song? Who-- who-- who made up that song? Who-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I wouldn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But was it a German song? You sung it-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It's a German song. Buchenwald was a concentration camp before the Second World War. And Buchenwald, basically, in contrast to Birkenau was a camp-- it was run by political prisoners, rather than by criminal prisoners. So there was a difference. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And did you speak German before the war? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You learned German in the camp? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I learned German at camp, and I learned German in Switzerland afterwords. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But that song you remember, like you were singing in-- in Polish, or in Yiddish, or in English? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: That's right. Yeah. Exactly. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you play an instrument? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. No. What I remember only is my mother wanted me to play the fiddle, and the teacher was always breaking my fingers to make it right. And I never did it right. My mother was very unhappy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's puzzling how you remember this song so well. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Why not? Why not? Just the same way like you probably remember your college song. I'm a graduate of Buchenwald. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But is your memory for music or for songs? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Not really. I remember-- what do you call it, uh-- now I probably don't remember anymore, but on and off when I take a shower, I remember my father's nigunim, the way he used to sing at the prayers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you sing them? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, I don't remember a thing. Right now, I don't. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you sing them in the shower? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you ever sing to yourself the Buchenwald song? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I'm sorry? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you ever sing to yourself the Buchenwald song? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No. Never do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you say you hear it in your head? I mean, that was total recall, and you haven't sung it since? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: That's right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened? You were saying how you went to the work camp outside of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh, let me-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, I'm sorry. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us about the Buchenwald and the ending. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: About what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The ending in Buchenwald. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Well, uh, I was, I believe, in block 65, or block 66, which was the block for the youngsters. Actually, that was the last building in camp. And that one was probably an auxiliary building, because the others were more as a brick construction, and that one was of wood. 

And, uh, Buchenwald was being evacuated by the Germans, as the American armies were coming closer. And one day, they decided everybody's leaving. Excuse me. So, uh, we decided-- we, collective we, group of us-- I don't even remember who, what, how, when, and where, that we're not going. And somebody had the great idea that, after all, there's an attic. Why don't we go and hide in the attic? 

So we went and hid on the attic, and we stayed there for quite a while. The Germans came chasing everybody and didn't see anybody in that particular block. They started ripping down the ceiling. Uh, quite a few people came tumbling down. I was lucky I was hidden between two supports for the roof. So even after they ripped it down, I didn't come falling down and nobody noticed me. And I stayed there till the-- we were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was that? How did you hear that, know that? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Uh, the only way I know is that-- is that, number one, the towers were not occupied by sentries. And somehow or other, our block [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], which was the guy in charge of our particular block, uh, was running towards the fence with a gun in his hand. A regular shotgun. I was wondering at that time how he got the shotgun. And he snipped the wires on the fence. That's how I knew it. 

The next time I knew about it, when-- there was a regular zoo in Buchenwald. Wolf So when we were liberated, they made a tremendous stew for everybody. We didn't eat meat in time immemorial. And we all developed a beautiful case of diarrhea, all of us. Quite a few died because of that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was a zoo? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yeah, a zoo. We had a bear and all kinds of animals, who became slaughtered and who made a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the zoo was for what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I don't understand. Where did the zoo animals come from? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: We had a little miniature zoo for the SS people who were living, not in camp, but in the outskirts of the camp. And then when they-- we were liberated, they just took the animals, they slaughtered them, they made a goulash out of it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you saying that during the course of your internment in Buchenwald, the SS troopers had a zoo outside the camp for their pleasure? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Right. Yeah. I don't know that for a fact. All I know is that I was told that the zoo was taken, slaughtered, and here is a beautiful goulash, strictly meat. And you can imagine what happens to somebody who weighs 65 pounds and eats pure meat and was deprived of it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is there-- 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I was running to the-- to the bathroom on the outside. I couldn't make it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How has it changed you? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this. 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: It made me very cynical. I don't believe in God. I don't believe in humanity. Don't believe in anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How does it change your behavior toward people? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: I don't trust people. Very few that I do trust. The only one I trust is my brother, really. Maybe two or three more people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is he here? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: Yes, he lives in Chicago. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was he with you most of the time? 

MICHAEL ROSENBERG: No, he was not. As a matter of fact, I-- I didn't tell you his story. His story is very simple. Uh, we left that Polish family, and then I was caught. My uncle and he were hiding, and uncle said, listen. The two of us together don't stand a chance. And he was, what, seven or eight. He says, go back to the Polish family and tell her, look, there's no place I can go. If you want to report me to the Germans, report me to the Germans. 

So he went back to the Polish family. The Polish woman was there. And she took pity on him. She says, listen, my husband will not permit it. So what I will do is I'll keep you in the house until the time comes that my husband comes back from work, In which case, you go to the dog house-- you know, they had a watch dog there, and sleep in the dog house with the dog-- 