[SIDE CONVERSATION] INTERVIEWER 1: We're going to go back into the past. Where are you from? 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, I grew up in Czechoslovakia. I went to school there and lived there through my teens. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT: In Prague. In the city, in the center of the heart of the city, in the old city. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the old city? 

SUBJECT: Oh, very well. I very vividly remember the walks we used to take on Sundays. We would walk up to the castle in kind of a circle and come back down. And I went back in '72 and did that same walk again. And nothing much has changed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As a Jewish person, did you feel any differences, any discrimination? Of course, you were very young. 

SUBJECT: Before the war, not really, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Would you mind repeating my question so that it's a full sentence? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I'm not aware of there being much discrimination against Jews before the war. It was a pretty open and integrated society. I remember some cat-calling of names on the street once. But in my-- I was in a public school. And, uh, there was a large Jewish minority there. And-- no, nothing I remember of any-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: So when did things change? 

SUBJECT: Well, uh-- there was an influx of German immigrants, and they kind of brought the fear with them, which-- until-- until '39, Czechs were saying, oh, it's not going to happen here. Nothing is going to happen here. We are safe. We are all right. 

And, uh, when the Germans came, and-- the German-- first the German immigrants, and we still were kidding ourselves that it's safe. But then in-- the Germans marched in on March 15, '39. That was kind of a shock to the system. 

I remember the day very vividly. I-- I don't know why. I went to the post office, and it was sleeting. And on a corner of the street, there was standing a-- a-- a Czech policeman directing traffic and a German soldier next to him who took over. And the Czech policeman stood there, and he didn't know what to do, because the German had taken over directing the traffic. And it was kind of a really classic illustration of the conflict of power, the two of them standing there, and the German taking over. We had had no warning at all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were they like marching in? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was in my young teens. And, uh, I don't even know why my mother let me go to the post office that day. It seemed, in retrospect, not the best idea. Well, it was very orderly, all very orderly, German orderliness. Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw columns of soldiers? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell us? 

SUBJECT: I had not seen any before. And, um-- of course, as a young girl, I was very apolitical. And it really didn't interest me terribly much. I didn't think it had much to do with me, as a-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you realize-- how did you realize that there was a special fear or a special concern for Jews? 

SUBJECT: I'm not really aware that that happened suddenly on one day, that there's an incident I could pin it on. Well, legislation started being passed, and then-- well, the first thing, I suppose, that happened, my mother started talking about emigration and took me out of the public school and put me into a private language school, because she wanted me to learn English fast. And-- so-- and afterwards, I was kind of apprenticed in a trade, because I was supposed to have something I could do when I came over to wherever we were going. 

And then first, the public schools were closed to Jews. We weren't allowed into public schools. Then we weren't allowed into restaurants. Then we weren't allowed into parks. Then we weren't allowed into schools. 

Then the-- this little workshop I was working was, you had to have special restrooms for Jews. And of course this was like a workshop with 10 people. And this was impossible for him, the man, to comply with this kind of demand. So he had to let me go. So by that time, I was realizing that things were different for me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when did the-- did they come and take you away someplace? Did somebody separate you from your family? How did it all happen? 

SUBJECT: Oh, well, then we-- we got uh, in October, '44-- October, '42, we were called up by a notice to appear in the fairgrounds. There was a fairgrounds there in building-- a big building, covered building-- and to assemble for a transport. And, you know, people around us had been evacuated, transported for years, since '42-- since '41, I think. I'm not quite sure of the starting date. I know we went in forty-- '42. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did they wait to choose your family or you? Why the delay for you? 

SUBJECT: They were just picking it by locations. Like, my mother's family, my mother was one of a big family. She had four sisters and two brothers. And one of them had a kind of a summer house outside of Prague. And when the restrictions to housing came, they were moving us together into smaller-- like in-- we were fortunate that we stayed in our apartment. They moved two families in with us, but we didn't have to change apartments. 

But they were evacuated from their apartment. And so they went and lived in the summer house, and this family moved in with them. And they went before we did, because they were evacuating the outlying districts-- evacuating, transporting-- before they did us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When you said that you-- "they went," did you know where they went? 

SUBJECT: We knew they went to camps in Poland, but of course we had no idea what-- what they were like. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But how did people explain it to themselves? What rumors? 

SUBJECT: I don't know whether I was too young and too uninterested to listen to rumors or-- or whether there weren't that many. It was pretty tight security, you know. There was no postal connection with anybody. Once they left, you never heard from them again. And we just thought there-- there was no postal connections. It never thought of anything else. I didn't. I don't know whether other people did. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was there a particular time that it hit you? That that was it? Or not really? 

SUBJECT: Not really, not too much. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the day when the appell assembly, where you were all called together? 

SUBJECT: Well, it-- not that distinctly. The-- the-- the day when I-- my mother and I went from Prague to Theresienstadt in Czechoslovakia, and that was still-- within Czechoslovakia, it was guarded by Czech gendarmes. There were no Germans there. 

Uh, it was-- they called it a settlement area, and it wasn't the terror of the concentration camps. I mean, there was no jails there. There was no interrogations there. There-- the only thing they were doing is they were shipping people out from there. It was an assembly point, really. 

And I guess we were lucky that we stayed there for two years. And, uh-- I was working, and my mother was working. And we had extra rations. So we did-- we-- we lived OK. We also had a couple of parcels from home, from some family that were not Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you mentioned you and your mother, and other men? 

SUBJECT: Well, my mother's family had gone before-- you know, in a different direction. And my-- I was an only child. My father died before the war. So it was just my mother and me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So, when you were in the camp, in Theresienstadt, um, you just worked as a-- how? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I worked in an office, and my mother worked in a factory there. They were splitting cellulose and Glimmer [mica], I don't know what the English name is for it. I never seen the stuff again. Uh, and I had friends in the kitchen, and we weren't hungry. Now, in a room this size, we were living 35 people. We had three-layer banks-- bunks, and there was no room to walk in between. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In a 12 by 12 room, you were living 35 people? 

SUBJECT: Yes. For two years. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Oh. Would you say that all in a piece? 

SUBJECT: In a room about the size of this one, I'd say 12-- it could have been a little bigger-- 12 by-- by 18, it was longer-- we were in three-layer ba-- bunks, and there were 35 people in that room. It was a little old house, and there was-- the bathrooms were-- the horror there was just two kind of outhouses on the-- in the hallway to serve the whole house that was equally full. 

And one year the Red Cross Commission came, and they emptied out all the rooms that were at street level, you know, and put one couple in each room and moved every 35 people-- relatively, depending on the size of the room-- out, and just jammed us up more, so that they should-- could show the Red Cross how humane this place was. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think when they did that? 

SUBJECT: [SIGH] I can't say. I don't know what I thought. I just thought what fools they were to fall for it. There-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did your mother say? Did you discuss it with her? 

SUBJECT: Well, I was pretty optimistic the war would be over, and everything would be all right again. You know, I mean, it's-- it was just something to live through, and it would be all right again. I didn't-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean, you actually saw the Red Cross people walking? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I did see them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And, you say, you could not say a word to them? 

SUBJECT: No. I mean, they were flanked by-- by Germans, and, you know, escorted through and shown around. And the streets they were taken through had been cleaned up and the houses painted. And on the ground floor level, there was one couple in each room. And they showed the Red Cross this lovely, um, settlement that was so clean and nice. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you wish to run up to them, the Red Cross quarters? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think we watched whether they could be got-- you know, whether there was any access to them. But they were never left by the Germans, so there was no way to get to them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So for two years, this went on daily. And wasn't there conversation with people-- if not between you and your mother, between you and your friends-- about where other people were disappearing to or being taken to? 

SUBJECT: No, it-- it was-- we did get postcards from people who had been transported, and they were allowed to print 15 words, you know. And they kind of tried to convey that it was not as good and to stay where we were was the strong message, you know. But, uh, it didn't convey very much of what was really happening. 

I must say, you know, the while, I and my mother, we were both young and healthy at the time. We were quite comfortable. A lot of people died, and just from undernourishment and stress, and especially the older people. I mean, the amount of food that seemed to be sufficient for me or my mother-- also, we had some extras. The old people died, I mean, in the hundreds and thousands. I think Theresienstadt turned over, like, 300,000 people within the two years we were there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about if you got sick? What about the medical care? 

SUBJECT: There was some medical care there. They had hospitals. They had hospitals in Auschwitz. 

I mean, the Germans are-- were that crazy, I suppose-- I was going to say "are that crazy"-- that they had these-- within Auschwitz, within the extermination camp, where there were barracks and barracks of people, and where they would gas and shoot people by the day. Then if somebody has an ailment, they went into hospital. They cured them of typhoid, and then they-- because they were weak, they sent them to the gas ovens. Don't ask me for the rationale behind all this. It seems it wasn't very sensible. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened-- at the end of two years, you were designated to leave. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And where did you go? 

SUBJECT: We went to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT: Well, there was a call up again. It was 2,658 people. I know because I was in the last carriage, and this was numbered and everybody was counted. And it-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The number of the carriage, do you remember? 

SUBJECT: No. The tag we wore. I still have. I kept that. Um-- my transport number, I still have that. 

And we were in cattle wagons. They were covered at that time. I mean, they-- they had slats, but there was a roof over them. And this was in October '44. And we went to Auschwitz. It took two days, 48 hours or better, to get there. 

And then when we arrived in Auschwitz in the evening, we could see this rather ghostly landscape, these flash-- flood lights on the barbed wire, which went on for miles and miles and miles. And it was all you could see. And at first I thought it was a mining town, you know. It was really kind of hard to understand or see what-- believe. And then when we stopped and got out of the carriages, of course, we were immediately separated on the platform of the station. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I wanted to ask you about being in the carriages. I mean, two days in a cattle car. What did you think? How did you act? What did you feel? What happened to people? It must have been, you know. 

SUBJECT: Well, we had two buckets. From was water, and one for other needs. And there were two children in the car with us, one like a four-year-old and a six-year-old. And then there was an infant in the car. And those kids were so good, it was absolutely amazing. 

Uh, I-- I don't know. It was-- I suppose I managed to really kind of insulate myself and say I-- I wasn't really participating in all that. I built a wall around me and said, that's not happening to me. I-- it can't be true, and I'm not participating in this. And I just really shut myself off. And that's how I went through the whole war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many people were in that car? 

SUBJECT: It was about 30. There-- it wasn't the same as the-- the coal wagons of-- that later on took us through Germany. I mean, that-- those were open, and there-- there was-- we could all sit. There was enough room to sit, which was a difference. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were insulated. But when you said you saw the miles of barbed wire and the flood lights, what then? 

SUBJECT: That became scary. That really became scary. I suppose, then, some kind of an inkling that-- I mean, we had heard of concentration camps. But we had heard of concentration camps for political prisoners. You know, we had heard of Dachau that had been in operation since '36 or something like that, for Communists and socialists and political prisoners. Not for us. Not for Jews. Not for me. Certainly not for me. I had nothing to do with all that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you wearing? I mean, what-- how protected were you? 

SUBJECT: Well, we had several layers of clothing on, because we were not allowed to take any luggage. I don't remember what I was wearing. I just remember when we got out of the train in Auschwitz that we were being separated right on the platform, as you stepped out of the train and sent left and right. And they wanted to separate me and my mother, and my mother said, we are mother and daughter, leave us together. So he motioned us to one side together. He did want to separate us. And then the next-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Which side? 

SUBJECT: I think the left. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your mother asked, can't we stay together? Or she said we want to stay together? I mean, what made them respond? 

SUBJECT: I think her words were we are mother and daughter we would like-- can't we stay together? Something like that. I don't remember the actual words. I mean, it was in German, and I don't really know what she said. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You speak German? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you repeat it in the language? 

SUBJECT: I'm trying to recollect the actual words. Wir sind Mutter und Tochter, wir moechten zusammenbleiben. We would like to stay together. I think it's what she said. I'm not sure at this stage. Anyway, in the morning, we heard that whoever wasn't with us-- there was 200 women where we were in the morning-- was dead. They all had gone straight to the gas oven, 2,456 people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You knew? 

SUBJECT: In the morning we were told. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were told what? 

SUBJECT: That everybody who was not in that round room with us was dead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

SUBJECT: Gassed. They told us. There was no-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who told you? 

SUBJECT: The-- what they called the kapos, the supervisors. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Some Jewish, some not, some just political prisoners, Polish political prisoners. No Germans there inside the barracks. That-- we were told right the minute we were separated and sent over to that one side that this was all that was left of that trainload of people. And amongst this group was my girlfriend, whose mother had gone to the other side, and was my gym teacher, whose children had been sent to the other side. That-- that was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: This was the first time you had ever heard about gas chambers? 

SUBJECT: That was the first time I ever heard about gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you feel? 

SUBJECT: I mean, it was just too big and too shocking to absorb. My mother started crying, but I still somehow refused to believe it. I just didn't. I suppose in a way she knew that she had just narrowly escaped. But I just-- it was too monstrous, too big. It was unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you do that day? I mean, you heard this terrible news. What did you do? 

SUBJECT: Well, they kept us in that long hall, which was cement floors and nothing else, all day. And uh, uh-- sat around and cried, I suppose. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No beds? 

SUBJECT: Talked to some-- hm? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No beds? 

SUBJECT: Oh, beds. I never saw a bed again until the end-- after the war. We talked-- one of the girls in our group, her boyfriend from-- had come over us somehow. He had-- and-- and I went to her and asked her what he had told her, were we better off here? Was that true, you know? He had brought her shoes and socks, which was a fortune. Uh, they had stripped us at that stage. 

And, uh, so I went to her and asked for confirmation. Did he-- had he confirmed that that was indeed true? And she said, yes. There was a very famous clarinetist with us too in that train. And he had an eye infection. He wore dark glasses, so he went to the gas. It was pretty-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said it was a barracks with no furniture, nothing-- 

SUBJECT: No. These were the kind of reception rooms. And there was cement, cement floors. And-- and then afterwards, they asked us to strip, and we were shaved. I mean, our heads and body were shaved. And we were herded through-- past soldiers, so now I was, like, 13 or 14, and I was walking naked past soldiers all the time, which-- really was-- after the first day or so, you get used to it. 

But, um-- and then we were herded into a bathhouse with overhead showers. By that time we knew that the gas chambers were dressed up as shower rooms. And we decided, there were holes in the windows. The glass was broken. This wasn't a gas chamber. So, that's, um-- and then we were herded into barracks. Barracks were long, big, wooden kind of Quonset huts with-- with planks that people would-- we were lying six on one plank. And then one person wanted to turn. We had six of us to turn, because there wasn't any room for anything else. 

Um, and then we were-- the-- the worst-- I don't know whether it was-- the worst part for me at the time was, we had-- we had roll call every morning. This was in Poland in October, and Poland in October was cold, and we didn't have much clothes. They had issues us-- they didn't issue us uniforms. Uniforms are solid and protective. We had just been given old rags. 

And we would stand on roll call from 6 o'clock in the morning till 11 o'clock at noon, or something like that, until every head in the camp was accounted for. And this was, like, 100,000, and the roll call would never work. And they come back and count again. And in the evening again, this was way before dark till way into daylight, and in the evening again for three, four, or five hours, we would be standing for roll call. 

And for the first three or four days in Auschwitz, we never got anything to eat. After first day, somebody complained to one of the kapos, and evidently we should have been issued rations, which hadn't happened. So she got us some soup. That was the only food I got in six days in Auschwitz, was one soup. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Water? 

SUBJECT: There was water. Yeah, I don't remember being thirsty. 

INTERVIEWER: Excuse me. We have to change the tape. 