DORIS SIMON: My name is Doris Simon. Today is May 31, 1982. We're at my home in Lawrence, New York. And we're interviewing Mr. Joseph Mandelbaum. Mr. Mandelbaum, could you please tell me your name and the city, the date, and the country in which you were born? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Yes. I was born in Poland in the city of Szczakowa in the year 1922 in December 2nd. It was Hanukkah because in Europe, in Poland, that's how they remember the dates because of the holidays, the Jewish holidays. And I grew up in a small town, population of about 3,000 people. Between the 3,000 people was about 500 Jewish-- not families, but 500 persons. And it was a quiet life. My parents, we had a lot of children. I happened to be the youngest in our family. 

DORIS SIMON: Could you tell me those who comprised your family? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Yes. 

DORIS SIMON: Your sisters and brothers? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: My father, my father's name was Samuel. And my mother's name was Golda. And my sister's name was Helena. She was the oldest. And after Helena came Shia. 

After Shia was Samson. And after Samson was Wulf. And after Wulf was Mendel. And after Mendel was Hamir. And in 1922, I was born. 

My name is Joseph. And we have a nice, quiet life in those days. As a young child, I don't remember too much. But as-- as was-- as I-- I was growing up, I felt-- then I saw that, you know, it wasn't-- we weren't too-- we weren't rich. My parents worked hard, especially with a very large family. 

DORIS SIMON: What did your father do for a living? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: My father was a businessman, a small businessman. And it was very hard to make a living in those days after the First World War. But somehow we managed. 

As the children were growing up, they started to work-- especially my sister became right away a dressmaker. And this was in-- in the '20s, in '28, '29, in the '30s. And she helped out my parents. 

My older brothers when they reached 15, 16, they went to work. And they were helping out. So it was easier. I went to heder. So also all my brothers went to heder and to public school. 

We were religious-- not ultra orthodox, but religious. We went to shul every day and every Saturday. And for the holidays, our-- the whole family got together. We were always together celebrating. 

I attended the public school. And after public school, we went to heder, like I mentioned. And in school, we always felt that we were Jewish because the majority of the children in the class were Gentile. And they always let us know. 

I was having prayers. And I looked different than them. And, you know, we spoke always with an accent like, even we speak now. But I used to speak with an accent. I couldn't pronounce the i and this and that. 

And we had fights with the children. As I was growing up, I understood more, much more than when I was younger. And then I felt that I didn't get in a lot of fights between the Gentiles and the boys. 

DORIS SIMON: Did you yourself ever have any antisemitic experiences before the war? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: I had quite a few-- just fights. I remember one incident. And it was-- must have been in 1936. We went-- from the school, we-- we-- we traveled to see something. There was an airplane accident. A plane fell down in one of the Pole.... 

So we were a few Jewish kids. But the majority were Gentiles. So we went into a big fight. 

But then we-- we called the attention to the teachers. But they said, it's nothing. Don't-- don't even mention it because, you know, when the Jews were beaten up, then they didn't make no-- no fuss over it. But these were minor things. 

But, as I grew older, I understood more. I used to read the papers. And there was a lot of antisemitic incident in Poland before the war. And this probably led to something which happened later on in 1939 when the war broke out. 

But our family was always together. I had grandparents. And my father had like four or five brothers and two sisters. And we always went together to shul. 

It was very, very nice life. We didn't know from a different life. We lived in the small town. In the whole-- our whole life was our family. 

So Saturdays and then holidays we were always together. Matter of fact, Sukkos we used to eat in the same Sukkot because, you know, we wanted to eat it together with our-- parent-- with our grandparents. And this is what happened-- that's how much I remember until-- 

DORIS SIMON: As the war became closer, as you thought that the war was coming, what did your family do? How did they decide what actions to take? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: We couldn't believe until actually it happened. They were talking about the war because my one-- three-- two of my brothers were mobilized in 1938. They reached the age of 21. Every 21-year-old was mobilized if he fit-- if he passed the medical and he passed the health thing. And they were mobilized. 

So-- and then everybody talked it's going to be a war because we found out about Hitler and-- but I mean, we couldn't believe it-- what it's going to happen-- I mean, how if he's going to react. We heard a lot of incident which happened to the German Jews because when Hitler came to power the-- the-- the Polish Jews, which were living in Germany, they fled right away because they had to leave Germany-- the-- the Jews which were born in Poland and they lived in Germany. So they used to tell us what's going on. So that, you know, we figured it's happens only in Germany. It'll never happen to us. 

Until September 1, 1939, when the war broke out. But, you know, as we were children, we didn't realize it to think, because I used to like soldiers. I used to like play war as children. And we-- we were-- we were making fun. We thought it's going to be a lot of fun if it's going to be a war. 

But then later on, it didn't look so. The minute the war broke out, we felt it right away because the first thing when the Germans marched into Poland, the first thing they started right away to look for Jews and getting them to do all kinds of dirty work and all kinds of work and all kinds. They mistreated them for no reason. 

DORIS SIMON: How old were you when the war broke out? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: When the war broke out, I was 17 years old in 1939. I was 16. I was to be 17 in-- in December. And then they mobilized. They took us right away to work because in the town where-- where we-- where I lived, they had a camp, a military camp. 

And, uh, we used to see the Polish soldiers all the time. And as the Polish soldiers escaped-- because, as the German marched in, the Polish people ran away-- so the German took over the camp. And they-- we used to work for them. We used to clean and do all kinds of dirty work for the Germans-- my father, myself, and the whole town-- the-- I mean, most of the Jewish people, which were able to work, worked over there. 

And then this was going on until one day-- yeah, when the Germans walked in, the first-- in the first-- the week, our town evacuated. Mostly Jewish people evacuated because we ran away. But the Germans were so fast with their machines and with their planes, they caught up with us. And they broke down all the railroads and this. 

So we stopped-- they stopped us. And they sent us back home. As we were going back home, we saw the first incidents where we saw they were killing Jewish people for no reason whatsoever. We were lucky that nobody from our family got killed at that time. But quite a few families were killed just-- just because you were Jews. 

My father, they caught my father, yes-- and they cut off his beard. My father had a beard. To us, it was a big thing. But thank God that nothing else happened at that time to him. 

And then when we stayed in [INAUDIBLE], and they set up all kinds of torture things, especially the German police in our town. In every town, they set up a police headquarters. They-- the Polish police was completely out. And they took over. 

So it was like a military police. And they were very, very strict. And they were very rude. It was unbelievable. They set up all kinds of torture. I was never-- I wasn't-- I was never caught. 

But one of my cousins which was caught, for no reason whatsoever-- he went out. It was-- they had a curfew. After 6 o'clock PM, nobody could go out. And he had to go out for something. They caught him. And he was accused of something. 

And he did-- they did all kinds of torture with his fingernails. And they-- they put them underneath a table. And they did all kinds of things which is inhuman. At that time, it was terrible. But, later on, when I went to the camps, I've-- I felt it on my own skin, certain things. 

DORIS SIMON: At that time, how did your family life begin to change because of the war? What happened to your family? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: My family-- my family, my mother and father was home and myself and my brother Hamir. The two older brothers went all the way. As the German came in, they went to the Soviet Union. They ran all the way to east. 

I was the youngest. And the next, my brother next to me, was also young. So we remained-- remained with my parents because the parents were alone-- and my sister Helena. So really it was very sad because one of my brothers-- the two of my brothers which were in the Polish army were wounded in the-- in the war against the Germans. One was wounded in the same part of the body from a shrapnel, which is a bomb from a piece which fell-- fell away. 

They were both wounded. One went to the German stalag. This means German-- not discipline not peak-- prisoner-- Prisoners Of War, POW. And the other one was one that when he went to Russia and he found my two other brothers. 

So the three brothers were together for a while in the Soviet Union. And they were there with brother Mendel, which was wounded. And he fell into the Germans, and was a prisoner of war for quite a few, or maybe a year, a year and a half. And then they released him. And he came back to our home. 

In the meantime, and they-- they-- they needed 100 people to work for, eh, labor. And they-- they-- they took the whole town of men in one place. And they picked us up. And from the 100 people, they picked 50. I was between the 50 people. 

My father was there, too. But I told him, I'll go. And my father should stay home with my mother and my sister. So I like volunteer-- not volunteer, I had to go. But my father could have gone instead of me. 

So this was my first experience. I was very young. And I was scared because I was never away from my parents. I was-- and a small town kid. And then started my life in camps without my parents. 

So I remember they took us to a-- to a certain town. And they caught us together, a few hundred people. And we went to a labor camp. The first camp, the name of the camp was Zacler. The work, what we did in Zacler, we were building superhighways. 

DORIS SIMON: What year was this? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: This was-- the year was 1940. It must have been like eight months in the war. And I was in Zacler. And we were working very hard. And it was very tough. 

The life over there without parents and without-- we had to do everything for ourselves. And we used to get hit because I-- we were not experienced to do this type of work. We had to break down mountains and unload thousands and thousands of like the sand and-- and-- and bricks. We had to level out highways and level out-- and build bridges because the super-- the highway in Germany had to be completely leveled. And, secondly, the labor didn't cost them because the people who worked there, well, were not paid. 

And we had German police with dogs watching us. We were-- our living quarters was barracks. And that's how we lived and worked every day, six, seven days a week. It was very hard. 

But then, after a while, in 1942, January of 1942, y- y- yeah, the war broke out between Germany and Russia. As the war broke out, they had to switch a lot of things in the camps because they needed more people to work because, in Russia, the measurements from the railroad was 6 centimeter wider than the Polish railroad. And we had to-- our work supposed to be to level it out because they would have to ship thousands and thousands of trains with-- with stuff for the war. So as the war broke out-- the war broke out, I think, in June 1941 between Germany and Russia-- they took us. 

They liquidated this camp. And they took us to a different camps, where we were helping the German government or the German army. We were helping them to work on the railroad. And we were shipping all kinds of military equipment into the Russian front. 

DORIS SIMON: Once you were sent to the camp, did you ever hear from your parents? Were you ever-- ever able to contact them? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: In the beginning, we did hear from the parents. I used-- I used to get mail every once in a while. And then one day in June of 1942, I received the postcard. And this was the last contact I had with my parents, that they are-- they said they-- they're staying on a station. The whole town is there. 

And they're going someplace. And they don't know where. And this was the last time. I didn't know that this was the last time by that time. But I remember well when I read this postcard that this-- this was it, and this-- they-- my parents-- how they were in a-- in a ghetto at that time because when-- when-- when they liquidated the town, it was 1942. 

They sent them out of town. They made a ghetto from the whole families. They put them in-- like two or three families in one room. 

I wasn't there. But I used to get mail. And I used to get information from friends which came to our camps. And it was very, very bad until they liquidated and they were sent-- after the war, I found out that they were sent, the whole town, the people who couldn't go to work, or they were too old or too young, or they were with small children, they all went to Auschwitz. And nobody survived from this town, from-- from those people. 

DORIS SIMON: Were you ever part of a transport? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: I was quite a few times part of a transport. But somehow I was lucky that our transport, the transport I was in, we survived. 

DORIS SIMON: Were you aware that there was a selection process in the transport? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: No. At that time, we were not aware. I was-- whatever, every time, or I volunteered, or I had to go. So my luck was all the time that-- that I made the-- the-- the places I went through, I survived. And quite, and a few survived. 

If I would have gone to another place where my other friends went, nobody came back. Nobody returned. So it was pretty scary. So we were going-- we were going back to Gros Myslowitz was the name of the camp, which I went from Zacler. 

You know, with all we worked, that was the-- the first very hard, bad winter. And this was the winter when the Germans were at war over there. And we used to send-- 

DORIS SIMON: 1942? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: 1942, December 1942. The German people used to collect-- I mean, the German-- the war machine used to collect all kinds of things to help the German soldiers, like skis and sleds and all kinds of things. And this was our job to-- we use to-- it used to come to our camp. And we used to load on wagons into the Russian front. 

We didn't know exactly how the situation was at that time. We used to get-- some of the people used to find a paper which was outdated. So we knew that the war was on in there. And sometimes we felt in our skin when they were doing-- and they were winning the war. They were beating us. 

And when they were losing the war, it was worse. So this is how we-- we could have seen on the faces of the Germans, the one who were watching us, how the situation is in the world at that time. This was in 1942. And I was-- we were there till March 1943. 

I was-- at that time, I was very sick because when I-- when we left from-- from Gros Myslowitz, we went to Markirch. Over there we worked on the railroad, building the German railroad, which they-- they needed more and more things to transport. So as we were carrying the iron-- the iron bars, some-- a bar hit me. And it hit my foot. 

And I was-- it was bleeding. And my foot was swollen. It was very bad. And there was no medicine. 

I-- you know, I was afraid even to ask because I would-- I was afraid to stay on the sick-- on the sick leave because once you would say you were sick, and every other day they used to come. And they took-- they picked up the sick people, which they would then, you knew that the sick people are going to a place, which-- of no return. So I was sick. And I went to work every day. I didn't want to stay. 

In this camp, quite a few of my friends-- this was the first time in my life in which I saw somebody die. One of my uncle died in this camp. He was, at that time, probably 40 or 45, which was very old in those days. They mostly which survived were the 17 and 18-year-olds because they couldn't do the type of work, especially the religious Jews. They never worked with a shovel, or whatever. 

And here the Germans, they were so strict. They only accepted-- they wanted we should work vorschriftmassig. Vorschriftmassig means to work exactly the way you want-- they want you to do. And it was very hard. 

DORIS SIMON: Could you-- could you describe a typical day in camp from morning until the night, how your day was. 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: A typical day in the camp-- I could describe, of course it was different in different camps. But let's me go back to Markirch, 1943. We used to get up very early in the morning. And it was very-- in the wintertime, was very, very cold. We never had warm water to wash ourselves. 

And we changed the clothes once in a-- in a few weeks. And we were never dressed right. In the wintertime, we just wear a little-- a little outfit. Like 6 o'clock, we all had to run. We used to get just a coffee because the bread we used to get at night. 

But I was so afraid we shouldn't take away, or somebody shouldn't steal it because everybody was so hungry. So we-- as long-- when I ate it up, nobody could take it away from us. So this was in the morning. 

We were-- we went outside. We were making a apell, an apell. Apell means a gathering. And we were like 400, 500. You get to stand still like an hour until everything settled up because we worked in different colonies, in different companies we work for. 

And then they counted us over and over and over. They counted. They called names. In the-- in the labor camps, the names, and a day later the numbers. 

And then we-- we-- we had to walk sometimes two miles or five miles. It all depends what kind of a job we did this particular day. And then we had to put in a day's work. And the day-- that day was very long, from morning till night. 

We stopped for lunch. But there was no lunch. We-- we never ate. I was fasting every day, 24 hours. We ate-- ate dinner with the-- with the bread in one shot. 

And we were waiting for the next day, for the next night. We finished the work. And then we marched. We had to march home. We-- everybody wanted already to go home because you knew. 

You couldn't wait because you knew you were going to get food. And the whole life was only concentrated in food because to be hungry and to be 17 or 18 years old, and to be hungry day and night, this is just indescribable. You cannot-- nobody should know about it. But nobody should feel it. It was very tough. 

So we couldn't wait to go home. We were praying that the soup shouldn't be watery we should get. But, you know, the whole thing was dreaming. 

And at the-- you know, while being home at night, you only used to talk how good it was before the war, home with your parents. And you were-- we didn't-- food was no problem, although we were not rich. But at least we had-- we were never hungry. 

So often we get-- when we got home, we had the meal. We had to wash ourselves. And we went to sleep. But in the winter time, it was very cold. In the summertime, it was very hot. 

The room we lived in was unlivable. We were between 20 and 30 people in one room. The size of the room must have been like 12 feet by-- by 15. And the bunks or beds, three-- three up. 

I was young and slim and skinny. I always slept on top. Sometimes it was good. And sometimes it wasn't. But the-- the-- all the people had to be down because they-- they were not this-- this-- fest to me to go out. 

And that's how it went on, day after day after day. Some days, sometimes, they needed something special to work, or we had to-- they-- they used to come in a train with cement to unload. Forget it. They-- they-- after a day's work, and after this, they caught us. 

We had to volunteer. Nobody wanted to volunteer. So they-- everybody was hiding. But I was watching so I shouldn't-- I wanted to work. But I didn't-- I hated to get hit. 

Some people got so used to being hit that it's unbelievable that-- like they were like brainwashed. And once they used to get hit, it-- it-- they couldn't stop. They needed it. And those people didn't survive-- most of them. After a while, they used to get black and blue. 

And then they used to-- I became a doctor at one time. I used to know exactly-- this one is going to live four days. And this one-- by the time they were 20 years old, they used to get water under-- under the eyes. And they used to get water on the feet. And they used to go down and down until one day they didn't make it. 

It was very, very sad because in the last few days they-- they couldn't work anymore. They couldn't go to work because when you-- when we went to work, they have to walk quite a distant. And the German soldiers, they used to beat them because they couldn't keep up with the-- with this-- the pace. So we-- they used-- they used to beat them. 

We used to pick them up. And we used to help them and carry them until-- some-- but everybody there thought, the next day or the next week, it's going to be my next and my next. We knew that we had no hope, although it was the year 1943. And we didn't know how long the war is going to be. 

Then from this camp, we went to Markstadt. Markstadt was also in Silesian, in-- in-- in eastern Germany. This was a very large camp. Over there, we would-- we did all kinds of work. And then this was already even the war, when they-- when they bombed in West Germany, the Krupp factories, which they built, the war machine. 

And they moved from Koeln and from the western Germany. From-- from the west, they moved all the factories to the east. In this work, we were building over there a tremendous city. It was unbelievable. And over there we made all kinds of war equipment. 

And in this camp, we were like 3,200 people. Before we came to this camp, when I was very sick on my foot, I thought that this is it. I will never make it. But I was so lucky. 

Coming to Markstadt, I met a man, which I recognized him. And he was from our town. His name was Baruch Weinstein. He was a very-- he must have been at that time 25 or 27 years old. 

He spoke perfect German. And he was a very intelligent man. And he was the-- they called it a-- an-- the Juden Alteste. He was the head of the Jews in this camp, appointed by the Germans. He was very strict because he had to be strict to keep order of 3,200 people, and all kinds of different ages. 

We complained that he was too strict because we had to wash and clean and take baths. And everything had to be so and so. And he used to hit us. But, to me, he was good because when I came to this camp, I was so sick. And I told him who I am. 

So he took me to a special place, to like a little-- not-- it's not a hospital. But it was a little one room in which they had a doctor and which they-- 

DORIS SIMON: How did you know him? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: I knew him-- he was a friend. He was a distant relative of ours-- of ours. And he was a good friend of my older brothers. And he recognized me. 

He tell me-- he told me, Joseph, [INAUDIBLE] we were here. Where are your brothers? And I told him my brothers are someplace in Poland or in Russia. I didn't know. I had no contact. 

So he said, don't worry. I'll fix you up. I'll help you. And he did. 

He gave me a double-- double food. And this was a very-- it meaned-- it meant a lot at that time because whenever everybody had one portion of soup and one piece of bread, I had two soups and two pieces of bread. And to work in this place, I had an easier job since I was-- my foot hurted me. And I had a good-- a good job, which I didn't have to walk so far. So everything worked out for me a little bit better. 

So we were there quite a while. In this camp, I met quite-- my-- a lot of my family. My cousins and my friends, we met over there. And that's where we-- where we worked together. And at night, we used to meet. 

We used to talk-- what's going to be tomorrow? What's going to be the future? Who-- this one died. And this one died. And this one died. 

But then, for-- for me, at-- in this camp was a little bit better. And I was there in this camp from the 1930-- 43 to 1944. In 1944, we left this camp. And from this camp, we went to a camp by the name Schmiedeberg. 

And Schmiedeberg was a old-- was a place, very old house. It wasn't even a camp. But they-- they put us in-- in a-- in a big house. And we-- when we saw the people who were living already there-- and they were there a while-- for a while, it was a very-- it made on us a very bad impression because we still looked different, although we went through so much, than these people which we met over there. 

DORIS SIMON: Why-- why is that? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Because they went through much more. In the camps where they came from, they went they went through much more. And it was unbelievable. I got so scared looking at them. And I knew just how I'm going to look probably being there. 

And this Baracke meister, the leader from this camp, was at that time together with us. From the 3,200 people, they picked 50. And I was chosen between those 50. And I was there in this camp for maybe three, four months. We worked very hard. 

We were also working-- everything, whatever kind we work, was working for the government, and to helping them build factories and build all kinds of thing, the war industry with the SS and with the-- and then, after this camp, we went to a different labor camp by the name Klettendorf And Klettendorf was the German Luftwaffe. Luftwaffe is the Air Force, the German Air Force. So we were helping then for the German Air Force. Not directly, but we were doing all kinds of work. 

Over there, we met Jewish women, which the Jewish women, they lived near, not together with us. And they-- they worked directly in the camp-- in the-- with the-- with the fellow German, they used to clean there-- over there for the German Luftwaffe. And this means for the German Air Force. And we worked at that time in a iron-- a factory, you know, where they were they made all kinds of iron-- iron works. 

It was very hard work because we had to lift like, uh, everything was done by us. But, uh, we had to thousands and thousands of kilogram or pounds. And some people were short. And some people were tall. And yet, we'd carry it on the shoulder. 

For the tall people it was torture. And for short people-- but we couldn't help ourselves. I was little. And I was skinny. But I always tried to work, like, because I didn't want to get beaten up. 

So I was hurt over there, too, in this camp. But it was a minor thing. The living conditions in this camp was terrible. We were-- it was very dirty. We-- we had the lice. I mean, this is unbelievable because once you don't clean yourself, this comes in immediately-- and all kinds of bedbugs. 

In the summertime, was un-- this was un-- we couldn't exist because we worked so hard in the daytime. And at night, when we coming home, we didn't have the Germans to bother us. The bedbugs what-- what killed us. You know, once you'd get weak, now they take over. And they are-- the worst is over you. 

But somehow, after a few months being there from Klettendorf, this was the year 1944. From Klettendorf, I was still in a small-- in a few smaller camps, which was not important because they have given us-- they formed a bigger camp. They put us over there. So after Klettendorf, we went to Waldenburg. All these camps, which I was till now was labor camps. 

Waldenburg, coming into Waldenburg, was really a concentration camp, konzentrationslager, which was completely with the SS. And we had to wear a special dresses-- I mean, special clothes-- the blue and white stripes. And over there I got this number-- 64559, which this my-- my number. My name was taken away. And I was called whatever they needed by number. 

DORIS SIMON: Was that an extermination camp? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: There, no. Our camp was not an extermination camp. But next, we used to go-- Waldenburg belonged to Gross Rosen. And Gross Rosen was the extermination camp, which they-- the extermination camp took care of all the smaller camps, which people were-- couldn't work. And they couldn't do their work. And they were sent to the extermination camps. 

But, at that time, I didn't know about the extermination camps directly. We knew that they were killing-- that-- that the people who-- who don't work, and they get sick, they're taking away. But we didn't know at that time. This I found out after the war. And Waldenburg was-- this was the last winter between 1944 and 1945. 

The-- the leader from this camp was a SS man. His name was Scherner. He was very mean. And it was unbelievable. They did all kinds of torture in this camp, all kinds. 

But we were lucky. We were lucky in this camp that not too many people died in this-- in-- in-- in this camp, our particular camp. We worked hard. It was a very bad winter. 

The only thing is that we-- somebody did something. And they couldn't find out. Let's see, something happened to me. I was looking out-- after work, I was looking out from the window in the camp, I was. I happened to be a-- I-- I happened to have a smiling face. 

And this German looked at me. And he thought I was laughing from him. And he-- I didn't see him. 

He runs in. He knocks on the door. And we were 25 people in there. Who was by the window and making fun of me, of the German? 

I didn't want to-- at the beginning, I didn't want to say. But I knew he's going to beat innocent people. So I-- I picked up my hand. 

I said, I was by the window. And I looked out. But I didn't-- I didn't make fun of you. I just happened to have a face-- a smiling face. 

And so I was beaten now. I was being beaten up, which I-- it wasn't the first time. But-- and this was-- this was sad. And this was in 19-- in 1944. 

But in the morning, in this particular camp, which we went through every day torture. Every morning, we had to get up-- instead of 7-- instead of 6 o'clock, 5 o'clock in the morning in winter. And he used to have-- he used to have pleasure to see us rolling in the snow. And just like this-- and he had a dog. And, like, the name was Allie. 

And we were so scared because whatever-- if he saw something, because somebody couldn't do, he used to charge the dog. Go ahead and-- and get him. And everybody was very scared. The dog came and ripped up the clothes. And there was no clothes because we-- in this camp, we lived just in one-- in one particular-- in one suit. 

But going back before we came to this camp, I went-- we went through-- before we came to Waldenburg, we went through a place which then, over there, we thought that this is our last-- our last day because every few months, when we were very-- when we had a lot of lice, and all kinds of dirty things, they used to take us to special places to clean us. You know, they used all kind of sprays, disinfection-- disinfectant thing. So in this camp, they told us to go in-- in a place, and to drop everything. And they gave us soap and this and that. 

So we were-- you know, everybody was saying goodbye to the other. I-- we thought that this was it. But, thank God, we went in. And they cleaned us up. 

We lost everything, whatever we had because they-- we had-- I had nothing. All the pictures of my families or letters, nothing remained because we had to go in in one door and go out from the other door. But, thank God, we went through this particular place. And they cleaned us up. And they sent us into this concentration camp, Waldenburg, which was near Gros Rosen. 

Over there, we were-- we worked-- over there, we-- we worked for IG Farben industry. This is a company which still in existence, although Krupp is also. Over there, we worked very hard. It was a very bad winter. And in this camp, since it was early 1944, 45, we found out that it's coming, that the war is going to-- that the German is losing the war. 

DORIS SIMON: How did you find out? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: We found out from-- from-- from source-- some of the soldiers which came back. And they were wounded. They lost a arm or a leg. So those soldiers became guards in our camps. 

Some of them, which they went through already so much, they had already some more, you know, more emotions, more consideration. So they used to tell us that-- what they went through. They didn't-- most of them didn't. But some people-- some soldiers did it. 

And then we found out from-- we-- we used to work with German people which came from the city. But they didn't tell us that they were losing the war. But somehow we-- we felt it. 

And we used to see, in the daytime, American planes flying through. We didn't know it's American planes. But we knew their planes because they used to make the alarm, which they wanted to hide us, not to see. And we were praying that the planes-- you know, we didn't have what to lose anymore-- they should bomb our place, together us with-- with the Germans, with the factories. And it was like every day the planes went by. 

And then they bombed someplace. And then they went back. So that's how we knew. We felt that it's coming closer and closer. And then this was 1945 in January. 

And this-- this is actually when the second front started from Poland, when the Russians started to push. So they started to prepare to evacuate us. But we didn't know. We didn't know that they're going to evacuate us. But this we found out after the war. 

But we-- there we heard already shelling. It was, uh, like 20 kilometer, or 25 kilometer for directions for, the shooting, and bombing places. At night, we used to see all the-- they used to come down, the planes. And they used to light up the whole town. And from-- from a distance, we used to hear the detonation or the-- the noise from the bombs, and this and that. 

And we were-- we were, every day, you were weak and weak. And this one couldn't work. And this one couldn't this. And a few other people died at this-- in this place. And I was there with a few people which-- which survived, which I am still with them now. 

But it was-- we couldn't wait. Day, every day, was long and-- and-- and we couldn't wait, until one day. We used to work. 

We used to clean snow, too, because we had to clean-- they-- we didn't-- there was a lot of snow. So we couldn't work in the factories. So they kept us to clean the highways. There was a lot of snow, especially in Bavaria-- and, I mean, in Germany, near the town where we were there. 

So every day, so-- and the German people used to see us every day walking through. And over there was mirrors. And, you know, I didn't see much my face because we looked-- we had this little round head and this jacket and slacks with my number and the yellow star. We used to look in the mirror to-- how-- how we looked, you know, as we walked through. And it was-- it was very-- it was tough. 

It was very hard, the last-- the last few. Just there came a time I couldn't walk because we were so weak. The food was very bad, like in all the camps, even worse. And this-- this was how this was going down until May 1945. 

DORIS SIMON: Were there ever any attempts at resistance, at escape? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: There was attempt to escape in a few camps-- not by me. I was young. And I was-- I am from-- I was scared because I didn't have money. And I really had nothing. But quite a few people escaped. 

Most of them, we found out, was caught. One-- in one incident which happened, escape, and they brought him back. And they gave him-- they called up the whole camp, all the 3,000 people. We had to watch how they were torturing him in the middle of the square to scare us that nobody-- or they used to tell us, whoever are going to escape, we will catch you. We will torture with this. 

And this is that very few people escaped. But a few escaped and survived. Most people didn't. We were waiting and waiting and waiting and following. 

They were very strong. And they were overpowered because they had machine guns. They were watching us. We were-- we were weak and then sick. And there was no-- we couldn't do a thing. 

A matter of fact, we even-- we used to go to work-- we had to sing songs, German songs to entertain the German people. And, a matter of fact, sometimes Saturday nights, we had-- some of the people were-- were talented. And they used to-- they used to entertain the Germans because they-- they had to stay with us all the time. Although they were-- we were on the inside the-- the-- the fence. And they were on the outside the fence. 

So they used to call us in. And they used to make a show, but very-- not too often because they wanted to be entertained, because they were miserable. Until May 1945, when it came, then this day, I will never forget because all of a sudden, we got up in the morning. Although the camp was prepared to being blown up, or to being together-- 

DORIS SIMON: How did you know that? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: This we knew later. But when we got up in that morning, nobody-- no-- none of the German were there. And the gate was open. And we were so afraid. 

And we were-- we were listening. And we heard shelling and then-- and detonation from-- from bombs and this and that. And all of a sudden, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, the Russian army, it was close to our camp. We were liberated by the Russians, since the Russian front was close to us. And they told us we are free. 

And, I mean, this-- this-- this-- we couldn't-- we couldn't believe it. We couldn't believe it because, first of all, it was-- we didn't know what to do. Every weak, weak-- we were sick. And we were weak because the last two days we couldn't go to work because they didn't know what to do with us. 

Then we found out that they wanted-- they supposed to do something. But they didn't-- they didn't have time because they wanted to save their own lives. So they ran away. And we remained. 

And we didn't know-- we didn't know what to do. But we were hungry. But the Russian people told us. They didn't help us to think. Like when the Americans came in, in different camps, the American came right away with the Red Cross, with all kinds of things. 

The Russians came in. They told us, you are free. Do whatever you want. And you can go-- what-- well, you do whatever you want. 

So the first day, the first thing is food because we was so hungry. So we went to the city. And we went-- I went where there was a bakery. We took all the bread. The first thing was bread. 

We kept bread, fresh bread. And a lot of people, well, got very sick because our stomachs were very-- were shrunk. And a lot of people died after-- after the first few days because there was a factory from liquor and vodka, something, or some kind of-- and they started to drink. 

And-- and once your stomach was completely shrunk, and they got sick. When they started to eat, some people started to eat fat stuff, and immediately. So we lost quite a few things. 

So I got together with a few of my friends. And we didn't know what to do. But-- so the first thing to do, to go home, which I thought there-- there is a home. So a friend of mine went. And he got himself a horse because there was no transportation in May of 1945, the first few weeks or few months. 

So we got the horse and a wagon. He took it from the Germans. And three of our guys were headed home. From this town, from Waldenburg, to my town, Szczakowa, Poland, must have been maybe 250 or 300 kilometer. And it took us a few days. 

As we were passing the big cities, and we saw the cities destroyed and everything. And it-- and the-- the Russian soldiers were yelling at us. We should watch because there was mines, and which-- bombs which didn't-- didn't get-- didn't get off, or whatever. 

And we had a lot of problems at that time, right away with the Russians. You know, we thought, you know, we are concentration camp survivors, that they should help us. In the meantime, they robbed us. They had no-- there was no communication. And they had no feelings like-- they just told us, go do whatever you want. 

DORIS SIMON: Where were the Germans? What-- what was your contact with the Germans? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: The Germans-- the Germans, they ran away. They had like evacuated because the Germans were very much afraid for the Russians. They would rather go to where the Americans liberated, or the French, or the English. 

So when the Russians were coming-- because they knew that the Russians, they rape. And-- and they beat. And they-- they kill. So most Germans from the town in which I was liberated were not-- were not present. They ran away. 

So we, like, took over some of the German homes. And we took some clothes. But I-- but the Germans which we met-- some of the Germans we met, which didn't run away, they were lying to us straight in the face. Like they saw us every day. because the camp in Waldenburg was outside the city. And we marched through, every day, the whole city. 

And they saw us. And-- and they-- we used to tell them, you see what happened, what they did to us? And they used to tell us they never knew about the concentration camp. They never knew that there was a concentration camp in Waldenburg. 

Then we saw right away. Then we said, this is-- this is Germany. They didn't-- they just-- they were ashamed. Or they-- they knew. And they didn't want to face it because they were guilty. 

So we ran away from Pol-- from Germany. I didn't want to stay in Germany. I figured I am-- I am from Poland. I was born, and I lived in Poland. And we still had-- had hope at that time that I will find my parents, which we missed so much in so many years. 

So it took us a few days. And I come back to my town, which I came back to Poland. Coming to Poland, I come to my little town. And I saw the house I was living in, the Polish family took over. 

And as we came to Poland, we felt right away antisemitism in Poland. It was after the war. And after everything that we went through with the Germans and with the Pollacks, with the Polish people before the war, right away they told us, and they asked us, are you alive? They couldn't believe it. They-- they want that nobody should be alive because they were afraid that we will-- that we want our stuff back all the time. 

But, you know, we couldn't ask for nothing. They didn't let me in in my-- in the apartment I lived. I saw my closet, our closets, and our bed, everything. And I couldn't go in. They would have killed me. 

So we found a little shelter. I was there for a day or two. And then I found out that my sister's alive. 

And they told me that, every day, I coming transports from-- my sister was in a concentration camp in Czechoslovakia. And they told me that in this town, Katowice, which is not far us, come every day a transport with-- with survivors. And maybe I'll find my sister. 

DORIS SIMON: How did you-- who told you that your sister-- 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: The people who came with the first transport. There was always-- and she said, oh, I saw-- or I heard that your sister is alive. And she's very-- and this one is like-- like every day we found out new things. So that day I went to a-- to this town. 

And in the evening came a transport. And my sister-- I met my sister. It was quite an experience. We cried together. And we laughed in this. 

I changed a lot in the five-- in the six years. I grew up. And-- because I was a kid when I left, to my sister especially because she is so many years older than I am. She like brought me up. All my education, which I had, is to my sister because she did a lot for me. 

And, as I met my sister, we came back to our little town. My sister was a dressmaker. And she went right away to work because we needed-- we had no help from nobody, the Polish government. You're alive? And that's it. 

DORIS SIMON: Where had your sister been-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: My sister was, from 1942, at the time when my parents went to Auschwitz, my sister went to a labor camp. And then it became a concentration camp. They worked in Czechoslovakia. And they used to work by material. They used to make wool from all kinds of stuff. 

She worked hard. And she was there quite a few years, and quite a few women and cousins from my town-- so I-- in the camp with my sister. And the wife I married was also together in the same camp with my sister in Czechoslovakia. So coming back with my sister to my town, she went to work right away. 

But somehow we didn't feel-- we didn't feel good in this little town. We felt that we are not wanted. And we felt like we are out of place. So my cousins also came. We were staying there a few weeks and a few months. 

So then I found out that one of my brothers is alive. There was a postcard in the-- with the-- with the burgermeister. And the burgermeister-- with the mayor. And, you know, there was a small town that you knew in the Pollacks when you were part of a Jewish family. So there was a postcard in the mayor's office that Mandelbaum is alive. 

And I went there. And I found out that there was a little letter that sent from Mandelbaum. And he's alive. He's an officer in the Polish army. And he is in this and this town in Lublin, Poland. 

We found out somehow. Right away, we got in contact with him. And he was still fighting because the Polish army was still-- there was a big fight between the Polish. It was different factions in the Polish government in those days-- the left and the right. So the right party of the Pollacks were fighting against the Russians. 

And the Jews were in the middle. The Jews were, uh, they-- they were very much mistreated, although he was an officer in the army with a gun. And they were still pointing out the Jews because they knew that the Jews are more to the left than to the right. So, as my brother came, this brother came, Samson. And, oh, he took furlough. 

He told them that he'd found a brother and a sister which survived. So they gave him like a few days. And then he came. We met. And we were very happy that we are together. 

But after a few days, he had to go back because he was still a-- you know, with the army, with the Polish army. But we made up during the war that we are not going to stay in Poland. And a few weeks later, we found out that another brother in Russia is alive. His name is Wulf. And he survived in Russia. 

He was in the Polish army. He was wounded in 1940, 1939, 1940. And he survived in Russia. And he sent us a card that he is in Russia in this and this town, Kuybyshev. So we started to write letters. 

And so we were already my two brothers and the-- and the two-- and the other two brothers, which went to concentration camp. Then I found out that those two brothers died. One was killed. And one died from weakness. This was Hamir and Mendel. 

It was very sad that, when we found out through people which survived this camp. And they told us that in this and this time, this-- this-- this older brother Mendel, which, uh, was killed, he was still alive. My sister saw him in 1945 in Czechoslovakia because most camps were evacuated. 

They evacuated. The Germans evacuated. They didn't want they should be caught by the Russians or they should be caught by the Americans. So they moved him. 

So one-- they moved them one night. They moved all the-- there must have been between 2,000 and 3,000 young people, and a few, maybe 50 or 60 from all account. They were still alive in February of 1945. 

My sister saw him. She couldn't talk to him because the Germans, they were watching with guns. One of my cousin died that day, that night, in this-- in this place. My sister couldn't help him. 

They were throwing down when they-- the Germans didn't see. And the next day, they-- they removed all the 3,000. And from the whole transport, not one survived. 

So this was-- this was with this brother, Mendel. So then we found out that these two brothers are dead. So we got together, my brother who was in the army and my sister. And I-- and I met another friend. 

And we decided that my brother will escape from the Polish army. And we will go together to West Germany. We knew in Poland-- we read in the papers there was an incident that killed a few Jews in Kielce in 1945. It must have been June or July. So we figured, yeah, there's nothing for us in Poland, no future. 

We found out there's camps in West Germany, which the American army-- the American Red Cross, the International Red Cross, the UNRRA is helping them. So we decided. But we couldn't get papers. So we went to Krakow, to a city to get some kind of papers because we needed that to cross, in order to go to Germany, to Czechoslovakia and then to West Germany, because we didn't want to go to East Germany at that time. 

So we packed whatever we had, the clothes and this and that. And we started to go. But this was something. 

We found out-- we met this Russian officer, which we gave him some-- some kind of cigarettes. And he should smuggle us through-- through a border. We had some kind of papers. But they were not legal. They were not real documents. 

We came there. They told us the papers are no good. So this-- so this Russian officer told us he's going to take us over. And he did. But going, it took us-- it took 24 hours to-- to-- to try to travel from our town to Prague, the capital of Czechoslovakia. 

So we went through so much scariness. He wanted to rape my sister. He wanted-- he-- he was-- he got drunk. And he had a gun. He was a highly intelligent man. But he was under vodka and under all kinds. 

And there was no way. We were praying. And we didn't know what to do. 

But thank God that everything went through. We-- we persuaded. And we promised him everything. So we arrived in Czechoslovakia. 

DORIS SIMON: How were you traveling, on the train? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: On the train-- and, I mean, not-- not the train for people. This was-- in those days, there was no-- there was only transport because Russia took out everything from Poland and from East Germany, from West Germany. They-- whatever territory they occupied, they dismantled-- all the factories, everything. So they-- they took full-- full trains there this way, and the empty. 

So with the empty trains, he hid us. He covered us somehow. And coming to Prague, this Russian was, uh, was-- was asked that he did something against the government. It is not important. 

I was happy because when we went through with him, he told us, when we come to Czechoslovakia, again, we still had to go another this-- but we met thousands and thousands of refugees, survivors, displaced people. There was a special camp. So we went to this camp. And we put-- everybody put their names on. 

And as we were looking at the names, I found my brother's name, that my brother-- we couldn't travel together because my brother was from the Polish army. When he escaped, he was very much-- he was scared. If they would find him, he was a deserter. They would have killed him immediately. 

He destroyed the gun. He destroyed the uniform. He went to a town. A friend gave him a suit. 

And he went to a different border. He payed someone. So we found my brother's name, that he was there at-- but we couldn't find him for a while. So from Czechoslovakia, we had to travel to West Germany. We were there like two days. 

Again, we smuggled. We went through-- we was my sister, myself, and a friend of mine. They told us to go in this and this place. There's not too many people, too many soldiers. 

The Czechoslovaks were with guns. And, you know, they were afraid because we could have been spies. There were all kinds of things. It was still a few days after the war, a few weeks after the war. 

Finally, we found already the American soldiers. And they saw us. So we were relieved. So who are-- you know, they asked us who we are. So we showed them the numbers and this and that. 

And they told us there are camps. And we should go to Munich. And from Munich, there's a camp, Landsberg. 

Landsberg was a tremendous, huge, displaced person camp. It was overcrowded already. But somehow they-- they took us in. And they-- they told-- they-- they-- they gave us a room and board. I was living with my sister. 

DORIS SIMON: How many people were in this camp? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: In this camp were between 3,000 and 4,000 people all the time, all kinds. But here at least we were free. And we were taken care. 

And they taught us jobs. You know, they taught us trades, like the ORT came in right away, immediately. And they started to-- and they were teaching us all kinds of-- but whoever, something. 

I worked right away. I went to work the rest of my whole life. I am a worker. And we were all there only a couple day because we thought we were going to go to Israel at that time. And there was a lot of agent from Israel. 

There were a lot of special people which took us in in the organizations. And they were teaching us Hebrew. And-- and, you know, like, like community life, like a kibbutz. But we were there quite a-- a few years. And then I-- my-- we found this-- 

DORIS SIMON: How long were you there? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: In Landsberg, we were there in the whole time from 1945, September till 1950, March. 

DORIS SIMON: And, when you worked, you worked in the camps? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: We worked in the camps. We did all kinds of jobs. And we used to get paid. And we used to get-- we used to get food free. And they gave us cigarettes or whatever and a dollar, a few German marks. 

DORIS SIMON: Who administered this camp? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: The-- the-- the camp was administered by the UNRRA, United Nations Refugee organization. And they-- and when UNRRA went away, it became a different name. And they-- they were mostly, the management was controlled by Americans. They had-- like the last call. 

And then they had the Jewish administration. The president was a-- a man, a survivor, a very highly intelligent man. He died recently. His name was Dr. [INAUDIBLE], very intelligent man. 

And we stood there. And they-- they made a whole-- a whole city from the survivors. We lived there. People were getting married and having babies. 

And we used to meet new people and different people. You are alive. And, you know, my cousins I met. And then I met my brother who was still in Russia until 1947. 

And he found out. But he couldn't leave Russia whenever he wanted. But he came right away to see us. And we met in 1947. 

But my brother couldn't find himself. And he was used to a different life. So he went back to Poland. And he stood in Poland while we were in Germany. So I was Germany with my sister. 

My brother Sam, he-- he-- he became sick. He had tuberculosis in a mild stage. And he went to a sanitarium for a while. And I was there together with my sister. 

My sister went right away to work. She was a dressmaker. So wherever she went, she did work. And in the meantime, my sister met a man. And my sister was married in 1946. 

And she moved away from our camp because she had to move where her husband came from. So I remained over there. And I met my wife, which I knew my wife since she's a small child because my wife came from the same city. My wife happened to be from-- she was born in Germany. But her parents were from Poland. 

So when Hitler came to power, the first thing that he did-- all the people, all the Jewish people which were born in Poland had to go back to Poland, which were born in Czechoslovakia or whatever. And there was a lot of Jewish people which were born in Poland living in Germany because it was a time which was very good for the Jewish people over there. So when Hitler came to power, my wife came to us. It must have been in 1936. And my wife's brother-- she came with her brother, with three brothers and one sister. 

So one of her brothers, the older one, is my age. He was my good friend. So we were always-- and I happened to-- I knew her parents and her sister. So I met my wife I met in months back. 

And, you know, we started to go. And we started to plan what to do because we had-- there was nothing what to do. I mean, there was no future for us, being in Landsberg. There was no place to go. Israel was closed by the English. 

I-- I just registered to Australia, to New Zealand, and to Canada I could have wind up any place. And there was quotas, and-- and, um, the United States was closed, at that time, until sometime I think in 1948, Harry Truman signed the bill to take in a certain amount of Displaced People, DPs, to the United States. And here we came. 

But, at that time, the war broke out in Israel, when Israel became a state. We wanted to go to Israel. I felt a lot because my sister, when she was married, after a while, she went to Israel with her husband. She had a baby. 

The baby was born yet in Germany. I happened to be-- I was the godfather to this child. My sister decided to go to Israel. And we decided also to go to Israel. 

But somehow I went through all kinds of-- with the Haganah at that time. This is a Jewish-- a Jewish resistance, the Jewish movement, the military movement. And I had to go through all kinds of, uh, physical-- my wife couldn't do it. She couldn't make it. My wife was very sick when she was liberated. 

She had problem with her stomach. The food, what-- what she had, she was very young. She was like 12 years old when the war broke out. And somehow she had a-- a doctor which we knew. She survived. 

And she went to hospitals. And I met her in 1940-- at the end of 1945, the beginning of 1946. And we decided-- and we were married in 1947. 

A matter of fact, my sister made the wedding in, uh, in her house because there was no weddings in those days like-- like over here. But, uh, we were married. And we had a honeymoon because we didn't work much. 

My sister learned that-- I mean, my sister-- my wife learned in the ORT. She became-- she worked. She learned how to be-- become a seamstress. They made shirts, all kinds of this. We had to do something. 

And then we were-- we-- we-- we went to Germany. It was a lot of culture. Since Germany is such a cultured country, and something like this happened with this culture, it was unbelievable. So we went to shows, all kinds, opera. I happen to like music and movies. 

We had to catch up with movies which I haven't seen. I have never seen a movie until after the war anyway because we were religious. And we didn't go to movies-- I mean, at my age. I was very young. 

DORIS SIMON: How did you relate to the German people in the town at that time? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: At that time, it was very-- we were-- we-- it was unbelievable. The Germans were still the same Germans. We were-- we-- we-- we met them a lot because we lived in the camp. And after the work, and after this, we went to the city. 

They didn't like us because they knew-- they knew how they felt, how they felt. And they knew how we felt about them. Most people were the same thing. They said they never-- which "Ich habe nicht gekannt," they never knew that there is going on such a things, which we knew it was lies. 

But I knew I'm not-- we're not going to stay in Germany long. We knew some-- something will happened. And then we will-- we will this. But we had all kinds of discussions. 

We used to tell them-- I used to tell them, I hated-- I hate the Germans till today. To me, every German is guilty. Every German which is today 50 years and older, or my age, is guilty because they did the job 100%. They didn't have to do it. 

Sure, they got orders-- but all kinds of orders. If I get the order to make-- to make clothes, to make the dress, I do the order right. But a order to kill children and-- and-- and-- and-- and sick people and old people, this is-- was just unbelievable. And we had all kinds of discussions and hot discussions with the Germans. And there was quite a few fights in this camp with the Germans. 

There was one day in 1946. One of the-- we had a kibbutz forming already in Germany to go to Israel. You know, they got together, young people from different organizations, like from the Akiba and from-- from the-- all kinds. So when-- when they got together, so one-- one boy was missing one particular morning. And we were sure that he was kidnapped or killed. 

That morning, the whole group-- thank you very much. When they found out-- you know, the word spread. We had all kinds of people from Russian, partisans and-- and survivors, and all kinds. They found out that a young boy is missing, a 17-year-old boy is missing. They went to the street, which every car, German car, or German wagon went through. 

They just started to fight with all kinds, with guns and fist fights, until the American army came in. And they made sure-- but they found out somehow that they found-- they found this young man. But we-- we were sure that-- that he disappeared, that something happened to him. And, uh, quite a few incidents happened. And it happened that a lot of things happened at that time, which they found that this guy is alive, and he was a kapo. 

A kapo is a man which worked in the camps against us. This means he had to do his job. He had to-- to help. So when-- when they used to find that this kapo is alive. And he came to the camp. So, every day, they were-- they caught him. They beat him up. And they-- he was arrested. But before he was arrested, they, they did the job. 

And then we had a court. We had, like, not like a jury, but we had a judge. And we called in witnesses. And according whatever he did, they didn't kill him. They didn't put him away for five or 10 years. 

But he was guilty. He was sitting like 30 days. But, in all the papers, they mentioned that this and this man was caught. And he did this and this thing, and different things. 

So, at that time, when I-- we found out that this man, which was my distant relative, and he was the kapo, the leader, from this camp, and his name was Burgmeister, that he was alive. So he-- he was hiding. He never-- he made sure that he would never be seen by a displaced person, by people, survivors because he would be recognized. Everybody knew his name. 

It was quite a few like this. Some of them were-- they caught him. And they were killed. And some of them committed suicide. They just-- they knew because they couldn't face-- and some of them are still alive today in the United States, or in Israel, or in Poland. 

And they are hiding. And this is how they live for the rest of their life. But this bergermeister was hiding all kinds of different places until he wound up in Argentina, in Buenos Aires, at the same Argentina was which had a lot of Germans survived in Argentina until today because there was-- they took in a lot of former Nazis and a lot of bad guys from those days. 

And this Burgmeister is a Jew. And he found his wife. And they had a baby. And, one day, we found out-- and this was-- it must have been-- it was in the same time when other Adolf Eichmann was caught and brought to trial, to justice. 

And it looks like that he must have-- he got a heart attack. And he died. I found out-- it was in all the papers in Poland and in Israel because they knew him much over there because he was wanted, like on the wanted list. This and this man was-- did so and so. 

So my sister sent me a piece of the paper, just how we always-- whenever something happens, she always sends me a newspaper cut up. And she told us-- she sent us that this and this man died on a heart attack in Argentina. And, uh, to some people, he was good. And, to most people, he wasn't good. So they couldn't catch him. 

So they caught a brother of his, which was in the same camp with us. But the brother had nothing to do with him. The brother was-- like he didn't do the type of work as we did. He worked in the office, or he worked in the kitchen. 

So they couldn't catch him. So they caught him in 1948, coming to the United States. You know, we had to go through all kinds, CIC and to, you know, all the proving to prove that who we are and that we are not communist. 

So they caught them, that they told him, this is the brother of this and this. So some of the survivors went-- caught him. And they beat him up. They beat him up so that he was unable to work the rest of his life. I came to the United States. 

I found out about him. I-- we met him a few times. And he couldn't work. He went on relief. 

He lived in a very poor, whatever he could do. And he died like in 1968 or '69. It was very few people at the funeral. I was there with my two brothers. And this was the story of this man. 

His wife, this Burgmeister wife is in Israel today. And she has a-- she has a son. And she has a sister which was also with our-- with us in the camps. And they are-- they are there in Israel. 

Whenever I am in Israel, she comes to see me. Or I come to see them because we have-- you know, we went through a lot together. There was one night, which all this-- all the people from our town had called in this bergermeister the-- the head of the camp, he called in. And-- and we had a talk. 

And I was present at this talk. But most people were much older than I am. My friends were like, at the time, when I was 17-- I was 19, 18, 19, they were all like 35 or 30. So, you know, it's different. And they were talking about what's going to be if-- you know, they asked him because, you know, they knew what he's doing, that he does such things, which, some things, he-- what's going to be if it's going to be? 

No, he said. It's a very slim chance that it's going to be sometimes the freedom. But if it's going to be, he said, they-- they'll judge him accordingly, whether it was right or wrong. And whenever I met-- I met this-- this woman, we'd talk about it, about this particular thing. 

But most of the survivors are dying out, which were with us, the older one. I, from the three or four, are still alive which were present at that-- at that-- at that-- he invited us for coffee. You know, we were-- we-- we couldn't believe it because we didn't eat cake and this and things. And he had everything because once he had this position, he was treated like the Germans. 

DORIS SIMON: In those days, in the camps, did you think you would survive? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: A very, very slim chance-- most 99% not. But there was a little-- a little thing, a little thing because I knew-- I knew. I didn't know at that time. But I-- I went from here that they needed people there. 

And then I found out that this one is-- these-- these are not here. These are not there. I hoped. There were-- there was times that we-- we-- we were praying. 

We met once. And we talked over about this, what's going to be. We wanted-- at one time, we were like brainwashed. When I looked back, we were thinking, at that time, that we wanted the German to-- to win the war and to set us in-- in labor camps. 

They were talking about Madagascar. Madagascar is an island between Africa and the Indian Ocean. And we wanted to be slaves like the Jews, which were 3,000 years ago. This is how-- this is how we were, how our morale was low. 

And it came to such a point that we-- we wanted the Germans already to win the war. And we should be slave. And we should have enough food to-- not to be hungry. This is how-- how they did-- what they did to us. 

But very few people survived. And I am-- I survived. And I am here to tell the story. And I am telling the story not only for myself, but for all of the people which didn't make it. 

DORIS SIMON: How did you come to leave the DP camps and come to the United States? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Yes. This-- this happened when we found out. My wife was born in Germany. So we had like a preferential quarter when I married my wife because the German Jews were-- were a smaller, smaller percent of Jews than the Polish Jews. So the German quarter was bigger. 

But, anyway, we couldn't come at a German quarter because-- because I came in-- in the picture. And I was Polish. So my wife decided that we are not going to Israel, that we want to go to United States. So we are-- I just-- I-- my brother, my older brother was already came in 1949. 

So we registered. And somebody signed for me papers in the United States, the affidavit that I am a tailor and they could get a job for me. So I went through all the legal procedure. And until I was accepted, I had to go through the medical. And I had to go through the mental tests. 

If I am not, you know, come to United States-- especially for the Jewish people, they make more problems than for the Gentiles because when they signed the bill for the 10,000 displaced persons, Jewish displaced persons, they took in 90,000-- maybe I am misquoting you this, but about-- Gentiles. And between the Gentiles was a lot of Nazis and-- and a lot of antisemite at that time. So, as we were-- we went through all the things. And in March 21st of 1950, we decided-- I mean, we were accepted to come to the United States. 

My wife was pregnant with my son. My son-- she was like in the sixth or seventh month. So they-- they decided that we-- they-- we-- they cannot-- we cannot go by boat. So I was like from the first ones to come by plane. And, you know, we went through-- she went through all the doctors, how she felt, and this and that, if everything is OK. 

So they-- they made up the plane with mostly pregnant women and sick people. And they appointed me to be like the Dolmetscher, the translator, between the Americans, between the crew and the people. I spoke a few-- a few languages, Polish and Jewish, a little bit in German, and in-- a little bit Hebrew. So, you know, there was a lot of people which couldn't speak. So I-- I was appointed. 

And my wife felt she was very sick on the 20-- in those days, we traveled 24 hours. We stopped in Copenhagen, and in Glasgow, and Gander Air Force Base, over Boston, and to New York. So she was throwing up. And she was very sick. Her feet were swollen, although she was only 19 or 20 years old. 

And we come-- we came to New York. It was March 21st, the first day of spring. It was raining. And they called out Mr. And Mrs. Joseph Mandelbaum, would you like to go out there first-- because I was there to translate. 

In the meantime, I didn't know that they had prepared-- all the televisions and everything was prepared. And my wife couldn't put on the shoes. We are travelers. And here 120 people with babies who are crying until we went off the plane. We went off the plane. Everything was rolling. 

And-- and they took us into a special room. They gave us an interview. I couldn't speak English. I spoke German, Jewish. We had over there a translator. 

And, in three hours later, in all the newspapers, where I would stop, my story and pictures. And people were calling and this and that and if I knew this, if I knew this one, if this one is alive. The first 24 hours, well, I thought this is going to be my life in the United States. It was unbelievable. 

I moved into my sister-in-law and my brother, which they were living here. They had a very small apartment. And I-- I-- I fell in love with the United States. I didn't like the neighborhood that I moved into in the beginning. But this was minor. 

I pictured the United States like I used to read in books, or I see on television-- Long Island or Fifth Avenue, only skyscrapers. I didn't see cats and garbage in the front of the windows. But it was OK. It was good. 

They were offering me jobs through-- through-- through the news media. And I had to know my wife was pregnant in the seventh month. I had to go right away to work. They found for us-- the HIAS came in. They helped us. 

And they found for us a furnished room. We moved into a furnished room. And I found a little job. And I started to work immediately. It wasn't the best job. 

And a few months later, on May 27, the star was born. And my first baby son was born. It was very-- it was beautiful. And, you know, it was, especially, by the Jewish people, a son-- although a-- a daughter is the same thing. 

Still, a son, or a child, you know, is the chain, the continuation of life because it could have happened in a second. And I would have never been here. And-- and, you know, I am conscious. I am living all my life with this thought that I am here. And-- and I-- and I would have been dead with the-- with the six million over there. 

So we have prepared everything, a bris. And we started to live-- to lead a life, a normal life, in the United States. We met family, cousins, and distant cousins. Everybody tried to help. 

And after a while, l left my job. I got-- I found a better job, that-- which paid more. And two years later, my daughter was born. My son's name was after my father. The name in English is Sidney, in Jewish is Samuel Sidney [NON-ENGLISH] Sidney Samuel. And my daughter's name was Golda, which is after my mother, which we knew right away that the names are here. 

And there was no television in those days. And-- and I had cousins here, which they encouraged us. Do you have children? Children you have when you're young. And, uh, what I told him, which when you're young, you have to make a living. And don't worry, if you-- you're alive, and you're young, and you're aggressive, and everything is going to be care-- everything will-- will take care. Because children you have when-- when you can have, not been you can afford to have. Because then it's already different. 

So a year later, my other daughter was born, Sherry, and like every child, brought more luck. And I try change to another job, and then we moved out from the neighborhood, from the neighborhood we used to live in. Because I couldn't-- I needed a park. Yes, because we-- in Europe we were used to live free, like not fenced in with houses, and concrete, and garbage. So we found a place, Canarsie, which it was closer like to the way we-- we lived in Europe. 

And over there, we started to live pretty a normal life. Children started to grow up. I never-- I will never took lessons. I was never educated how to be a parent, but somehow this comes by instinct. And it comes by the time I started to learn. I started to go to school. I went to night school for a while. 

And later I learned together with my children. If my children started first grade, I went from first grade through junior high and high school. They didn't know. I don't know how I spoke to them, because I didn't speak English well. But you know, when they were babies-- but every day, like, I pick better words, another thing. And we were good at languages. I speak with an accent, like it's normal for far in as I can lose it. 

And my children were growing. And then we saved up some money and we bought a house in Canarsie. Like first we lived in a apartment, and then we bought a house. And as they moved, my children and became of age, school age. My son went to public school, and then they went to heder. This is a parochial school, the Jewish school, after-- like we did in Europe. But it was different. And then they start junior high school. 

And then we were preparing-- we were preparing to bar mitzvah. Bar mitzvah is, like, 13 years after the child is born. And we made a beautiful bar mitzvah for my son, my two daughters were already become big girls. We invited the whole family, although my sister from Israel couldn't come. And my wife's sister did-- couldn't come. My wife-- but from my wife's family she arrived also, one sister and one brother. The two younger children went together with their mother. 

My wife happened to have a very young-- a very young father. My father-in-law was at that time-- he was born in 1900. He was 39 years old when he went to camp. And he was in labor camps with one of my brothers, which also didn't survive. 

So-- so my wife's sister, which is-- my wife's sister lives also in Israel. My sister lives in Israel and my wife's sister. We keep contact. I write letters for the last-- from 1947 until now. She never came to the United States. But we travel. We go every few years. I make sure. Because it's easier-- financially, it's easier for us to go to Israel than for the Israelis to come here. 

My sister-- then she saw me after 15 years, because I didn't see my sister from 1947 to 1965. It was the first time I went to see my sister. She couldn't believe it, how I changed. Because, like, I was her baby. She still calls me baby in Polish and-- and this. And she said I used to have a tin voice. What happened to you? You were-- you were-- you had such a tin voice. And now I speak like a man. I have a deep, low voice. That was a nice reunion, when-- when I went for the first time to see my sister. 

And after this, I go every few years. My sister's became very religious through her children. My sister was-- after the war, just speaking for myself and my friends, we thought that we will never believe, that we will never become like-- like my parents were. And somehow we said no. And what-- what God was watching what was going on. And the most religious people wouldn't believe us what happened. 

So we said forget it. I'm not going to show. I'm going to live with it, just endure what I don't have to. Somehow after the first year, we saw Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish new year, came and something-- something was missing. We didn't just-- so we went. We went to first Rosh Hashanah, and then-- and we went Yom Kippur, and then we were fasting because-- I was fasting for five years. I figured I'll never fast in my life. But somehow in this respect, I'm affected, because, to me, food doesn't mean a thing. It doesn't mean a thing. 

Food-- if I have it now, I have only food. Doesn't have to be fancy, and it doesn't have-- I would never travel 10 miles to a restaurant or this and that. And then I listen to some people which they talk about food. And-- and it's so unimportant, because when I-- what I went through. And it was unbelievable how-- how you suffer to be hungry day and night, and day and night. So if I have just bread and butter and this and that-- 

And in 1966 we found out that we have another brother alive. Until 1966 we-- we-- we didn't know that we have another brother which is living. It-- he would be-- I-- we knew we had a brother in Russia. And he was arrested in 1939, and he was sentenced to be shot. And-- and he is not here. Because 1945, after the war, he called every Red Cross, every place. My two brothers, each one Russia, and they told him he's not there. You know, it's like crossed off-- Shia Mandelbaum, not here. Shia Man-- somehow he survived. 

And he went to 1965, when he went away from the camps to Moscow. And he told them, because he found out that every Jewish-- every Jew which was a citizen of Poland, which came to Russia, was free to leave. There was-- there is an international law. 

So he called up, and then he couldn't prove that he's a Polish Jew. The only way-- you need witnesses. But there was nobody there. So they told him, write to Poland. If you town will write us that you are Polish citizen, it's OK. He writes to Poland, and here comes answer from Poland that there's no-- nothing. There's no documents, not-- everything was destroyed. 

So Russia-- so they called him over. He said, do you see? Nothing is there. This means you are not-- and so they made him ultimately a Russian citizen. So then he decided he'd like to escape. Somebody told him that if you were Russian money, go to Wulf, to this town. And there's something over there. There's a woman over there. She has a-- she sells liquor, and she knows the police. And go cross over. 

As he went over there, this and this night, the moon-- when the moon will come out, 12:00, he goed over there. Nobody's there. As she-- as he crosses over there, he was arrested again. When he was arrested over there, they-- they-- they told him, you see? This-- this is-- this is the spy, the same guy who was arrested at that time, and this and that. 

But we didn't know the whole thing. We found out after-- after he came. And he-- they gave him another five years, another five years. But we knew already that he's alive. So he-- we used to write to him. If he's doing-- if he made up affidavit. 

First Israel started to work for him. Because my sister lives in Israel, we feel that it's going to be easier to the Israeli government. Israel was in very good contact with Russia in 1965. But in the meantime, the war broke out in Israel in '67. So Israel broke relations with the United States. 

So we took over-- I took over from here and we made up papers. We had help from the city, state. He had to go to a lot to make-- through Russia because it's different. And we used to make-- we made up the affidavit. I have contact with congressmen, with Senators. Kennedy was alive. Javits was Senator and congressman Celler. 

Then we-- resend the affidavit, and Russia said, no. We wanted-- we said yes. Then Russia refused. This means he can't leave, but we have to make up a new affidavit. Maybe they'll change their mind. So it went on for quite a few years. In the meantime, we sent him packages. And he was still in different camps. 

To make it short, in 1972, in November 1, here arrived at New York City. But they didn't let us know. You see, he left them money to call us. And we wanted to prepare, you know, the press and the television. But they knew what we wanted to do, so they didn't want him-- they didn't want to let us know. They just took a plane and they dropped him off in the middle of the night. And as he came in middle of the night, he met the American Council, which, you know, takes care, you know, of the things. 

So you ask him, what's his name. And he wanted to call us that he's here. And so in New York, it's-- you know, they took a telephone book, let's say 274 Mandelbaums. So they woke up quite a few Mandelbaums until it came to Joseph Mandelbaum. And I said, yes, I am Joseph Mandelbaum. Your brother's here. 

So we got the children together. We woke them up. It was in the middle of the night. I took my brother, we went to the airport, and here we saw this man. It was a terrible scene, you know. The beginning, we didn't-- we didn't believe that-- that he's alive because he asked him in the letters, we asked him the names of our parents, if it's him. Because we-- it was just unbelievable that he survived this thing. 

And then started the whole thing. He told us the whole story, what he went through. It's unbelievable and what a human being. He was, like, 33 years away in this. And since he came-- he just came to my son's wedding. He just came my son's wedding was November 19-- November 1972, November 25. And my brother came November 2. He was skinny, he was slim. He weighed, like, 90-some pounds. And the press came for stories and all the papers. 

And he came to Sidney's wedding. It was a beautiful wedding, and they gave him all kinds of honors. But in the beginning, he was very depressed. Until-- you know, he was he was brainwashed. He was completely away. When he was liberated-- when he came-- and when they found him-- when he found-- before he found that we are alive, he was out completely. This means he was working and drinking. He forgot every language. Completely out. He didn't know how to write. He didn't know how to speak. He worked with-- with-- with all kinds of criminals when-- when he was there the-- the 30 years. 

But after a while, he came back to-- to normal. He was a very intelligent man. He reads a lot and doesn't speak English well, but he knows a lot. He knows the Bible and he knows politics, everything up to date. 

INTERVIEWER: What are your feelings today about how the war influenced you? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: My feelings today-- it's very-- it's mixed. I have very mixed feeling. But I-- like I said, I'm, I'm happy I'm alive. I enjoy every day of my life. Every day-- it doesn't go a one hour in the day, or one day in the week that they shouldn't-- that the memories shouldn't come back. Not that I live with the memories, but somehow you can't-- you can't push them away. 

I try hard, and I tried all my life. I live a normal life. My family, my wife, my children. I am active in all kinds of different organizations. I'm active at my work, in the union. I am a shop steward. I'm executive board member in our union. Matter of fact, tonight I missed a big meeting, which we have negotiations for-- for a new labor contract. I-- I live, and I enjoy life. 

And going back to Germany, I'll never, never forget. Because something like this could happen in a land, in such a cultured place, the most intellectual at that time, and something like this could happen. This is unreal. It only bothers me that the standard of living in Germany is very high. And they-- and the two countries which made the war, Germany and Japan, they are the most prosperous country. It bothers me a lot. But we have to live and go on, and go and living. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever talk about your war experiences with your children? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: In the beginning, when they were young, we didn't talk about it. I didn't know why, but somehow I-- I you know I used to read all kinds of books. I read all kinds of books later. I started psychology books. And so we-- everybody said, you know, it's not good because it shouldn't affect the children. But they should let them grow up normal, without knowing. 

But as they get older, we always-- I didn't-- I never told them the-- the horrible things which I actually went through, what I saw. Even maybe up today, but most general thing, we used to talk about it. Because we happen to be two of us that survived. It's not just me, it's my wife was a survivor. And we are very close. We have a close group of friends of ours, which are also survivors. So somehow, you know, you can't-- so we used to talk to the children. 

I'm at a factory. We talked at them last year. And we had this meeting, the International Holocaust Survivors gathering in Jerusalem. My son decided to go with-- with me. And I was very happy that he wanted to go. And I was happy that-- once he told me he wants to go, I left everything. In my job-- I would have-- even my boss didn't like it, because we were very busy at that time. My wife couldn't go on account of her job. 

So we decided, and we went. And here we are. And it was a very-- one of the most-- I was-- the most important thing, which happened after the war. I mean, I was married. That was very-- everything. But this gathering did so much. It's just indescribable. Because when we were there, the 10,000 or 8,000 people strong. I was there 10 days. I was in a different world. 

I got so-- we-- we were so-- we got so close that every one of them, we-- we were like sisters, you know, sisters and brothers. It was unbelievable. Especially when we found out-- then-- and when we met-- when we had the meetings with the second generation, with the youngsters, and I was always-- I was there. 

Like some-- in the beginning they made up that the first generation should not attend meeting with the second generation. But somehow, we walked in, in the morning, and there was nobody there. Sidney thought-- my son thought that he's the only one that was there from the people. We knew that a few, but we didn't know that it's going to be like 500, 600, or more. 

So I-- we have to leave-- in the beginning, we didn't attend. So I was outside. We had-- I met with all my friends, and this one, this one. Somehow it was then me, and I went in. And then I saw how the children, how it reacted on the second generation. Because they also didn't know that-- everybody knew that-- they are the only one, until they started to talk. 

And this kid from California-- a doctor, and he broke down. He made everybody cry because-- because some of the-- some of the second generation mentioned that they cannot talk to their parents. It's very hard. The parents don't want to talk about it. They say that they want to die with all the things, and they can't open up. And some people-- some of the young people suggested very smart, nice suggestions that they should exchange, that, you know, if the child cannot talk-- if a son cannot talk, cannot ask the-- the-- his own parents, that they should exchange. And they should ask the friend's parents. 

And so-- so every day was-- was-- was-- I-- I wanted to just go on and on and on. But it-- time came, the last meeting, which we met at the cartel. And with the Prime Minister, Menachem Begin, and everything, it was-- this meeting was unbelievable. The candles-- the candle lighting ceremony, which they put up, like, thousands of candles. I think thousands in a thing. And everything represented a million, for 6 million. And the speeches and the prayers, and this giving over, this handing over from the old generation to the new generation. 

You know, it was-- I am glad I was there, because it was once in a lifetime. And I met quite a few people, which I haven't-- I haven't seen them since 1941, like 40 years ago, 41 years ago, 35 years ago. And we didn't recognize even each other. But everybody had a tag with the name and the name of the camps we were there. It was quite an experience. 

There was one room-- they called it a computer room, which looked exactly like in 1945. There was a tremendous room, and on the wall was written down, this is Poland, and this is Hungary, and this is Germany. And on the wall they had everybody put names. I am alive. But this is 40 almost-- 37 years after the war, 36 years after the war. People were still looking for people for-- for-- for family and for friends. 

INTERVIEWER: Did some people find-- 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Quite a lot of people found, and a lot of people didn't. Some of them was disappointed. So this was really something. And then, the last night we met at the cartel. And it was from every country, representative from France and from Greece and from Italy and from Russia. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever apply for German war reparations? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And how did you feel about going through that? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: Going through that, it was very-- in the beginning, I-- you know, I needed the money in the beginning. I didn't want it. I didn't want to know. Because that-- I knew that there was no money in the world which can repay the suffering and the loss, what we had. But somehow I saw this one is doing it, this one is doing it. So, like, a few years later, I did. 

INTERVIEWER: What year? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: What year was it? Must've been the '60s, the early '60s. Because I was accepted in 1963. I know this date because my-- one of my brother's wife passed away that year. 

And that day, I-- we had to go to a lot of torture-- not-- not-- not physical torture, mental torture. Because you had to go to German doctors to be accepted. And the-- that day, I was so mixed up, because I was so aggravated about my sister-in-law's case. And just particular day, I had to go to-- they ask you all kind of questions, and over and over and over and over. 

So-- but anyway, I was accepted for the minimum. This is, like, 25%. And I'll tell you, the money which we received, it's not much, but it helps. And if we can take out the least money from the-- from-- from Germany, it's not their money. It's our money they took away, in the hundreds of millions or-- or billions of dollars of Jewish money. And, eh, we get a check, like, every month. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that another Holocaust is possible? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: It's very hard to say. I hope not. But it might be a different Holocaust, like with the atomic powers. But I mean, something like this which never happened, and I think it can never happen. Similar things is happening, happened in Africa and-- and Asia. But what happened over here, to the Jewish people, was completely the worst ever. Because there was a inquisition, a Spanish Inquisition. 

In those days, at least, people could convert, they could change religion. Where over here, there was nothing-- there was nothing you could do. We were in camps with Germans, which they were real Germans, like three generations away. For them I've heard-- we felt-- we had the satisfaction that they are in the camps with us. And they still didn't want to mix with us, because they are-- they were-- they were better. 

But they-- they ran away from-- from-- from Jewishness on this side. They were not parents or grandparents. But uh, I hope it will never happen. Anyway, in my lifetime, which what we went through-- it's undescribable. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel about being Jewish? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: I am proud of being a Jew. And I'm trying, and I hope that my children will continue in my-- in the same footsteps and the same way. It's proving already, because my sister, which was very far from her being religious, and her children went to extreme orthodox. 

But at this, how it's going-- and how it's going on in the Jewish history, a few generations are going away from religion. And then it comes in one generation, which is coming back. And this is going on and on and on. I'm proud. Whatever happened in my-- to my family and to the Jewish people. I am proud of being Jewish and being a Jew. 

And I met quite a few people in Israel from the second generation. And you know, we talk about this. And this girl from Cleveland-- I forgot her last-- her name. And she mentioned that being a survivor's child, until this time, she was like-- she felt lower. She felt down. But going to Israel, to this Holocaust gathering, coming out from them, she, like, picked up her head And she feels proud that she is a Holocaust survivor's child. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there anything else that you want to tell me? Anything else about any war experiences? Something that we've left out that you want to share? 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: There's so many things which-- which we went through. I just want to mention-- I did never mention my parents, which is going back to before the war. I had they-- I had-- we were living a normal life in a small town with a close family, and I had parents and grandparents. 

I was very close. I was the youngest in my family, and I was the youngest of the small children. I was very attached to my grandfather. My grandmother got sick and she died. And my grand-- eh, grandmother died. And my grandfather was still alive 'til January of 1939. 

And before he was dying, we were talking. And there wasn't-- the war wasn't on. The war started nine months later. And he used to tell me-- he's Jewish. And he used to tell me-- he knew already what Hitler is, and what-- what-- what he's doing, already and this and this. So he used to tell me, if I survive, if-- if whoever survives-- and he knew that he's dying. He was very sick. He had gangrene. That we should-- I should come to his grave and tell him that Hitler lost the war. 

And this was really something, you know. I always think about it. I never did it because there was no-- there's no graves. No one in this particular town, but-- because they built a highway and they destroyed. But that's how what he felt, and how smart he was. 

And that's it. I always-- I'll-- I'll always remember. Not one day goes by. I work and I always-- I try to forget. I try, I live, I do everything. I love music and I love opera. I lead a normal life. Super now, because I do a lot of things. I read a lot to push away-- to, you know, different habits. 

But I-- I hope and I-- that I survive. I live as long as I can. And I tell my story, the Jewish story, that future generations should know and should-- like some people said, that something this professor from Chicago or the other professor from Los Angeles-- that never-- it never happened. But-- and here we. We are alive. We are still witnesses. Once we go, it's going already history. But once we are alive, it's still living witnesses of the Holocaust, what happened. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much, Mr. Mandelbaum. 

JOSEPH MANDELBAUM: OK. Thank you. It was-- I'm glad that I can tell my story. Thank you. 