[SIDE CONVERSATION] INTERVIEWER: Do tell us about-- 

SUBJECT: The dehumanization. While the dehumanization-- the physical is one very important. Lice-- we fight against lice. Because if you don't control your lice-- everybody had lice. If you don't control your lice, you'll be eaten up by them. You will become sick. And it will be impossible to really survive. 

In order to control your lice, you have to have somebody who-- who examines your head. And if you don't have somebody who examines your head, then you're sunk. So you have to have somebody close to yourself. These are all very small things which become really vital. If you are-- for instance, I think one of the reasons why we survived, my sister, myself, because we had each other, and we had a very small, very close circle of friends. 

In order to-- there was no electricity in these barracks. So you had to have some light. You came home after work, and it was already dark. Well, how can you look for lice if it's dark? 

So what we did, we stole petrol-- gas-- petrol-- Neft, what you call Neft. And we lit-- had a little light or candle. You couldn't really survive if you do not-- did not have a lot of stamina and a lot of physical and especially mental strength. 

INTERVIEWER: Determination. 

SUBJECT: Determination and strength. And I think one of the very early realization-- I was an adolescent. But we became very-- it became very clear to us we were in a very heterogeneous population-- people who were-- came from, as I said, utterly deprived backgrounds, the German criminals also some of the Russians; people who came from regular middle class; people who were spoiled. 

We found out the more spoiled or the more protected you were, the more strength you had. Because this was something you-- was almost a sport how to really lick them. And the more deprived people were in their background, the more they compared this with their previous lives. And they couldn't-- I mean, they couldn't cope. 

This, for the first time, really taught me some theory, taught us some theory. How strange-- we were spoiled. We had a very good life. And we were much better prepared to cope with these situations than some of the people who had suffered all their life deprivation. This was very strange. But this was a fact. 

Another thing which was really dehumanizing that it brought out the good and the bad-- you know, the good in people, but it also brought out the very bad-- worst in people. And for instance, we saw mothers eating the last piece of bread of their children. And mothers whom we had known in, you know, in our group. This was some of the shocking dehumanizing kind of experience, that mothers were, because of hunger, able to do this. 

INTERVIEWER: Were the assistants in the barrack-- the Jewish assistants given special treatment? 

SUBJECT: No. They were in our-- we were never were in a Jewish barracks. We were too few and know that there was no Jewish barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: The assistants to the SS guard, were they given special treatment? 

SUBJECT: They were given special treatment. They had better conditions. They had better food. They had better-- they had some privileges. And some of those-- we were first in a Russian barrack. 

And I said, the Russians were very-- a very closely knit group. And they-- own-- very strongly organized communal ties. And they-- we were a alien subgroup. And they did everything to make our life miserable. And of course, the Germans had this in mind. 

Then later, we were in a Polish-- in a Polish barrack of Polish political prisoners, which was certainly not better, certainly not better. These were Polish aristocratic people. And even-- and a year later, we were in a special barrack of Siemens. Because the factory found that it was inefficient to have their workers share this kind of regime. And it weakens their workers. 

So they established a small camp, what was like a-- satellite of the big camp for Siemens' workers. And there, we were separated from our mother. And this was one of the terrible things. And this, of course, was also the reason why my mother alone couldn't manage. My sister, myself were in the satellite camp. And she was in the big camp by herself. And this was impossible. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you leave that camp? When did they-- and there were no-- there were very few Jews. You were working with mostly-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, very few Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: --non-Jewish people. 

SUBJECT: Except for in January 1945, when the Russians already succeeded to-- to, I think, conquer the first German-- I think Czechoslovakian, also in Poland lines of defense. The Germans evacuated Auschwitz. And at that time, there was a tremendous influx of prisoners from Auschwitz, who had walked-- you're probably read about this-- death walks for days and days and days and months. 

And they came-- the women came to Ravensbruck in terrible condition. And amongst those women were many Jews too. And this was already the very chaotic-- then, the very chaotic situation started in Ravensbruck. Until then, Ravensbruck was a regime of the first order, everything according to the second. 

But when these big transports came, they couldn't manage. And there were thousands and thousands. And then, they also started with extermination. I mean, they started extermination in Ravensbruck. Only towards the end of the war, in Jan-- I think January 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: What method did they use? 

SUBJECT: Gas. 

INTERVIEWER: They built gas chambers there? 

SUBJECT: They had gas chambers. But for us, this was our-- and now comes the unexpected-- completely unexpected twist. My mother had died in January 1945. And that was already during this period of utter chaos. And we were in the separate camp. And they told us about her death. And we could come and visit at this place for where they had put up corpse for us to see her for last time. 

And one week afterwards, we were called to the command that was a camp command that my sister, myself, and three more women from our own-- from this Dutch group-- one was a-- two-- two were Turkish, and another one, well, I think, Hungarian too-- I don't remember-- and we were told that we would be released. And we were told we would be released and sent to Theresienstadt. This was in Feb-- beginning February 1945. 

It was completely-- I mean, the weirdest thing. We thought we'd get extra treatment. And extra treatment means, in concentration camp language, to be eliminated. We were sure this was the end of us. And we would be put somewhere. And we would be finished. 

They told us you, will be given back all your belongings, which were handed in a year and a half before. You will be put on a train to Berlin under supervision of two SS guards, one woman, one man, in February 1945 when the Germans were losing the war. And you will be handed over to the camp commander in Theresienstadt. It was absolutely like a-- completely surrealistic. 

We didn't believe one word until we really were given our belongings, our handbags, our coats, our-- our clothes. And it was in this chaos German had kept very carefully the belong-- had to check-- you know, they had a tremendous depot. And they checked the belongings of all these people had come in. It was absolutely incredible. 

We were put on this train. And we were sent to Berlin. And then, never forget in Berlin, this was already a time when it was absolutely like hell, because the German-- the Germans were-- had fled all the bombardments from East Germany. And they were all on the air-- on the railway station in Berlin-- thousands and thousands of refugees, German refugees, Volksdeutsche. 

And here, they put us on a train-- a military train to Prague from Berlin. And the whole plane was full of soldiers. And here, we were five prisoners in our regular clothes and protected by these SS guards and being brought to Prague and from there to Theresienstadt. It was absolutely incredible. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ask why? 

SUBJECT: They said it was of order of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On the order of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we would be sent to Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: What condition were you in? 

SUBJECT: We were in a very-- we were very thin. We were very hungry. And I remember very well in this-- it was a night's trip. We were-- we stole the food-- you know, there were these baggage nets on-- above the seats in this train. And my sister and myself, we still form the food-- the food of the soldiers. Sandwiches with bacon. It was-- we-- it was absolutely, for us, something. I'll never forget that. 

And then, we report to Theresienstadt. And then, another chapter started, which was also incredible. We came to this command in Theresienstadt, the camp commander. And he decided not to put us into the ghetto. 

But he put us into a special room--a special house in the one room, where we were locked up for four weeks. And we were fed. And we were guarded. And we had no contact with the outside world for four weeks. Because outside of the ghetto-- we saw people from the ghetto from our window behind a wall working and living there. 

And we couldn't understand it. We had absolutely-- it was completely all very mysterious. We couldn't understand it. And we had no idea what is behind that. And after four weeks, we were called to-- where we were-- we rested and ate. We got very decent food. We were guarded by Czech army people, who were very decent. 

We were called separately for an interview with five high-- very high SS officials. One of them was Eichmann. And we were interviewed separately about what we knew about our past, what we knew about Auschwitz, about the extermination, what we had experienced in Ravensbruck. And they wanted to-- why we think we are here and what about our past in Holland and so on so forth. 

So already at that time, we had the feeling that we shouldn't talk too much about what we knew about Auschwitz. We were very cautious. And after this interview, we were told, we allow you, by great privilege-- the great privilege to enter the Jewish communal-- community-- autonomous community in Theresienstadt, provided you will not tell anybody about what you know about anything about Jewish concentration camps, especially not about Auschwitz. If you tell anything, you will be finished. You will go through the chimney. That's verbally what he said. 

And the next day after, we were allowed to go into the ghetto. We were accepted by the Quarantane in the ghetto. And there, we met many friends from Holland and many people whom we know. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you tell? 

SUBJECT: And we immediately told them. And they said, you are lunatics, declared us absolutely insane. Because we already know what happened to people from Theresienstadt who had been sent to Auschwitz and who had all been exterminated. We knew that from people who had come from Auschwitz and whom we-- who told us all this. And these people-- the general reaction of the people whom we met in Theresienstadt in February 1945 was these girls are crazy. They are-- 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't believe you. 

SUBJECT: --psychotic. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't believe you. 

SUBJECT: They did not believe us. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You stayed there-- 

SUBJECT: This, I think, says-- that explains everything. This explains everything. 

INTERVIEWER: You were liberated in May? 

SUBJECT: We were liberated in May. For us, Theresienstadt was like liberation. That I must say. It was like liberation because it was-- and it was only a show camp. It was all-- just towards the outside world. It was a family-- it was a family life. 

There were no prison guards. People had their own clothes. People worked. People suffered. And there was not enough food and so on. 

But it was, compared to the regular concentration camp regime and stance, it was like a kibbutz. There was culture. There were children. There were men and women. There was-- there were holidays. There were Jewish holidays. 

INTERVIEWER: You are here now in Israel. You said they didn't believe you, and that says it all. Do you find that same circumstance here in Israel? 

SUBJECT: Not anymore. But after the war, for instance-- after the war, we came back to Holland after the war. And one of our great, I think advantages, was that for a year or two in Holland, this group kind of working through amongst the remnants of the survivors, was a way-- for our mental health, a very important process. 

But then, we-- in '47, I went to America. We went to America and joined the rest of the family. By the way, my brother and the whole family went to Bergen-Belsen. They were all-- they all perished at the end through this period at the end of the war-- towards the end of the war. This is a story in itself. 

But when we came to America, people didn't want to hear about all of this. I mean, they didn't say it was not true, but they didn't want to listen. Our own family-- nobody wants to listen. I mean, we definitely were met by a wall of silence. 

And the same was true when I came here. The same was true. I came here in '56, and definitely, the same was true. And even was true in mental hospitals where people who were interviewed, the amnestic material, it said, where were you before-- why you come- where you come from? Poland. Where were you doing '40-'45? In Poland. That was all. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't want detail? 

SUBJECT: No details, nothing. Nobody talked to the people. After the Eichmann trial, this changed. After the Eichmann trial, certainly was a beginning of some kind of catharsis and also revealing what really was-- and allowing people to talk and confronting the reality, what had happened. Because the population here had a very negative attitude towards survivors, towards people who-- 

INTERVIEWER: The population in Israel-- 

SUBJECT: In Israel, in Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: --had a negative attitude? 

SUBJECT: Yes. They had a stereotype negative attitude. They thought the Jews had gone to slaughter by collaboration, by corporation, by not rebelling, by not doing anything, which is a half truth. I mean, it's much too complicated to just stereotype. But this was more or less the attitude. It was not a-- I mean, a survivor was a person who-- there were many doubts about survivors. 

And this changed very much after the Eichmann trial. Because the Eichmann trial was a big-- the first time where all the details were exposed and the complexity of this whole episode were displayed. I mean-- 

INTERVIEWER: How have you adapted now, finally, to Israeli life? 

SUBJECT: I think I'm very much part of the Israeli scene. I mean, this is-- I got married to an Israeli-born person. And I'm completely a person of Israeli-- of Israeli society. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there acceptance by an Israeli-born person of your past? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: He did not question you? 

SUBJECT: No. I mean, I shared with him the experiences. This is one-- was one of the natural explorations. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he concerned that you had been abused? As a young girl who had survived, was concerned that you had been personally abused? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Is this-- 

SUBJECT: I mean, abused-- what do you mean, sexually abused? No, I was not sexually abused. I mean, there was-- I mean, since we shared my experiences, there was no reason to be concerned about that. No. No. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with? 

SUBJECT: What am I? 

INTERVIEWER: Left with. 

SUBJECT: What am I left with? 

INTERVIEWER: Emotionally. 

SUBJECT: That's a very good question. It's a very formidable experience, which has positives and negatives. I mean, I wouldn't say that everything is-- is negative which I went through in terms of my own goals, let's say. I think-- I'm sure I would be a different person if I wouldn't have gone through this, but in a positive and a negative way. That sounds very funny. But I'm sure that it has added also to my maturation process in many ways. 

On the other hand, I'm sure that there are many things which I'll never be able to eliminate all my mental-- from my mental life or inner life. I think-- my mother's death, for instance-- I'm sure I'm left with something, but. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have children? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you tell your children? 

SUBJECT: Everything. I mean, not this way I told you. But when it comes up, I tell them. There's no deliberate attempt not to tell them. In the contrary, they are very much informed about this whole history. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever encountered any of the officials or collaborators in the camp since the war? 

SUBJECT: I've encountered Jewish collaborators after the war, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And? 

SUBJECT: And the reaction to Jewish collaborators in the first-- shortly after the war, immediately after the war, was a very violent one. I mean, anger of hatred and-- 