CREW: 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Testing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. You mean down here? 

CREW: Um-hm. 

CREW: Is that better? 

CREW: Better? 

CREW: Um-hm. A little less distracting. OK. 

CREW: Yeah, that's much better. I think that's much better. OK, do you want me to click this on? Or are we ready to begin? All right, I will. 

CREW: 7, 8, 9, 10. Testing 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. 

CREW: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5-- 

CREW: OK, we're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Mr. Friedenberg, I hope that you can remember back to the time when you were a younger man, a younger person. Can you describe your life? Can you describe your family? 

FRIEDENBERG: Well, uh, as I said, I was born in Poland. I was raised in Poland and went to school in Poland. And after completing my high school education, I went to Vienna, Austria, where I was admitted to, uh, Vienna University. And I graduated in 1929. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you then, Mr. Friedenberg? 

FRIEDENBERG: Uh, I was 19, 21 years old. 

INTERVIEWER: 21. Tell me, what was your family like back in Poland? 

FRIEDENBERG: I, uh, had a wife. 

INTERVIEWER: At 21 you had a wife? 

FRIEDENBERG: No. When I came back from Vienna. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. 

FRIEDENBERG: Uh, so in 1933, we had been married. We had a child in 1937, a girl. And I was a very successful businessman. We had a, uh, electrical wholesale, which owned affiliations all over the country. And this was up to 1939, where the war began. 

As soon as the German army came into town-- uh, so very friendly soldiers. As a matter of fact, we, uh, lift the cross from the railroad station, and they came up for coffee. And, uh, we hoped for the best. 

But, unfortunately, the next day, the first Gestapo man start to arrive. And whoever was caught in the street were put up to torture. 

INTERVIEWER: They put up to what? I couldn't understand. 

FRIEDENBERG: To torture. To torture. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

FRIEDENBERG: For instance, they have you-- it was in August, I believe, or in September. Uh, they have you sit on a sidewalk, looking at the sun through a glass. They hold a glass to the eyes until you were just dead. This was about the beginning, of course. 

And, uh, the next day, in order to show what the future will-- now we understand-- what this future will bring, they ordered the whole Jewish population of that city to get to certain points, gather. And when that happened, they picked at random just every so on and just shot them. 

We were there, and I was in the barracks, where there were quite a few thousand people. And then we just had been released to go home. And since then, we knew what to expect. 

Every day, another branch of the German troops, or were gendarmes, or Gestapo for the city hall, had been picking up people in the street at random. Whatever they could to do their work, like unloading coal on the station, uh, picking up an big, these, uh, canisters with gasoline. They were big, all right. You have to carry two about a half mile back and forth, until you, really your arms didn't work any more. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were your wife and daughter at this point? 

FRIEDENBERG: Well, before the whole thing started, we had a maid, a gentile girl who lived in, in a village not far away from the city. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the city? 

FRIEDENBERG: My city where I lived was Czestochowa. The last month, the pope was visiting. And, uh, we tried to get my wife with the child away. So we were lucky to catch a bus and, uh, to put them in. But, in the meantime, the airplanes came in, and everybody disappeared except the bus. But the people were standing around and the planes were just hitting. 

And, by sheer luck, nothing happened to them, and they went away to that girl. And after the army came in, as I said, my wife and the child came back, and we went through the whole thing again. 

Now, since then, they start to take the Jewish people apart, morally, physically, in any way they could, to take away your dignity. They start to come up and take away some furniture, and linings, and sheetings, and what have you. 

INTERVIEWER: Out of your house? They came into your house? 

FRIEDENBERG: Out of the house. They didn't ask any questions. And, uh, you weren't allowed to ask any questions. 

As a rule, a normal human being, if he's hurt in the street, he hits back. And some people are so naive 'cause they said always, why didn't you hit back or, uh, resist? 

That's a nice question. But, after they took away everything from you, you couldn't. You were just apathetic. You couldn't resist. You have no resistance. You have no moral way of doing it, or physical. 

And from that one, they start to organize a ghetto. The ghetto has a certain amount of square miles. Then they put the whole population in, and put up barriers. Everybody has to put up, uh, the Star of David to be recognized, especially these people who were resembling gentiles, like a blonde, or so. 

These were mostly watched. As Goebbels said, this has to be watched. Because whoever looks like a Jew, we know him. But these blondes who doesn't, they have to be watched. 

In the ghettos, they have organized a certain, I would say a community, a Jewish community which has been picked by the Germans. They didn't know who they are, and they didn't care. They said, you are responsible for everything that these people will have, everything they need. But there was nothing to get the need. 

So one starts competing with the other. Uh, people were happy to go out to work by the Germans, because they picked up something to eat, and they brought home something for the children, although you never know how many will come back. They never come back in the full strength. There are always somebody that's missing. And missing means they shot him. 

As a matter of fact, between the branches of the government, and the army, and the Luftwaffe, which means the air force-- so there's competition for the slaves, for whom they have to work. If the gendarmes picked up a group of Jews who had a permission to go through the streets from work home, and made out by the Gestapo, they picked up the whole group and shot them. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing in the ghetto? What specifically were you doing? 

FRIEDENBERG: I was with these groups going to work every day. 

INTERVIEWER: As what? What did you work at? 

FRIEDENBERG: Any work. They didn't ask of anything you know or you don't know. We did always the dirty work, like shoveling snow, uh, uh, bringing back coal, heating, buildings, racks, and all this kind of stuff which normally people did who were used to do that kind of work. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you paid? 

FRIEDENBERG: No. This was out of the question, to be paid. Well, everybody lived in that ghetto doing whatever they could in order to, uh, earn a dollar and to buy something. Of course, everybody has connections with the outside world. By going to work, uh, via in working in these places, we got together with some gentiles who we had certain things to exchange with them-- like clothes, or, uh, uh, some jewelry-- for something else. 

Uh, going back home, we have, we have these big black bags, which they call it. We'd hidden these in these bags. Of course, this has cost us many lives because of that. 

Now, personally, I have gone through all these things, until, uh, until they start to liquidate that ghetto. In other words, they have come down, special groups of Gestapo from a certain big city which were devoted to that kind of work. They didn't trust the local Gestapo. So, and every day, a certain part of the city has to be gathered in a certain place, where they have decided which one has to go right and left, which means death or to be alive. 

The first to go were the intellectuals. Whoever has a nice overhead, forehead, and, uh, gentle hands, they were gone. But who has big muscles, they have left them back. 

I have lived, during the ghetto, in a place where they build up, from a certain part of the house, as a hospital, where they brought people in, in just, just to die. But, of course, from that hospital nobody came out alive. And I know I was in a section where it didn't call, it hasn't been called out yet. But I knew, in order to take my chances, I have to do something. 

And they used to come with a wagon which was covered, and, uh, with a cover on the hinges. And they put in these dead people. And it was hot. When they went away from that wagon, I just opened up that cover and I jumped in. 

And they took all these dead people to a certain place where people, Jewish people, were brought in to dig graves for them, big graves. Well, when they threw out all these dead people in together, a certain guy hit me with a shovel while I was laying there. And he says, hey, this is Friedenberg. He's alive. 

They know me. I was well known in my city. And they picked me up, gave me a shovel, and we marched in to a certain place, where these people were selected at random to stay as workers with the big muscles. It was a factory which was not intact, and we were there. 

Now, the next day, one of the gendarmes who were there in that place was looking for a couple of men to go in to work in that office. Which a German captain, an older person, and he picked one, and I was the other. It's just my luck. Maybe it was. 

What we did is, whoever came into that place, then they get at columns of these working people. And the factory starts to come in to pick up these people, to put them in a camp, in Czestochowa camp. There were three of them. One was HASAG, one was Warta, and the other was-- I don't even remember. 

But, nevertheless, as they were going out, they have to take off everything they had, like, whatever hey have-- their watch, their ring, money. Otherwise, they will be shot. And everything came into that office, where the two of us have to put-- and rings, for instance, we put a big circle from wire. We put this on. And the money, and so forth. 

And every day the Gestapo came along and picked this up. Now, I have a wife and a kid still in the ghetto, which hasn't been touched yet. And I know that, any day-- and, as a matter of fact, in their house, in their parents' house-- which I lived, uh, in the same place-- there was a whole family who came down from Litzmannstadt, from Lodz. And there were about, around 25 people, the whole family. And I knew something will happen. 

The German captain who was my boss in the office told me that there is a bakery left in the ghetto, which bakes bread for all the people alive, who work, who are still in the ghetto. And that bread is picked up by a Jewish man with a platform and a horse. And they gave him a Polish escort, which was a policeman. And he had the permission to go and pick up that bread in order to deliver to certain places, also to that hospital that my wife and kid stayed. 

Uh, I asked that German captain to allow me to go with these people to, with the bread and to the hospital. I told them I have a wife. I didn't tell them about the child. Because, otherwise, wherever there was a child, that means the family was doomed. 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

FRIEDENBERG: This was the Hitler philosophy. If you kill the children, you kill the nation. So he's now following. This was a philosophy. And they did it, all right. 

Well, it came a day that this has happened. And we went to where one of the people who were in contact with these Gestapo people on these places where they have selected these people to go and, and not to go. He came with us. He was one of the community members. And the Polish policeman that, uh-- 

We went to that hospital. Of course, we went through where the gentile section, and there was a barrier, where there were Lithuanian soldiers, who let us through. Well, when they went up to the hospital with the bread, I went up and picked up my wife and child, and brought them out, put them on the platform. 

The child-- we had picked up a little barrel, tiny little barrel, like, uh, an apple barrel. And we put her in. And she was three years old. Covered it over. And here we go. 

We've gone about a hundred yards, and the Lithuanian guard says stop. Then, first of all, we didn't see that woman going in. So she just can't come out. Get off the wagon, put her against the wall. 

CREW: We need to change the tape. 

FRIEDENBERG: Who is the husband of that woman? I said, I am. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr., Mr. Friedenberg, we have to-- technology has its limitations. Uh, we have two change the tape. We're just gonna change the tape. 

FRIEDENBERG: That's all right. 