CREW: Roll nine, run. 

INTERVIEWER: A man came into the ghetto, the resistance leader. And he said he saw killing. 

SUBJECT: Uh, he came Mordechai Tenebaum Tamaroff. And, eh, he was a member of the same organization I was. And he assembled all the-- from other youth organizations too. And he told us what happened in Vienna. 

And I think he was one of the first and the very few who understood at that time that the mass killings of the Jews of-- from Vienna is not just caprice of the-- of the Germans there but that it is a-- a general German policy toward the Jews. And at the same thing, or will certainly happen also in other places. And he was the first to-- to make an-- us understand this, that this is the German policy, the physical extermination of the Jews. 

And at that time, uh, there was not many people who-- who understood this. Now when he came from Grodno, he went to Bialystok and from Bialystok to Warsaw. And when he came, uh, to Warsaw and he told this, the-- the-- the-- the all the Jewish leaders, they-- they didn't believe him. They didn't believe such a policy could exist. 

INTERVIEWER: Why not? Why-- why couldn't they believe it? I mean-- 

SUBJECT: Because it was such only un-- unhuman. Because they couldn't believe that the legal-- a legal, uh, government-- the German legal, even Nazi Ger-- Nazi government-- will kill hundred of thousand and millions of people for nothing? Only while-- why-- because they are Jews? Children? Why? It was not that they couldn't face it. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? What did you do? 

SUBJECT: We believe what he said to us. And, uh, he told us also of his plans, what we have to do. Um, and after he was in Grodno, he went to Bialystok. And he has-- eh, he had a very Jewish face. And he was traveling. It was not permitted to Jews to travel. Of course, to leave one place, uh, a ghetto, it was, uh-- it was not a-- eh, I mean, OK, he could be shot, eh, 1,000 times. 

He went-- He had the false-- 

INTERVIEWER: Papers. 

SUBJECT: --papers as, um, Tartar in your-- he studied before the war in Warsaw, um, East-- East cultures. And he knew, um, eh, Turk-- eh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Turkish? 

SUBJECT: --Turkish, a little bit. So, um, he, um-- he-- he made these false papers in Vienna. And with these pass-- false papers, he traveled. And I think there was not a place in-- in, uh, Poland where-- where he-- he have not been to-- to organize the youth and to tell them, to instruct them what they have to do. 

INTERVIEWER: And you joined his movement? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: You went with him? 

SUBJECT: I was with him. I told before, he was from the same movement as I was before the-- the war. And now he told, eh, uh, us that the center of our movement in this part of Poland, in the eastern pass-- part, uh-- northeastern part of Poland, will became Bialystok. And he went from-- he went from Grodno to Bialystok, from Bialystok to-- to Warsaw. 

And then after eh, a month, uh, another girl from our movement came to-- to meet to go to the, eh, to the ghetto in Grodno and told me that I have to go to Bialystok, uh, to join a meeting of the members of our organization. And there will be just a meeting to see, uh-- because it was, mm, eh, wartime, and many people were-- were no anymore on their places. But from all the district, of Bialystok district, the members of, uh, our organization have to come to Bialystok or, mm, to-- to meet and to see, uh, to elab-- elaborate the program of our, uh, activities for the future. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get out? 

SUBJECT: Yes, this was the problem, how to get out, how to come in. And Bialystok was a ghetto too. And I had no papers. I had nothing. But, uh, I was lucky to have a very not Jewish face. Um, so I decided to go by train. But even to buy a train ticket, um, even the-- the Polish people had to have a permission. But I-- I-- I had no permission, of course. 

So I-- I went out from the-- from the ghetto by some, um, hole in the, um-- in the, um, wall. And I went to the train station. Of course, it was dangerous because there were many, eh, not Jewish people who-- who know me. It was not a very big city, eh, Grodno. 

And then I didn't know exactly how can I buy a ticket without permission. And I saw a German on the station. I went to him, and I told-- and then asked him. And I smiled to him nicely, and then maybe he can buy a ticket for me to Bialystok. So, yeah, all right. He bought me the ticket. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you give him the money? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I give him-- I gave him the money. He bought me the ticket, and I went to-- to Bialystok. I came to Bialystok. And I-- I didn't know, of course, where the ghetto is. I had to find out where the ghetto is and then how can I come in. 

The instruction was, I had-- I have to go to someplace where Jewish girls are working outside the ghetto. There was Jewish girls with a German guard-- guard who were working outside. There was some places where-- so at the-- I was told where such a place is. I have to go to this place and go in. And with this group, group of the Jewish girls, eh, go into the ghetto. 

But I came-- it was in the morning. I know, uh-- I-- I knew they will go back in the evening. So I told her, it's too bad, all the day to wait there just to go in? No. I will try to go in by my-- myself. After all, if I-- I-- I-- I knew how to come to Bialystok, I would find a way to go into the ghetto. 

And so I didn't know exactly what, uh, what-- what I will do. But in the last moment, I went to the ghetto. I looked around where the gate is. And I saw that, uh, from the main street, there is a small, uh, street. And there, after some, uh-- after, uh, some hundred meters, there is the gate. And there is the German, eh, Gestapo on the-- the gate. 

So I, um-- I had my, uh, stars in my pocket, because I was traveling without the stars. But I had the stars-- the stars to be able to go in-- in the ghetto. So I--I came to, uh-- to this street. I put on my stars very quickly. I was us-- used already to do it. And I began to, uh, to run to do as if I was running all, eh, a long-- a long way. 

And I came to this, uh, German guard, and I told him, eh, very much in hurry, yeah, please let me-- let me in. I was out with my working group. But I forget a German gave me something, some, eh, clocks to wash for him, and I forget it. And no, I can't come without his clocks. So please let me in, and in a while I will be back. 

And I was speaking so quickly and so in hurry. So he didn't know. He was, uh, uh, you know, he didn't know what-- what-- what to do. So he looked at me and told me, yet-- yes, but you will-- you will go out from the same-- on the same gate. And, uh, sure, sure, I will go. Eh, a just in-- in-- in, uh, 10-- 10 minutes, I will be back. And so he let me in. So this was the way I'll-- I come-- come, eh, in-- in the ghetto. 

And then we, uh-- and the other people from different villages in all the dist-- the Bialystok district, they came to each one in his different way. And all of them come safely in. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you then-- did this become a resistance group? You never went to a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Ah, because what happened? What did you do? 

SUBJECT: Um, from this meeting, I returned to Grodno. And then later, I was asked to come to Bialystok and to stay there. And I left my family. I didn't know-- I left-- I-- I-- I, uh leave them forever. Uh, I didn't tell him-- them where I'm going because it was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: A secret. 

SUBJECT: --a secret. 

INTERVIEWER: You never saw them again? 

SUBJECT: I never saw them again. And I remember my mother staying on the door and smiling, looking at me, such a long, a sad look. And I even didn't kiss her, because I didn't realize I will never see her again. And so I went second-- I-- [COUGHS] uh, to Bialystok. And this time, I went by another way with, em, em, a member of our-- our organization, a boy. 

And, um, we went buy food and sometime by, uh, eh, some, uh, horse cart. We went all the way from Grodno to Bialystok, passing different villages. Eh, one was a-- even a camp, villages where ghettos were already, passing there to meet members of our organization. Uh, and it was more to, uh-- to support them, to-- to tell them what they have to do, uh, that they have not to be, um-- they have to do something. They have to-- to-- to fight, maybe. 

We didn't know at that time what real-- really how we will fight. But we already knew that we must do something. We must, um-- we must fight everything against everything the Germans will do against us. And to mobilize, uh, uh-- our people. we went through all these places. 

And at first, I was in Bialystok working, um, working with young people to-- persuading them to join our movement, to-- to walk in the underground. And later the same year, at the end of '42, I was sent to, uh, outside the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you manage to survive once you were outside the ghetto? Hiding in the woods? 

SUBJECT: No, no, I was never hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: What did-- how did you eat? 

SUBJECT: I was never hiding, because I was in the underground movement. I had false papers. The false papers-- eh, no, this was real papers I had. I-- I, um, obtained them from the Germans on the base of a false birth certificate. We used-- the underground movement-- we used the-- the one Polish population had at the, em, in-- in, uh, '40-- in '42, eh, to change-- to-- to, uh-- to, um, register in the German Polizei Presidium and, uh, to receive German-- eh, German passports, you know? Or the base to receive this was the-- the, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Birth certificate. 

SUBJECT: --the birth certificate, you know, telling you are a-- you are a Christian. You are born there and there, and so on. So on the base of such-- of the false-- because our organization was, eh, was forging, eh, false documents-- on the base of such a false metric, I went-- I-- I do-- I did the same like the-- all the Polish, eh, people did. But I was-- at that time, I was living in the ghetto. So I had go out every time, eh, when needed to go the first time register myself, then to go and photograph myself with a number because of the-- eh, of this passport was the number two. 

And all this, I had to do it, and I did it like all the others, whole time going back, every time going back, uh, into the ghetto. And then [CLEARS THROAT], at the end of '42, I had my passport. Then at the-- at the end, you-- you went. You present yourself to receive this passport. 

And I remember when I came to receive-- at the Gestapo-- to receive this passport, there-- there were, uh, Polish boys, eh, young people working there. And one looked. Ah, you were born in Duszniki? Oh, I am too from Duszniki. But I am-- I have never been in Duszniki So he began to ask me about Duszniki. 

And of course, it was very dangerous, this moment. So I-- I made jokes. He asked me, yeah, I will look-- is now this and this place. I told him in Polish-- because it was such in expressions-- oh, this place, you know, it is no, uh, mourning about all these people who are not, eh-- who left this place, something. I gave such answers, because I didn't know what to answer. I didn't know this place at all, where I was born and supposed to came now-- just now from this place to Bialystok, 

So all the people around, they-- they laughed, because-- and it was all-- it was all right. But of course, we had also some girls who didn't come back from-- they passed some stages of this regis-- to be registered. But in some place, they were discovered that they are Jewish. And they never come back. 

INTERVIEWER: You know what happened to them? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER: Shot? 

SUBJECT: Shot. We-- we-- we knew of people who were in the prison-- who were in prison, and then they were shot. And, uh, so I had already my passport. Everything passed very well. And one day-- and, uh, my people want me to leave the ghetto. But I was a little bit with afraid, because you know, here, I--I-- I had-- I-- I had no-- nobody there outside. And I was-- here, even in the ghetto, I was with-- with my people. I was with friends, even not with my family, but I was with friends. 

And so every day, uh, I told-- uh, I-- I said, oh, well, next day, I go out. And so I remember one day, I came back from work in the ghetto. And there was some party-- eh, called party. So I was very much surprised. I thought, what is this? Well, they told me, oh, we had-- tomorrow morning, you go out. So [CHUCKLES] I had no choice. I had to go out the next day. 

And the next day, I went out. Eh, but of course, I had-- I have to mention-- I mean, to go out, I-- I had to have a place where to live. I had a chance, uh, that we had, um, some girls who were before me living as non-Jewish, who were the liaison officers of the movement. And they-- they knew the conditions of life-- I was new-- the conditions of life outside the ghetto. And one of these, uh, girls, she found a room. 