INTERVIEWER 1: OK. You were telling about a German who helped you, and I don't understand that. 

SUBJECT: He was be a Communist, and he was a good man. And he was feeling sorry for us. But he was afraid, you know, for the Germans. 

So when he was, uh, visiting us every single, uh, day you know, he was asking us why you are sitting over here? Why don't you go out? Because the SS men, they'll, they'll come every single day. They can come today. They can come tomorrow, you know. 

But we was afraid for him. We was, uh, they, and thinking maybe he wants to, uh, bring, bring us in trouble, you know? Like I said, until we find out that he means that. Um, and then, then he said, if I wouldn't have in Berlin, uh, five young children and a mother, I would go with you. He was stumped. Really, he was stumped, you know. 

And then the, my father said, if he's talking something like this, let trust him. In every, in every way we're going to be killed, so let try that what he's telling us, to do it. And we did it, like I told you before. 

And we came to the partisans. And they was giving us clothes and, and the food, you know, and everything. But they didn't took us, really, to the partisans, because the partisans would fight with them and we couldn't, we was so young, and with men, you know, with older men. So they said to us, we're going to send you to Russia and you have to go. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who was going to send you? 

SUBJECT: The, uh, partisans will send us to Russia. Not to be with them, you know, because they can't take care of us. They have, uh, jobs to do, you know? They have to go and fight for the, uh, Germans. So they can't keep, uh, small children, you know, and younger kids and oldest men, so they say you have to go. 

So a lot of Jewish people went there. Was months we was going by foot, you know-- months. And when we was scheming, eh, going, you know, to, to Russia. 

Then they find out, the Germans, that we are going to Russia. So then they, uh, block out the, uh, the highways, you know. And then we couldn't go because they was everywhere-- on the ways and on the, uh, highways, you know. So three times we was going and we came back because of the Germans. 

So we was going in the villages. We was so hungry. We was naked-- almost naked, and barefooted. We didn't have anything. 

So we came in the villages and we beg for food, to put on something on us. They should give us something. But the Russian people, they are really good ones. I don't know, in this time, they help us out and they save our lives. 

That I have to tell you. Because I don't like them government, but I like the people. They are very good people. 

And they help us out, you know? They gave us to eat, and give us sleeping in the, uh, houses, you know. And they give us something to wear. This was really wonderful from them. 

But the partisans, they say to us, you have to stay here. We're not going to take you in the, uh, in the partisan because you are too young and your father is too old. We can't take you. And the people wouldn't let us stay because they was afraid by themselves, you know? 

So my father said to me and to my sister, I'll ask him. I'll ask them. Let they take you and, and the sister, and I'll be over here. 

And I'll go every single day from house to house, he said. And I'm going to work over there. Maybe they'll give me something to eat and everything. 

So I said to my father, I'm not going to let you alone. We're going to grow old together. And he said to me, you have to go. You have to go with them, and I'll be here. And the father make us to go. 

And when we was going out with the partisans, uh, from this village, maybe about 30 miles, and this was in wintertime. It was very cold. And in Russia, you know, the winters is, is terrible. 

So we came-- we was going out from just, uh, village, about 30 miles. And then they say to us-- was three girls, me and my sister and another girl. They say, you have to stay here. You're not going to go with us. We can't take you. You are too young. You're not going to help us out. 

What shall we do? And this was about 4 or 5 o'clock at the, in the afternoon. We started to cry. What shall we do? Where shall we go? And, uh, our house, from our house was so far away, we are go? 

And so they left us. They was going away and leave us staying on the field, on the naked field, you know. And we are crying. 

I was the oldest. I said to, to these girls, I said, let's go. We'll go so long until we'll find a house. And we'll coming in the house and we'll beg-- beg for, for eating, for something, you know? 

So we was going another 6, eh, 30 miles until we find a house in a, in the woods, you know. And we came in, and I tell them the story of what happened to us. And they was really good people, so they gave us to eat. 

And they say, don't you worry. We have over here headquarters from partisans. And we'll send you over there and they'll take you in the partisans. 

So we were sleeping over. In the morning we woke up. They gave us something to eat. And then they show us the way where to go to the headquarters to the partisans. 

And we went there. We came in a house and we tell the story. We was talking very well in the Russian, you know. 

And thank god we met two Jewish, uh, generals. And they saw us, they start, they start to cry, really. And they said, don't you worry. Now you are going to be in good hands. 

So they left to headquarters in the, uh, in the woods, in the partisans. They send to a man and they brought us over there. We were sick. We was very sick. So they put us in a hospital. And they give us everything-- they clothes, and food, and everything. 

And then we was in good health when we start to, were working for them. My little sister was working in kitchen for the, uh, soldiers. I was working in a, in a hospital. I didn't have any idea how to work or what to do, but they took me to work. 

I just working with a doctor. They was bringing every single hour the, um, and the people. I forgot how to tell this. They rang in people, um, see, like I said, it's, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were Russian people? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no. Uh, sick people. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, sick people. 

SUBJECT: Sick, sick people. Um, I, I forgot the word. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was your mother? 

SUBJECT: My mother was, uh, was, uh, dead. Like I said, they burn her-- her, my mother and my sister and the grandmother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew? And you knew that this had happened? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know? 

SUBJECT: When I was in the, in the ghettos after the first, uh, killing, you know. So I came to the ghettos, like I told you, with my father and my sister, how we've met all together. So we knew that they are dead, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You had no hope of finding-- 

SUBJECT: I forgot to tell you that when after they kill, they burned the 1,000 Jews, we came to see what ha-- how they did it, what, what happened. Was-- I was fainting over there. I couldn't see. Was bones, was legs, was heads, was arms, was a terrible thing. And when I saw this, I fainted dead. 

So what I want to tell you about the, um, the, um, what I was talking about. 

INTERVIEWER 2: About the hospital. 

SUBJECT: Oh, the hospital. So they would, uh, bring, uh-- when you shoot a man, you know, when he's not dead-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wounded. 

SUBJECT: Wounded. Wounded. So they brought a lot of wounded people. They brought a lot of, uh, sick people, but they have malaria. And I didn't have any idea what for a sickness this is. And this was a real terrible sickness. 

But what can I do? They told me to, to work over that. I was working. Uh, a woman, uh, doctor was with me, too, and she took care of these people, too. 

So one night they brought, uh, two, two men with malaria. And they fall down from, from the beds, and I was scared to death. So I was going to this, uh, woman, to the, uh, doctor, and I said, you have to help me out. Look how they look. They was falling from the, from the beds, and I don't know what to do. 

Was a very hard life. They was giving me a rifle. I was going, you know, with the, um, with the soldiers to bring food and to bring clothing. 

We was working like, like men. I was 15 years old. My, my, uh, uh, sister was 12 years old. We was going hand by hand with the men. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- where was your father? 

SUBJECT: My father, oh, my fath-- I, we didn't know. A whole year, he didn't where the father is because he told us to go. And, uh, and that's it. 

One day, um, our gen, our general came to me and he said, I brought you a, a letter, and I think this is your father. Because he was, he was asking me if I know a name Sh-- Shura, or Marusia. And, uh, I, he brought me the letter and I, uh, was reading a letter from my father. 

The father came in the same village in the same headquarters that we was. When I hear that father is alive, right away they told, uh, the partisans, two partisans to take me to the partisan headquarters in village and to see the father. I was going with a rifle, you know, and I had what to wear. 

I came over there, I didn't recognize him. He was terrible. He was so old. And he didn't have, uh, clothes on him, you know. And he have a beard up to here, a beard. 

He didn't recognize me, because I was, I was good-looking, you know. I have what to eat, and what to wear. So I took him with me, and since then we was all the time together. These are, these are his stories to tell, but I want to just the, the main thing to tell you, you know? 

So I, I brought him to the partisans and he was working over there and we was together. In the time what we was in partisan, the Germans would surrendered. They surrendered a few times, us. They like to kill us, because we was a very big help for the Russians, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They surrounded you? 

SUBJECT: They surrounded the woods, you know. They couldn't get in in the woods, because the woods was so big in, in, in mud and in water. But what they would do is, with the airplanes, you know, they would come and bombard the, the, uh, the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you sick at all in the woods, with the mud and the cold? 

SUBJECT: We was very sick. We were sick, but I don't know-- this is a miracle, how we, uh, escaped, you know, and we are alive. This was a miracle re, really, because the conditions was so bad, it's unbelievable. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you eat? 

SUBJECT: Grass. My father would, uh, take whatever would grow very big leaves. So my father would take the leaves, with the dirty water, and he would cook this, you know. And we was eating that. 

We had a little bit when the third time when he made the, uh, the surrounding, the partisans, you know, the third-- this was the third time. Then the Russians, um, freed. The Russians freed the, the whole Poland, you know. 

So, uh, what I want to tell you I lost my memory of, really. I don't remember so much. 

So, uh, he would take the, the leaves and he would cook with dirty water, and he would give us to eat. So, uh, was going on about two years, something like this-- two years. Then he said to us, the third time when, when this was, like I say, the father said to us, you know what, yeah, when the third time they surrounded the partisans, we was going deep in the wood. My father took us deep in the woods. And he said, over here we're going to see it, and we're gonna see, it was going to be maybe the, uh, Russians feel, uh, free at us, or maybe not. 

As a matter of fact, the Germans was in the woods in this time, the third time. And they was hear-- we was hearing how they laugh, or how they talk, or how the radios was, was playing, you know. And this was the last time though, this, because then the, uh, Russians freed these, the partisans and the, uh, uh, the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were overhearing the Germans talk? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were so close? 

SUBJECT: Ah, we were so close. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, why didn't you-- 

SUBJECT: But they wouldn't go too far in the woods because over there was so deep, uh, mud and water, they was afraid to go over there. And another thing was a lot of animals-- was all kind of terrible animals. But we didn't, uh, we didn't care about it. Because, uh, the father said, look, sooner or later we're not going to live, he said to us. So it's nothing to be afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you talk about, did you talk about the fact that you may not survive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. Of course. We was so swollen. We was very swollen, me and my, my, uh, sister, because we didn't have what to eat. And that's what the father would make for us. We couldn't take it, you know. This was terrible-- without salt, and green leaves with the dirty water, you know. 

So in the woods was, um, blueberries a lot. So my father said to us, let's go in the, uh, let's go, uh, deep in the woods, and we'll, uh, we'll be in the, uh, blueberries. We'll eat how much we could, and that is going to be our life, he said. And we said, OK. 

So we went to the, uh, to the blueberries, you know. We was sleeping over there. We ate how much we could and we get so sick, very sick, and the father didn't know what to do with us. The father was all right. And we was very sick, both of us, because we was young. We couldn't take any-- the, the conditions for life and everything. Anyway-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did, how did you know when the war was over? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I want to tell you. So when we didn't hear the Germans, and my father said to us, I can't understand. Where are they? We don't hear any, anymore the Germans. 

They don't speak. They don't laugh. They don't, eh, play the radio. 

But in this night was a crystal night from the Russians. They bombard over there, everything-- the woods and the villages. And in this time, in this night, they, uh, they freed everybody. And they, uh, they killed the Germans how they could, you know, in every way. Um, I can't, I don't know how to tell. They freed, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel now? 

SUBJECT: But what I want to tell you is this. So, uh, so the second day it was raining. It was a very, very big rain, a heavy rain. And the, and we are in the woods, and we hear somebody's coming. So my father said, I have to take a look who is, who is there-- an animal, or the, maybe-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you hiding under something? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, under the trees. But the woods from the Russians was so, uh, they was-- see? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bombed out, you mean? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't know how to say. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you sleep in the woods? 

SUBJECT: On the ground. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No blankets? 

SUBJECT: On the water. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The woods were very thick? You couldn't see through them? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 2: The woods. 

SUBJECT: I could see the woods. I was in the woods. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you couldn't see through, you couldn't see out? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, that's right. They were so, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dense? 

SUBJECT: Right. So my father said to us, let's see who's coming. So he hide under a tree, and he was, uh, looking who is coming. You're not gonna believe, this was a partisan from our, eh, from our partisans. 

And he recognized him, my father. And then he saw us, he faint. He said, you are still sitting here? 

The, the, uh, the Russians came and we are now free and everything. And we didn't know. Our whole month we were sitting in the woods, we didn't know that the Russians freed us. 

So he took us. I-- we were so sick. And he had, and he said, come on, I'll take you in our village. And we'll make, uh, for you, you should wash up a little bit, and we'll make what to eat and we'll give you something to wear. 

And, uh, and then we came over there in this village, nobody would believe it that we were sitting a whole month not, not knowing that the, the Russians freed us. If not this man, we would, we would, uh, die over there. He brought us and he make for us eating, you know, and he, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your father come to this country with you? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, my father is here in New Haven. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you talk about this with one another ever? 

SUBJECT: Of course. We almost, uh, all the time you remind the places where we was, and how was it, and every time. Matter of fact, I have nightmares. It's unbelievable. 

I-- when I woke up, I am sick. All the time they coming. And they, they catch me, and they want to shoot me. And they kill me, and something like this all the time, all the time. 

So then we was a whole week in this village until we could stay off our feet, you know? And then the partisans was not far away where we was, and, and they said to us that we are dead. We didn't come in this month what the Russians, uh, freed us, you know? The, they count us for, for dead people. So, we'll, we lost our lives somewhere, they say. 

And then we came, they couldn't believe it. They was so happy for us. And they did everything for us. 

They brought us doctors. They gave us, uh, food. They gave us what to wear, you know. 

And when we was all right, so, uh, the partisans said to us-- the general from the partisans-- he said, now you have to go home and go of your own, you know? So they took my father of hard labor after that. And me and my sister, they, um, they sent home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you find when you got home? 

SUBJECT: This was in 1944. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you find when you got home? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. We came home. This took us from Minsk to, to us, a whole week until we came home. We came home. We didn't recognize our town, you know. Everything was broken and burned, you know. 

And we find a few Jews over there and they took us. And we was living in one house, maybe about 15 people. And my father was in Minsk. The send him of hard labor after the war. 

So the father said to us, OK, I'll go over there where they send us. And you go home and I hope I'll come to you. No matter how, but I hope I'll come to you. 

So we went home, like I say. We, um, we knew our family, a neighbor of us, and we gave them away clothes what we have, you know. My mother gave away. 

She said, if you're gonna leave, I'll come and I'll take it back. If not, it's going to be for you. So we knew that the mother gave away the clothes to, uh, uh, Gentiles, our neighbor, you know. 

So we came to, to her. She was so scared. And she wasn't happy with us, you know. But I said to her, look, I am alive. I know the mother gave to you clothes and everything. And you have to be nice to us, because I am a partisan and I can kill you, too. 

And she was very afraid for us. And she took us in the house. And she gave us to eat, you know, and she didn't have another choice. 

So I said, I don't go for the clothes. I don't need any clothes. I'm so happy that I am alive, and I can take something, I said, to the people what they kill us. 

I am more than, than happy, I said. You can keep the clothes. I don't need it. And I was gone to the people what, uh, the-- so the Jewish people, I said, I'm not going to stay with her, because I'm af-- I, and I don't want to see her. 

And it was, uh, about two weeks until my father came back. They send him back to us. From the hard labor work, they send him again to us. 

And we was living together, and then came other, other Jewish people over there, you know. There was one family, no matter who came from the Jewish people, it was one family. It was like sisters and brothers, you know. 

And when the father came, he make us a home, you know. We was living over there with the Russians. And then the Russians told us there are Polish people from Poland, you know, Polish, uh, citizens, you have the right to go where you want to go. The Russian people, they didn't, uh, let them go anywhere. But the Polish people, they say, if you want to go somewhere to find your family, maybe some, somebody is alive, you can go. 

So my father took us and we went to deep in, in Poland. We came from, we came to War-- Warsaw. From Warsaw, we came to, uh, Hanover. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you go? 

SUBJECT: This wasn't Poland. Uh, we was going by, uh, by trains. This was after the war, so we was going by trains. 

And we, um, and my father said to us, we have-- we're going to go somewhere, over to America if they let us go, or to Israel. So we went to Germany in 1946. We came to Berlin. 

Over there was that joint from America. We had a lot of help from them. They help us in every way. They send us to doctors. They gave us clothes. They gave us everything. They help, help us out very much. 

And then my father said, uh, we'll go to, to America, because we have a lot of relatives over here. And they'll maybe take us, and we'll go over there. So we came, um, in 1946. 

No. My father was going in 1945 with my sister. Because 1945, they let go people from, uh, Germany to America. But in 1946, they didn't let them go. 

So they went in 1948. They went in, uh, in America, my father and my sister. And I was living four years in Germany, which I was sick every single day. 

INTERVIEWER 1: By yourself? 

SUBJECT: I couldn't-- no, no. I was married already. I was married when I had my son over there. And my son was very sick, and I couldn't go in 1945. 1948-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you meet your husband? 

SUBJECT: I met him in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: He had been in a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: He was, uh, he was in Russia, really. He was in Russia. He'll tell you his story. I know my story. Because he didn't know me, I didn't know him, you know? And we come from different parts from Poland. 

So, uh, then we came over there. We came, like I say, in the, um, in the ca-- American camps. And, uh, we tried to go out from the camps, you know, from Germany. 

Because every single day in Germany, to see it was for me a whole year. I couldn't stand over there to be, you know? But I didn't have another choice. 

So when I was married-- in 1946 I was married. In 1947 I have my son. And he was very sick, and I couldn't, I couldn't go to America. 

And I said to myself, I'll kill myself. My father is here. My sister is here. We was going through so much terrible things in our lives, you know. And now I'm separated from them. What shall I do? 

But anyway, um, then come the time, you know, in one good day, and they tell us that 1946 can go to America. It's matter of fact even took us too long they send us over here. They make for us papers and everything, and they send us over here. 

And so was a story from my life. I thank God I am here. I'm very glad. I hope, I hope America will, will be forever and ever for everybody. It's a wonderful country we like very much. 

When we came over here we kissed the ground, you know. We make a nice living. We educated our, our children, you know. And we thank God for America. God bless America. That's all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's a very-- 