INTERVIEWER: OK, we're rolling. So you just begin. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: I'm Irene Shapiro, born Hass. I am 54 years old, born 1925 in a very small Galician town of Brzezhany, which I'd have to spell for you. And the reason for which I was born there was that my parents lived in the so-called corridor-- political division of Poland between East Prussia and Germany. And at that point, in these days, there were no mohels in the little town in which I grew. So when my mother was pregnant, she went to where she came from, so that, in case it was a boy-- and disappointingly, I wasn't-- I could be circumcised. And so, I became a so-called quote unquote "Galitzianer" by that event. But I was raised in Western Northwestern Poland in a large enough town with some approximately 150 Jewish families. 

My father was a noted musician-- a composer and an excellent violinist. My mother was a teacher. Both college people. And my father, at first, he was a violinist, a soloist. And after a while he decided to teach. So he got his degree in pedagogy at the University of Lemberg. And of all the places to work, he was asked to work as a professor of music at a German high school, and that Polish taught, subsidized by Deutsches Reich. So you can well imagine what kind of life, and what was spoken about in my home. 

He eventually was dismissed in 1938. They just wouldn't have a Jew, although he's done a tremendous service to the German folks-- Deutsche community in that town. He was conducting a choral group, operetta, has written music. He led a wind orchestra and a string orchestra, and so forth and so on. The community could be compared with a Midwestern or a southern Jewish community-- small community, we stuck together. We had two versions of the Zionist movement-- one right wing, Betar, and a left wing or middle of the road Hanoar Hatzioni in a small little synagogue. And we got together pretty much aware of the fact that we were Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: How big was the city? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: The city was about 60,000. 

INTERVIEWER: And the name of it again? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Grudziadz. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you spell it? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: G-R-U-D-Z-I-A-D-Z. 

INTERVIEWER: And would you mind spelling the town where you were born 

IRENE SHAPIRO: B-R-Z-E-Z-H-A-N-Y. 

INTERVIEWER: And geographically this was positioned where, would you say, without a map? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Grudziadz was nearly at the estuary of the river Vistula, just before it reached the Bay of Danzig-- the bay of the dance, the Baltic Sea, I'd say approximately 15 miles from the former east Russian border. You could actually see east Russian border on nice days. 

Brzezhany, on the other hand, was in the eastern part of-- uh, in the western-- sorry, western part of the Ukraine. That was the so-called Polish Ukraine, also known as Galicia-- the eastern Galicia-- not too far from the former Soviet border. And that was a typically Jewish town, a small town where my grand and great grandparents lived, and both of my parents-- high school sweethearts-- came from that area. 

My father was in an orchestra-- a bandleader in the Polish army. And with that army, he migrated or he was sent off to Western part of Poland. He liked it there. He settled there and brough my mother in. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did they go to university? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: My father went to University of Lemberg, and my mother studied at a seminar-- that was a sort of a teachers institution in the town where she was from. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the terrain like? What was the geographical? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: In the western part? 

INTERVIEWER: Where you grew up. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: It's a very pretty lake area, much like Maine. Pines, sand dunes, mild climate. We had some skating in the winter, not too much. Very much like East Prussia and northern parts of Germany. On the other hand, Brzezhany, where I used to go every third or fourth summer to visit my grandparents-- this was the breadbasket of Poland. Beautiful land of wheat and corn with two minorities-- Jews and Ukraines-- both hating each other because Poland maintain the conquer and divide policy, egging on one minority against the other. So the Ukrainians, whenever they could, killed Jews. And the Jews quietly hated the Ukrainians, and downed them to feel a little better about themselves. 

INTERVIEWER: The Jews were not violent? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: The Jews were never violent. I found Jews most of the time professing and adhering to the, don't make waves, let's be nice people. 

INTERVIEWER: Even against the Ukrainians, who were inflicting harm on them? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. The Jews carried on their shoulders the history of centuries. They were invited to Poland in the 1300s or so, where they built cities for Polish kings, and then were promptly, when not needed, located in isolated areas and despised for one thing to be what they were-- not Polish themselves. Polish Jews. 

Now extend that for the centuries to come-- constantly picked on, pogroms. And so you end up intimidated. That's how Jews met the war. The only exception were the young Zionists, who have started their haksharas-- who practiced at times of their right wing use of weapons, who dreamed about getting Palestine liberated from the British. They were different. They were a little better prepared to fight for their peoplehood and nationality. But the other Jews, their refuge was their religion. 

INTERVIEWER: But these young Zionists, when they encountered violence from the Ukrainians in the small town where your family had resided for so many centuries-- didn't they fight? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Did they fight? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: I couldn't tell you. I would say-- I would say that they probably did fight back to some extent. They were never in large enough numbers to do that. And they, too, were intimidated. I remember clearly later on, we moved to the eastern part of-- Northeastern part of Poland, the big city of Bialystok, where Jewish students would simply not walk in the park. Very much like ourselves in New York today. I just wouldn't go walking in the park. 

Now, am I intimidated? I absolutely am. What can I alone do against hoodlums? Now how could a young student stand up against attackers? 

INTERVIEWER: But you said young Jews, and I think that young anyone would not walk in the parks in New York City. So there is a difference. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Because this time, the muggers are against anybody who has money in his pockets. But at that time, those were specifically anti-Semites. There was not other minority. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they identify the Jews? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Jews were the blacks of Europe, especially in Central and Eastern Europe. They were racially, so to speak-- once again, I'm a biologist and I disbelieve in races-- but they had the mixed characteristics of people who came, were stemmed from Asia, and not from Europe. Certainly not from Slavic lands. True, they underwent injections of Slavic blood during pogroms and rapes-- repeated rapes. But they were different, and they were the only minority. It was very easy to recognize a Jew even if he didn't wear a yarmulke and a beard. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said the Ukrainians were also a minority in that-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: And they looked different. 

INTERVIEWER: So the Jews weren't the only minority? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: In that part of Poland-- Western part of Poland-- the Jews were the only minority. The Ukrainians were only-- a minority only in Ukraine-- where they, too, only in the Polish part of Ukraine, which subsequently was annexed to the Soviet Ukraine in 1939 and unified as one republic. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back to your birth and your upbringing, your childhood, whatever you remember, as much as you can remember, about your family, about your school. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: My parents, I would say, were assimilated Jews. Very Western. We had a very elegant home. There never was enough money for anything, but always enough for education, good books. I and my sister were given piano lessons, and painting lessons, and whatnot lessons-- ballet. And we had Friday tea time, where my father's colleagues would come and play trios and quartets. 

But Jewishness was maintained. Not very much in the way of religion as much as in national identity. This small town has hired a Hebrew teacher who taught us Hebrew. And then again, my father was active in the small Jewish community, he has undertaken conducting in a little band for the Jewish people, always participated in celebrations, and so forth. And they went to synagogue on the major holidays. 

But I was raised in much the same way as all my Polish friends. I went-- attended a Polish gymnasium, which was for the few and not for all. There was no compulsory education past the elementary grades. And that was an excellent student, graduated summa cum laude. And I was not, perhaps, subject to as much anti-Semitism as in poorer sections in town of-- in towns where Jews were actually molested. 

But I witnessed it all. I witnessed boycotts of the few Jewish shops in that town with placards saying, buy in your own stores and your own goods. Once, I've written a beautiful composition, and it was torn. And what was found in my notebook instead was, Jew go to Palestine. Then there were remarks made when I tried to join the Girl Scouts. We don't want anything but our own. 

And I had a few friends-- Polish friends who were a little closer to me. But it was always the awareness of my being different. You know, always the awareness that I wasn't one of them. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you discuss this with your closer friends? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: I attempted once. I attempted to express pride in Israel-- Palestine at that time. And that was recognized, but only to some extent. They could not-- would not buy my wanting to be a Polish Jew and not a Pole. How come-- how could you feel that way? Your father served in the Pilsudski legions, which was a very, very famous kind of army outfit, and my father actually was. 

And I don't think so. I don't thing that Poland was ready to be a multi-racial melting pot. It was only ready for the escapees of Jews, who christened themselves and became Polish. It just wasn't a nation where a Polish Jew with his magnificence-- Polish-Jewish, mind you, larger than Polish language-- culture, humor, songs, where it could thrive for a very long time. Unless, of course, it had not been for the fascist trends in Poland itself and imported from Germany. 

Perhaps if the Jews ever reached the status of blacks, where they would have stood up-- yes, there was a large enough activity-- community to have-- to have taken a stand. And to some extent, they have. For example, before the war, Jewish students were assigned left side seats in all Polish universities. And they all stood up. Didn't take a seat. Period. That was passive resistance, which I'm sure Martin Luther King would have approved of. There was nothing else you could do at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that the resentment was against your being a Polish Jew. Was there-- do you think you would have-- Jews in Poland would have had acceptance if they all converted? Was that encouraged? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. No. Nor would they have. Polish Jews were basically a proud community who wasn't ever given a chance to thrive. They have contributed an awful lot. 

INTERVIEWER: But you said that your Polish friends said, why are you a Polish Jew? Your father was in the Army, you had a-- you know, a stake in the Polish country. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Correct. 

INTERVIEWER: Apparently they would have accepted you if you had converted. Is that true? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: That was possibly just a statement of-- I'm not sure what it would have been like, had I actually wanted to convert. But all I was trying to emphasize-- there wasn't a chance for me to be accepted as me-- for me to stand and be proud of my Polish Jewish heritage. 

INTERVIEWER: You said there was a thriving cultural community in Poland-- theaters, etc. Can you describe some of that? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: We had Polish Jewish newspapers coming to us daily from Warsaw. I am translating loosely, our review, and a little review for children, which I was getting. We had a gigantic theater in Warsaw in Polish language. Humor-- to this day, there is a very well-known, noted comedian in a nightclub in Warsaw. And to this day he is very highly liked, despite the fact that he has a big Semitic nose, so to speak. 

And there are names that I could name-- Ida Kaminsky. She's a Polish actress of renown. Hannah Ordonowna-- a Polish songstress. It was a well-known community. And lot of it was expressed in the Yiddish. You see, Poland consisted of Jewish minorities. Some of the so-called Litvak was the Jews and Galician Jews. And depending upon their background, they did or did not maintain a strongly Yiddishist culture. 

The formerly Russian-- Poland was divided between the three empires-- the Austrian, Austro-Hungarian, Germany, and Russia. And the parts were Russian maintained Yiddish culture to a large extent. The Galician Jews under Franz Joseph, the benevolent emperor of Austria, were more assimilated. For example, my grandfather was clerk of the court. A Jew, clerk in the court. That's unheard of in the other parts of Poland. So Warsaw Jews, in that part, they spoke Yiddish among themselves and lower classes. 

But the educated Jews-- my generation is the same as my husband's, my husband is a Native American generation of Jews-- how many of those speak Yiddish? We were exactly the same. I had no difficulty comparing my notes with my husband's notes. It's exactly the same. A Polish high school, Jewish Polish heritage. His is a Jewish American. He doesn't even understand a Jewish joke. I taught myself Yiddish. I never spoke Yiddish. My parents spoke Yiddish so that we wouldn't understand what they were talking about. 

So yes, that depends. When we migrated to Bialystok, eastern part of Poland, where Yiddish culture was active, rich, it's the first time that I became aware of the fact that this was a language with grammar. And strangely enough, where the Soviets occupied our land, Bialystok, our parents' association PA voted Polish language in. We-- I went to a rich people's high school, besides a finishing school. Ruskin high school, to this day, fun is being poked out it, because I mean, rich factory owners daughters went there. I went there because my father taught, and I had free tuition. 

But our parents voted the Polish language in, and it was the Soviets who said, aren't you ashamed of it? Why don't you want to study in Yiddish-- your own language? Wasn't enough. This was in part, I'd say, a class distinction. People who were from the better classes spoke Polish. Not much of it is known here, because the immigrants who came to the United States weren't the likes of my father. 

The successful people stayed. The same with all the other minorities. Who came to the United States? The forsaken ones. Those that couldn't make it, and then had-- was spunky enough and vigorous enough to make it. And so there was a large Polish Jewish heritage. And it has been only recently exterminated in Poland. I periodically go to Poland, and I brought with me a lot of books still published. 

There was, in 1965, a wonderful Jewish theater there. There were high schools and elementary grades Jewish. And city of Wroclaw, for example. It's all gone now. So that there was-- this is a legitimately, just as much as there is a Jewish American community, so there was a Polish Jewish community. A rich, a vital and-- 

INTERVIEWER: You said you graduated the Polish gymnasium with honors, but you must have been about 14. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: We had a so-called little regions-- small, lesser regions and higher regions. And 19-- the first of all, I skipped two grades. I went to private schools. And I didn't graduate. I just finished Polish lower-- lesser gymnasium. But that was already in Bialystok. And then the Soviet Army came in. So we were remade into a Soviet 10 year secondary school. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did your family migrate to Bialystok? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Bialystok had a very large Jewish community. It had several Yiddish high schools, and one Hebrew high school. And my mother's brother taught social studies at that high school. When my father was dismissed-- that was 1938-- the brownshirts were already parading in the streets. There was just one hope that in the eastern part, far away from Germany, whether he hoped that, if anything happened, it would happen to Western Poland, I don't know. But that was the only place he could get a job. 

And sure enough, he got a job as a music teacher in several Jewish high schools. 

INTERVIEWER: You said the brownshirts were marching in Western Poland. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Not in Western Poland, but next door to us, in Gdansk, which was supposedly a free city. 

INTERVIEWER: But the Germans were there already. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Oh, yes. We took a trip to the seashore several times. We passed by and saw them parading with the Heil Hitler. 

INTERVIEWER: Gdansk is outside of Danzig. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: And not too far-- Gdansk is Danzig. 

INTERVIEWER: Is Danzig. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. And that was within a very-- very, very short distance from the city where I was raised. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. So your family went to Bialystok and-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: We settled there. And then, as you remember, in 1939, one year after we settled, the Soviet Army had the infamous pact with Hitler whereby they-- we were occupied by the Germans for exactly seven days. And then the Soviet Army came in and truly liberated us. 

During the two years of the Soviet occupation, there was a marked difference. The Jews were the welcome and the trusted minority at that time. It was entirely different. I could have never-- had I been me at that time-- believed that anti-Semitism would be flagrant and in existence as it is now in the Soviet Union. Nothing at that time indicated that that might happen. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you an only child? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. I had a sister. I have a sister. 

INTERVIEWER: Younger? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. She is younger. She's in Poland. 

INTERVIEWER: She's in Poland? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: That's a very sad story. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, let's continue and find out. But I am trying to keep the chronology straight. In 1938, you went to Bialystok. And it was then invaded by the Germans. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. One year later. 

INTERVIEWER: One year later it was invaded by the Germans. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: And they receded, and the Soviet Army came in for two years. 

INTERVIEWER: And the Jews were comfortable. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Very 

INTERVIEWER: Under German. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER: Under Russian. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: When the highest positions. Poles were very uncomfortable. But the Jews were quite comfortable, except for the capitalists. But the likes of my father were just the so-called professional intelligentsia. They were fairly comfortable. Naturally, conditions weren't as comfortable financially. It was a poorer set up. But fairly good. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that the Jews were a favorite minority under Russian domination because of the prejudice against Jews under German domination? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: I don't think so. I think that, at that time, the Soviets were not yet embarked on their racist modification. There was, after all, no Arab world with oil, where this would have been one of the motives and motivated forces. And the Jews at that time had a university in the city of Minsk, and the Bialy-Russian republic, of which we became part. There were in important positions. That was the time when Litvinov was the foreign minister. And there were just Jews all over. And they were many of the Bialystok Jews, by the way, were left wingers. Because this was an old revolutionary town. 

Now that I'm getting through Theos, because I never lived there long enough, but I understood after a while that a lot of the Jews in Bialystok perhaps were not the Bolshevik variety of Marxist, but did belong to the Second International. They later on were ostracized. The Soviets did not accept anything but pure and simple Bolsheviks. So they were ostracized. In fact, any left wing Zionists were persecuted. 

I thought-- my parents thought that I surely would end up in prison, because I was a Zionist, and belonged to Hashomer Hatzair, which is a left wing Zionist organization. And there were elections for uh-- for uh-- the school president, SO president of my school. And I was nominated. And the director of that Soviet-- or remade Soviet school stood up and spoke against this Zionist so and so. 

And I, being a naive-- what was I? Oh, just a teenager. Nonchalantly gave him a lecture on the merits of Zionism, and Hashomer Hatzair. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your name then? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Irene Hass-- H-A-S-S. 

INTERVIEWER: What was Irene in Polish? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Rena. I was known as Rena. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. Were you studying English then? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. I-- yes. I did know some English. No, the languages we had to choose from was either French or German, in high school. 

INTERVIEWER: Because your language now is so-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Well, I'm just a natural mimic. I also managed to learn Russian so well that I got myself to go into the Soviet Union to look for my sister, and passed four-- passed the NKVD, who were absolutely, were absolutely sure that I was a native Soviet citizen. That's how I, after the war, tried to go in and got her out. And so, I'm-- I have-- it's with ease that I speak languages. 

But I studied a little bit of English. I studied English in the ghetto in Bialystok, while I also participated in the underground. That was my time to meet with my underground person while having lessons. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe the Bialystok community, and then leading to your participation in the underground. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Well, I only had one year of it. And as I said to you, I was stuck with this upper class, rich man's world, where I felt a little unhappy, because I didn't quite have the same clothing as did my friends in school. And I just had an idea what the community was like. It was a very rich community. My father was giving much of himself to, for example, one folk Schuler folk school, Mendele Mocher Sforim School. 

And I only had to do with the Bialystok people who immediately surrounded me. We were slightly alienated, because they had a Russian background, and I had this Galician background, to some extent. But I did know that these were a spunky, active people. And they gave the Germans a sendoff after the seven days, before the Soviets marched in. They threw rocks at the German Army, screamed at them like one man. 

INTERVIEWER: The Jewish community? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. And the Germans were heard saying, we will come back, and we will let you have it. And they did. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe Bialystok itself as a city? It's a well-known Polish city. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: It was a very large town. I don't remember whether it had 350,000 in Polish situation. Warsaw itself had about 1 million. So that was a large city. A very ugly city. A factory town. This was a textile-- a second textile city in Poland. And the fabrics they produced were rather second rate fabrics. 

Oh, I really would say approximately 8,000, 7,500 or so. Before the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER: How many-- what was the first textile city? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Bielsk. B-I-E-L-S-K. And Lodge. They were known to have fabrics, woolens much like British woolens, of very fine quality. Bialystok was one of the second rate, as I discovered during the war, where people were selling things for food. We were much better off having Bielsk fabric than Bialystok. 

But it was a factory town and 1905. They participate in the workers' movement against the Czarist oppression. And that tradition of unionism persisted. And so when the Soviets marched in and occupied, I would say that they found very sympathetic Jews. They weren't Marxist. They certainly weren't Communist. Nor were they dead set against the Soviets. Nor was there much of a reason at that time, as I said to you. 

So the community, I'd say, was thriving. There were Jewish performances and schools in the Yiddish language. We-- that's where I started learning my Yiddish. The Soviets had Yiddish books-- textbooks, poetry. And that's where I learned a bit of it. And when they marched in, it must be said that they tried to take as many Jews as they could with them. 

They were advertising it. Why do you stay on? Don't you know what's going to happen? But they themselves were surrounded. I marched with the Soviet Army. I ran away from home. And we were lost. This-- you know, movement that the Germans were employing and surrounding us. They were ahead of us. There was no way of going. And the Soviets could not have really helped the Jews. They were totally demoralized in 1941, caught by surprise. 

INTERVIEWER: Between 1939 and 1941, under the Russians, you lived fairly-- a fairly stable existence? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: A fairly stable existence, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister was doing what? Your parents were doing what? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: My father was teaching music at several-- the same several high schools. He also conducted a Red Army Band. He was asked. This was a great honor bestowed upon him. And other than he conveniently lost his military books. He was, after all, a Polish petty officer. And he was frightened that they would perhaps send him off to Siberia. 

So he told them, when the time came to register, that he lost his military books. I don't think they really believed him, and gave him the so-called 11th paragraph, which meant his passport-- his citizenship-- wasn't quite right. And there was always the danger that he might be sent out. Because the Soviets, during 1941, apparently in preparation for a possible invasion, was sending out into the interior refugees who came from Germany. 

And they claim that many spies were among them, and that they were capitalists. And only the native Bialystok people were allowed to remain. The rest were sent off. And the people who had this type of an undesirable passport. And my father was one of them. So we weren't quite sure. You know, he was respected as a musician, but politically, not quite so. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother and your sister? What were they doing? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: My mother didn't work at that point. She's had problems with her heart. And she couldn't. As a matter of fact, at some time, I think the Soviets even allowed domestic help, because she couldn't manage. So my father worked, and I went to school, and my sister went to school. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. And was there any thought of leaving? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: At that time? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. We had-- we couldn't even think of it. Where would you go? People who were persecuted, people who were about to be sent to Siberia, some of these left. But they had to have a lot of money to traverse entire Europe, and somehow get to, let's say, Palestine. And America was out of reach. My father had a visa to come to the United States, which he could never use. 

First of all, it was just for him, and not for my mother, not for us. And second of all, by the time he got it, I think he was called to the American Embassy in Warsaw perhaps a day or two before the war started. So that was out. Where would you go? 

INTERVIEWER: In 1941, what happened? What changed? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: In 1941 was my graduation ball. And we stayed till 2 o'clock in the morning. And I came home and just put my head down when the bombs were falling. And the Soviets were caught with their pants down. The airport was bombed. And that started it. And that lasted for, I think, two weeks. 

I found masses of humanity. Masses of humanity went on the roads and trying to get to the Soviet Union. There were no trains. There were no buses. And people were encouraged to do it. So with little satchels and rucksacks on our backs. And that's what the Germans needed-- armies of escaping people. They were just nonchalantly machine gunning with low flying planes. I was one of those, and found myself in the woods without anyone I started with. Two brave souls like myself, two boys and another girl. Lost them. Then I found a friend of mine, and we marched. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents? Your-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. My parents wouldn't budge. 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: My sister wasn't with us at that time. She was in Galicia. She was in the mountains with my aunt. So we did not-- my sister and I did not live through the same things together. 

INTERVIEWER: You just went on this march with your friends. Why? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Well, we knew what was going to happen. 

INTERVIEWER: Weren't you afraid to leave your parents behind? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Well, at that time I wasn't. I felt anything was better than ending up in Nazi Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: And they were not concerned? Or they were not afraid? Or they-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Were afraid. 

INTERVIEWER: They were? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: They-- my father was approached by the director of my school. And he was told, Mr. Hass-- they'd call him, Hass. Don't you know? Don't you know what's going to happen to you? Pack and come. I have a car. It wouldn't have helped them. All these cars were demolished. Very few got through. The Germans really didn't permit any evacuation of that area, to speak of. 

We tried to break through the front line several times. Then each time we got to a point where there supposedly was some Soviet unit on the other side, the Germans were right in front of us. And finally, we marched perhaps 150 miles-- I and parents of my girlfriend and myself. And we were caught by the Germans. So I went back to Bialystok. 

INTERVIEWER: To what? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: To find the city burning. The whole Jewish area burning. 

INTERVIEWER: Your parents? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: And that's what I thought. So I stationed myself on the outskirts of the city, and my friend went to see what was left of my home. And that house was left intact. And my mother came to get me. And I was speaking of why I wasn't afraid. I was scared. I was totally just a scared little child. I refused to sleep by myself. I who marched-- marched with the army. I came back home to sleep with my parents, because I was afraid to sleep by myself. So totally frightened of that experience I was. There were many children like myself walking. 

INTERVIEWER: And so you went back home with your parents. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: So I went. But the spunky thing that I was, I wasn't giving up. I looked Gentile. And there was nothing to eat at home. And I went to little villages with whatever bits of soap or whatever we had as a Gentile, right under the German noses, and traded it for food, and came home with a little bit of food. 

INTERVIEWER: No one-- no one stopped you? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. I never appeared-- it never occurred. I was this very young looking teenager, and very, very much like these Bialy-Russian peasants. And it never occurred to them to push. 

INTERVIEWER: How long did this go on? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Oh, for a couple weeks. And then they started building the ghetto, which means the war was coming up. That put an end to that. We were walled in. 

INTERVIEWER: Walled in? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Walled in. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe that? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: It was a-- reminds me of the western palisades-- the-- where the small settlements were-- walled themselves in from Indians. Something like that. It's just a wooden structure which would cut a street in half. In other words, radiating from the inside of the ghetto, there would be a street, and then a stop on that street. 

And the houses on the other side of the gate were emptied of inhabitants on either side, and the SS people or [SPEAKING GERMAN]-- wherever they were, were marching up and down these gates. And there were a few entry gates to the ghetto. This was a very large ghetto. But it is undergone consecutive sendouts-- as I'm translating here as it was known. Because they were inevitably sending people out to work. 

First they looked for lawyers to be sent out to work, then doctors to be sent out to work. Needless to say, they were exterminated in the nearest woods, and never came back. 

INTERVIEWER: And you-- how did this-- how did this send out occur? What was the-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: These people just-- they went ahead, looking for lawyers, or looking for doctors, or looking for teachers, or looking for men. 

INTERVIEWER: Someone came into the ghetto? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Germans. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Came into the ghetto and did what? How did they gather up these-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: That was even, I think, before the ghetto was locked up. They did it on the outside. They simply would come and get men out. 

INTERVIEWER: How? Can you describe exactly-- what did you hear? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: At gunpoint. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you hear? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Raus! There was no question. They came in, into a house, Juden Raus! To a man. If he was a young man, he went. People just went. Several soldiers, house to house. When they got their quota, they left. And then we never heard of them. And so the ghetto was minimized at first. It didn't have all the people that belong there, because so many men perished. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't take women or-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Not at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Older men or-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Not at that time. No, this was a calculated genocide, don't you see? Getting rid of military age men precluded the eventuality of any uprising. 

INTERVIEWER: And you knew where they took them? Or you heard? Or how did you know they were killed? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Eventually, news got back-- where they were and where they had really been followed a pattern. They would work them for a while, digging ditches on the Russian front, or whatever else. And then just shoot them down in the nearest woods. And some few peasants saw it. And it has been happening all over Poland. And since Bialystok became the receiving town for smaller towns that were totally liquidated, we knew all about it. Vilna Ghetto, we knew all about it. 

And this is why we had no difficulty getting people to join the underground, because we knew what was happening. 

INTERVIEWER: What was happening inside the ghetto? Could you get out at all? Or were you-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Only to work. Or if you smuggled, or if you knew how to. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get food? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: They rationed a certain amount of bread and other. 

INTERVIEWER: They brought it into the stores in the ghetto? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. And then there were people in the ghetto, as anywhere else, who had money, and belongings, and jewels. And it was traded and sold to the outside. Some people had it. We never had. But again, I did something very, very unusual. I opened a school in the ghetto. Yes. And this completely boring teacher. 

And I taught little children and older children everything from Latin to physics and German. And it was truly remarkable, because so long as this was going on, both I and my students believed there's going to be a world to come. Of course. Education is preparation for life. There's got to be life. And these children didn't need a lesson plan from me, or motivation, or phony little sayings. They wanted to learn anything and everything. And I wanted to teach them. 

I think deep down I really felt they weren't going to use that. But I enjoyed it. So mothers of those children paid me whatever it was, a little bit. And that helped to buy additional bread for my family. So once again, I'm being very enterprised. Helped my parents. And that-- I did that for a while. And then there was no time. I was forced to work in a factory or else. 

Because the ghetto underwent one decimation, so to speak. They call it selection. In other words-- they decimate-- they had a quota, how many people to take out to gas chambers. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know there were gas chambers? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? 

IRENE SHAPIRO: Because at that time, I was already in the underground, and we knew darn well what it was. We knew all about when I near-- I eventually ended up passing this infamous Treblinka. And I could readily recognize ashes, human bones. And I knew about it. We knew all about it. We may have blocked it out for survival and sanity, but we knew about it. 

INTERVIEWER: The underground. You were a teacher. 

IRENE SHAPIRO: A teenager teacher. 

INTERVIEWER: A teenager teacher-- 17-year-old teacher. And there's an underground. Now, where is this underground? And how were you relating to them? And-- 

IRENE SHAPIRO: I, as I said, decided to do something for myself and take English lessons. And English, only because there was an English woman and whom I was very fond of. It was the furthest thought of my mind that I'd ever use it. It was simply, why not? Nice to know. And I took these lessons with a boy. And for some strange reason I sensed that something was going on while we were talking. And I asked him a point blank question-- if there is an underground, I want to know-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, yes. We're going to have to just change tapes. 

