SUBJECT: We finished with that joke. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, OK. 

SPEAKER 1: OK, any time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. So what was happening at home, Mr. Kaufman 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, when that Crystal Night happened, then you heard stories about people being dragged out of their beds at night and taken to police headquarters and beaten up and killed. But in very, very remote circumstances did you hear of people being killed. You heard of people being beaten up or pushed around, but not really killed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about you and your family? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. Nothing happened to us. Nobody touched us. Nobody, uh, uh, insulted us. We had-- . of course, now going to a Jewish school meant the same thing as going to a non-Jewish school, except by this time, the discipline in school was a little lax, because the teachers, the Jewish teachers themselves had, of course, problems. They-- they knew what was happening. 

They were 20 and 30 years old and 40 years old and 50 years old, and they had problems. And of course, we were kids and had childish minds. And all we were interested is in pranks and how do annoy the teacher and 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the teachers trying to prepare you in any way for what was to come? 

SUBJECT: Not at all. They didn't know. Nobody knew what was going to come. Who knew that some mad man is going to take people and actually kill them? I mean, this is the 20th century. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your father's work was changed. Your mother had to go to a brick factory. 

SUBJECT: Accepted it. Accepted it. You don't-- you know, it's funny, but the mind of a German or the Austrian is you have to go by the book. That's it. The law is the law, and whatever the law says, you must do. And most people, 99% of the people, are law-abiding. And when the law said, well, you have to take and bring your passport and be photographed, and they have to put a name of Israel on every man's passport and Sarah on every woman's passport, and you must have a middle name, you said, well, that's the law, and we'll do it. 

So we went, and we had-- that's right, we had ID cards. And we got Sarah and Israel. Every man and every child and every woman had to have it. But still, it wasn't-- it was done. You went there, and you had it done, and you walked out. 

Well, my father had lost his business, but he all of a sudden became a-- people were lining the streets at the embassies, for instance, at the American embassy, at the British embassy, to get visas to leave the country. And my father became a-- well, I don't know what I would call it, but it's sort of a-- sort of racketeering. He would procure passports by bribing Austrian officials, and get passports for Jews. 

And he said-- when I said, oh, my family, I said, why don't we? You know, why don't we get a passport and go? And he said, look, this can't last. And we're going to stay, because when everybody is left, we'll be here, and we'll be the first ones back. 

So he would procure these passports for people for money, people who had money, who could bribe officials to get these passports and get these visas, to South America and to different countries, like France, and anywhere, out of Austria. He would-- he was able-- he was getting these passports for these people. And he was arrested in, I believe, in 1939. And I remember going to the jail to visit him. 

And they kept him in jail for maybe two or three months and then let him out. I don't remember exactly if he had a trial or what happened, but and now, he was let out and went back to work. He was working in a milk factory. And by 1939, I had to go to a labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your father feel differently about leaving, once he had been arrested? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you talk about it with him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, he was arrested, but he was not abused. He was not, uh-- he was not beaten, though. He was not pushed around. It was just an arrest for bribing officials. And whatever happened, I don't know, you know. But he came out, and he was OK. So there was no, no reason for him to leave. He just didn't believe it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So he went to the milk- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, his-- for instance, his brothers were in the Austrian army. They were officers in the army and were killed in the First World War, and you know, had all decorations of the army. And-- and he-- he just felt very Austrian. And so did my mother. My mother was very patriotic. My grandfather, who was, in 1914, on business in Romania when the First World War broke out, left his family in Romania stranded and ran back to Vienna to enlist in the army to fight for Austria, believe it or not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So-- 

SUBJECT: They were very patriotic. People were, were patriotic, and they were-- they were-- they believed the letter of the law, that is, they believed whatever the law is, they had to do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And they didn't think the laws about Jews would last? 

SUBJECT: That's right. They said, this cannot last. That was their-- that was their feeling. And of course, to a great extent, we were not alone. There were millions who believed it. There were, I'm sure, a few people who saw what was coming, and that was-- that were the people that, that ran, that took everything they had and ran. But the rest of us were blind. They didn't see it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what happened to your father and to you? 

SUBJECT: All right, in 1939, after my father came out of jail, I was picked to go to a labor camp. And this was the first time I had to leave. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm sorry to interrupt, but I wanted to ask you. You never had the bar mitzvah. We didn't finish that. I'm sorry. Can we go back there now 

SUBJECT: Right, right. We-- I never had my bar mitzvah, because the temple was bombed. And in a way, it's funny, but as a child, I never-- I never wanted to go up there and have to read all this and the speech and all this. And when they bombed the temple, basically, I was glad. It's funny, but that was my feeling. I remember that. It was just one of those things that I never wanted to do, but I had to do, because my grandparents wanted me to do it, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And still, your parents didn't take that as a special sign of something-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --ominous? 

SUBJECT: No, they didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, let's continue. I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In 1939. 

SUBJECT: In 1939, I was taken-- that is, I wasn't taken. I was told to come to a labor camp. And I was going to be at a certain hour with my belongings at a railway station, and I'll be shipped off to a work camp. And my mother brought me to the station. I was about 14. And I'm-- I'm small anyway, and I know I was very small when I was 14. 

So she brought me to the station, and she left me there in care of some older Jewish men, who went on the same transport. And there must have been a few hundred men that left there. And we went to upper Austria. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you re-- do remember saying goodbye to your mother? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember of that? 

SUBJECT: Just-- nothing unusual. It was like going away to a summer camp, more or less. And-- and it was basically-- it was basically that. It was not, uh-- we weren't beaten there, or we weren't harassed. We were not abused. We were fed well, except that we had to be out there and work, building a road on-- on one of the mountains in Austria, beautiful countryside. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you say it was? 

SUBJECT: It was in-- in I believe it was in Carinthia, called Karnten in Austria. And it was called Erzberg It was a mountain. And we were clearing the paths for a road to be built. We were cutting trees, and so on. Well, most of the time, I would not really have to work. I was a water carrier. And I didn't-- I didn't really work hard. 

I think we stayed there for about a summer. And we wrote letters and commuted with the family. And they sent us packages. And it was a-- it was a more or less normal existence. It was nothing horrendous. I mean, you can take it. 

We came back in the fall, because, I think, the winters, you couldn't work up there, you know, because of snow and ice, and all that. So they sent us back. And upon return, I remember I had to go to the Labor Department to get another assignment, work assignment. But I think I came back, and I went to a school. 

Of course, we were not allowed to go to any higher education, that is, you couldn't go to high schools or colleges. But you had to learn a trade. You could learn a trade. And the Kultusgemeinde which is the Jewish community-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like a center. 

SUBJECT: A center, something like that, had set up classes for different trades. And I started to take carpentry, and I took plumbing. I took locksmith. And then I took photography, worked in a-- in a studio. A Jewish photographer had a-- had a studio. And I worked, I think, there for about six months in this studio. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Living at home? 

SUBJECT: Living at home, yeah. In 1940, we were going to emigrate to South America. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What changed your minds? 

SUBJECT: Well, it didn't change our mind. They changed their minds. We were going to, I believe, to Colombia. And we had-- it was all set, and we paid our fair, and whatever. And we had big crates sent to the house, and we were packing the crates. And they never picked up the crates. The transport was a fake. It was somehow-- everything was just done to-- to, I don't know, extort the money from us, or whatever. But it never came off. 

INTERVIEWER 1: May I ask you-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --about that? You mean your father didn't make up his mind to leave, or your mother, but that you were told that you would have to leave? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, no, no. No, at that time, we were ready to leave. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What changed your father's mind? 

SUBJECT: Well, the opportunity came, let's say. You know, we were-- my mother wanted-- for instance, they took Jewish children to England. And my mother tried to send my brother and myself to England. But somehow, we could not get on the transport to go to England. 

So by that time, now 1940, it got to a point where we-- where we wanted to leave. The war had started that thing with Poland, and we really want to leave. And somehow it happened. There was some kind of a fake deal going on with Columbia, and we just couldn't leave. We had to unpack, and the crates were picked up. And we just stayed. 

After that, there was no more chance to leave, because then, it really started. Once Poland was invaded and taken over, it ended it all. Now, in Poland is where the Germans really started with their atrocities. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You knew? 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't know. We didn't know. But this is where they really started. This we found out after we got there. In 19-- but on the meantime, we lived in Vienna, but we had to leave our apartment. We had to give up our apartment and move to a different district and move in with another family who already had three other families living in their apartment. But by this time, you could not leave the country anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were your parents saying to you? What was your father saying to you about his-- his patriotism, at this point? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: The-- the only thing that I remember was the hope that this will be over in no time at all, that this is just not going to last, that the war with Poland is going to be over, because France and England and everybody else declared war. And how long can Germany last? And we were expecting it to end any minute. Now, this was his opinion, and it was my opinion, too, at that time. Because he didn't know either. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your brother, how old was your brother? 

SUBJECT: My brother is a year and a half younger than I. So he was, at that time, probably about 12. 

INTERVIEWER 1: There were no discussions with other friends of the family who thought maybe you were wrong? 

SUBJECT: Well, I'm sure there might have been, but I really don't-- you know, I really don't remember what was said. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want to stop the tape a minute and let them in, because I hear it out there, OK? And I didn't want to get into the camp. Could you close the door, Herb, please? Thank you. 

SPEAKER 1: Tape rolling, Chris. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, you went to live with another family. 

SUBJECT: Yes, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were crowded into their apartment? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we had one room, and we used the kitchen. Everybody used the kitchen and the bathroom. There were three other families living there, that is, the family that owned the apartment and two other people really in each. Each had a room, and then we had a room, the four of us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what did you do every day? 

SUBJECT: Uh, we went to work. We did-- in the wintertime, we had to go out and shovel snow on the street. And summertime, we done-- lots of times, we had nothing to do really also-- just ran around the street, playing in the parks. But again, we had-- we had our own friends. We had Jews who were our age group, and we stayed together, and we played together. And there was no real abuse at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did the abuse begin? 

SUBJECT: Not until we came to Poland, in 1941. Now, in 1941, in-- in I believe it was in-- in the spring, we got a letter to report to a center-- it's a school-- with 40 pounds of belonging for each person, then one suitcase. And that was it. And we got the letter, and of course, we obeyed, because the-- the thinking of the German or the Austrian is, like I say, again, it's to the letter of the law. You do what you're told. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you frightened? 

SUBJECT: No, not at all, because I remember it was-- the reason for us leaving Vienna was that they made Vienna what they called Judenfrei clear-- clean of Jews, and that we were being evacuated to the east. And I remember my father saying, well, what can happen? We can only work. They can't kill us. And that's exactly what he said. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Describe the day that you left and were taken. You went to the railroad station, to the market place, with your suitcase. 

SUBJECT: We went to the school with our suitcases, and we were assembled there. And of course, hundreds and hundreds of other Jewish families came there and went with us. And there was a, uh, my father's sister and her family was there also in this transport. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did your father say to you about this? Was there-- 

SUBJECT: Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Nothing? 

SUBJECT: Nothing. There was-- there was-- there was nothing that we could do about it. There was nothing that-- what could you do? You had to do it, that there's no way to-- nowhere you could go. And then, again, you were not afraid, because the worst that could happen to you was you had to work, and you had to work anyway, anywhere. So why should you be afraid, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened at the-- at the school you were? 

SUBJECT: All right, at the school, we had bunks. We slept there for about two or three days, I believe. And I think I remember my mother said that Eichmann was at that school, that he came there to oversee what was happening. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know who Eichmann was? 

SUBJECT: Not at all, no. Now, one uniform looked the same like the other. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did she men-- why did she mention Eichmann? 

SUBJECT: She mentioned this after the war. She said, you know that Eichmann was at that school? She remembers it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She recognized him? 

SUBJECT: Well, I either recognized him or knew him by name, or whatever. Uh, well, I remember we were loaded on trucks and then brought to the railroad station and were put into railroad cars, and regular passenger cars, not cattle cars, or anything. And we were given food, ample, supplies, and water, and coffee, and whatever. And it was sort of exciting, I remember, as a boy to travel on a train, to leave Vienna to go someplace else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were regular passenger cars? 

SUBJECT: Yes, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hm. 

SUBJECT: Now, then, when we got to Poland, that was the first time since 1938-- and this is now 1941-- that we saw SS men with whips standing outside the train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

SUBJECT: Nothing yet. And we were rushed off the train. And I remember my brother getting off the train, and somehow, one of the SS men hit him with the whip. And my brother stopped and turned around and started screaming at the SS man, and says, hey, what are you-- the hell are you doing? You know, something like that, because we never encountered it, never. 

And I don't think-- I don't think he was-- he was astonished himself, the SS man, at that time, that somebody spoke back to him, or something, in German, because they were used to the Polish Jews, you know, not talking in German, talking in Yiddish, or talking in Polish, and just being, of course, of a foreign country, you know, being the German being the victor, that supposed to take this abuse. So somehow, this was the first time somebody beat us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So what happened? What did happen to your brother? 

SUBJECT: Nothing, nothing. He just hit him once, and that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. And then? 

SUBJECT: So then we were marched off into the town, a small Polish town. It was Opole, Opole, O-P-O-L-E, Opole. And we were brought into the temple. And the temple had beds, that is, wooden barrack beds, like stacked up maybe four or five high. And they weren't-- they were bunks, let's say. And there was just straw thrown in. And then we crawled up on them, and each family took a little piece. And we just laid there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were still all together? 

SUBJECT: Yes. And we got food again, and they had coffee for us, or whatever . And we were there a few days and had a few, of course, our belongings that we brought with us. And then the Jewish people that lived there, the Polish people, came to get acquainted and talk and-- and they looked to buy things from us. Like we had leather coats and boots and fancy underwear, and things like this, and these people were buying this from us. And they wanted to buy it. And some people sold them some of their things and-- in order to buy food that they wanted with that, et cetera. 

Well, a few days later, they came around and picked people to come live-- to live with them in their homes. Now, we came from a city, eh, from Vienna, a metr-- a metropolis, a modern city, with toilets and running water. And here we are in-- in Poland, in a town of maybe, maybe 10,000, maybe less, maybe 5,000. I don't remember. It was a small, small town, with homes with third floor and thatched roofs and outhouses. And of course, we were shocked. We couldn't believe that, you know, that people live like that in that day and age. 

INTERVIEWER 1: These were other Jews? 

SUBJECT: These were other Jews, yes. And of course, these Jews were mostly poor and mostly, uh, shoemakers and tailors and bakers, and things like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you speak with them? How did you communicate? 

SUBJECT: We spoke German with them. And of course, Yiddish is very close to German. And the next day, I think, we met, of course, some boys our age. And we started to pick up a few words of Polish, mostly dirty words. They would-- they'd give us the dirty words, and they'd say, go into this store and ask for this. You know, and we'd go in and ask for it, and it was a curse of sorts, you know, some silly, childish thing again. And here we are, you know, 13, 14 years old. 

And, uh, two boys picked me to sleep in their house. And some other kids took my brother to sleep in his house. And my parents were picked by other people to sleep in their house. And again, the house that I lived in, it was a family. There were maybe five or six children, ranging from maybe 2 years to 19 or 20 years old. And they all live in this one room with one bed, and the parents slept in the bed with the little children. And then the big children slept on the floor on a bunch of straw. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This was 1941, Mr. Kaufman 

SUBJECT: 19-- 1941. 

INTERVIEWER 1: People had already been taken to camps, to work camps and to-- 

SUBJECT: Only work camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Only work camps. 

SUBJECT: There was no-- no idea-- nobody ever heard of extermination in 1941. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You never heard Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: Nothing, nothing, not even, not even remotely. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did that change? 

SUBJECT: Well, that changed in-- we were in, let's say, in Opole in 1941. We were there. When did the war break out with Russia? When did Russia declare war? Do you remember that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: I thought it was 1941. 

SUBJECT: It was-- I think it was 1941. It was late 1941, I think October, or something like that. In-- and that's when it happened. In 19-- I guess in the summer of 1941, they started to round up Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were living with this-- 

SUBJECT: We were living in this little-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --in this village. 

SUBJECT: --ghetto, village. And they rounded up these young men, and they just disappeared. Nobody knew where they're going or where they are or where they're at or what happened to them. Nobody knew. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you in communication with your parents and with your brother? 

SUBJECT: All the time, all the time, because we lived-- we lived-- as a matter of fact, after a while, we had our own little place. We got a little store where we all moved into together. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the discussion then with your family? 

SUBJECT: The discussion then was survival, because my father had no job or income. My mother had no job or income. And you had to pay for your food and your goods. So the question was survival and how to get bread for your next meal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And how did you? 

SUBJECT: Well, we had to-- we had to think up a-- a lot of ways of-- my father would, uh, go out and sell some of our belongings and, uh, all kinds of, of, of things that you had to think up to-- to find, or go out to the fields and pick up corn and steal it, to bring it home, to eat it. 

Well, at that time, they started to round up people. And we were living in this little store, the four of us. And one night, there was a knock at the door, and it was the German SS. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember that night? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Describe that night, would you? 

SUBJECT: Well, we were asleep, and all of a sudden, you hear the banging on the door. And as soon as we heard that, we knew that they were looking for young men. This was the procedure, that people would just be raided, and the-- only the younger men would be taken to the labor to work. 

So my mother said, quick, get up on the roof. My brother and I climbed up on the roof. And they came in looking for us and didn't find us. And we were sitting up on the roof. And they walked in. They said, well, where are your boys? And my mother said, I don't know. They didn't come home. And they left. 

So then, we climbed back down, and my mother said, well, they know you are here. And you're going to have to leave. So she said, the best thing to do is you go to your grandmother. And my grandmother has been evacuated from Vienna to a different town in Poland, approximately maybe 300 miles away from where we were-- maybe a little more or less, I really don't know-- a little place called Kunow in Poland. And it was across the Weichsel River, this Polish river called Weichsel 

So she said, you leave right now, and you go there. So my brother and I took on-- we had-- we were wearing our German short leather pants, and it was summer. And we walked. We started walking, right there in the middle of the night, and walked towards the direction of my grandmother's. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember being frightened? 

SUBJECT: No, not really frightened. I-- I-- I don't know. We were never really frightened at this time, at this point. Uh, well, we-- we walked for maybe a week. And on the way towards my grandparents, it was going east. They lived east. And on the way, the German tanks was an endless, endless parade and a road of German tanks and trucks going towards Russia. 

And of course, we spoke German, and we kept talking to the soldiers. And they kept giving us bread. And at night, we'd go into some little town and go into the Jewish families there. And we'd tell them we-- we're running away from Opole, and we're going towards Kunow, if they could offer us, give us direction or give us something to eat. And usually, they'd let us sleep over at night, and they'd be very helpful most of the time, and give us food. 

And in the morning, we'd take off again and again go towards Poland, towards Kunow. And we got to Kunow, and my grandparents were very happy to see us. And I had my grandparents there and my mother's sister and her husband and the child. And they lived-- they had a house there that they lived in and somehow survived, I don't know, again also, you know, going-- selling most of things that they had, maybe a little jewelry, or whatever. And that's how they survived. 

So we spent some weeks there. And all of a sudden, there got-- there was a rumor that the Germans and the Russians have signed a pact, and they're splitting up Poland. And they're going to split up Poland at the river. And half of that portion is going to Russia, and the other half is going to Germany. Now we, my brother and I, were at the portion that would have gone to Russia, and my parents were at the portion where it would have gone to Germany. 

So we said, no, we're going back to our parents. So it was decided, and we left our grandparents and started again on the way back to the German part. Well, we kept hitching rides. And it was a week or more, you know, to get back. 

So here we are on this nowhere in Poland road, and we hitched a ride on a hay wagon. And we're on top, way on top of the hay wagon, and we're both sleeping. My brother and I are sleeping, and the horse and wagon is trudging along. And all of a sudden, I wake up-- and this is in the middle of nowhere, middle of Poland-- and I wake up, and I look out. And there is a cart going the other way, with a-- with a horse and a buggy, and my parents are sitting in this cart, going to us. 

Now, if you see this in the movies, you say, that's impossible. That's made up, right? They make the story to sound good. But that's what it was. And I woke up at this exact moment to see them. Now, would I have not woke up and gone back, we would have been dead, because my father's sister, who stayed there in this town, and my father's brother-in-law, who stayed in that town, they were all killed. 

So we jumped off the wagon, and we all together went back to our grandparents. And it's mind-boggling. It's hard to believe. So we went back, and of course, our grandparents were happy to see us. 

Now, the town that my grandparents lived in was even a smaller town. It was a-- it was a-- a village, and it was hardly touched by the whole catastrophe, by the whole German thing. There was-- there was very little of Germans in this little village. Occasionally, they'd come in, and they'd get drunk in the town. And maybe they'd take a Jew out and beat him up, but that would be a remote, a very remote thing again. 

But all of a sudden, in it must have been 1942 by then, there was a rumor again that Jews are being taken away, and they don't know where. But it was a rumor, and you heard nothing of killing or dying or nothing. Now, what happened was the Germans would come in. For instance, they had a attachment of gendarmes, of German gendarmes, which is a-- it's a part of an army outfit. But they would call them gendarmes, because they would be the official, uh, police of this little village. And I worked cleaning their horses. That was my job. Now, I would work up there and clean the horses, and they would feed us, would give us the food. And we'd live. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They know you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Oh yes, of course. That was the reason I-- I worked. And my brother, my brother would be working some job and little things. And well, one day, they came in, and they took maybe six or eight young Jewish boys, and took them outside the town, and made them dig graves, and laid them in the graves, and then didn't kill them, but shot over their heads and let them go out again. 

So they would do these little-- little things like that. And of course, then you were frightened. Now you knew that it's-- this is it. This is the real business. Now, one night, again we heard a rumor the Germans are coming to round up the Jews. So what we did is we all ran into the woods, and we hid. We ran into the woods and hid, and we heard the dogs barking and, you know, the Germans. And they didn't find us, all of us. And there was that-- my parents and my grandparents and my brother and-- and my aunt and my uncle and my-- their little child. And they didn't find us. 

So the following day, my father went, and he heard of a-- of a German company that is looking for labor, Jewish labor. And he went there, and they said, OK, get your family, and you can come here and work. So he picked us up, my mother, of course, my brother, and my uncle, my aunt, and their child, and brought us to a small community. It was called Bozechow 

And there was a company from Vienna, called Elin, E-L-I-N, an electric company. And their job was to build an electric power line into Russia from Poland. Actually, it was probably from Germany through Poland into Russia. They had hired my father as a slay-- a slave labor, of course, no pay, just food and lodging. 

But we could not take our grandparents. So our grandparents stayed at this particular house. And while we went there-- and we lived in barracks. Families lived together. I think there were little-- little rooms. And I think my parents had-- had their own cabin, and my brother and I had their own cabin. And my aunt and uncle, they all had their own cabin. But it was a long barrack, and everybody had their room. And of course, there were hundreds and hundreds of other Jewish families there working. 

Now, the-- the job would consist of going out in-- in the morning. And I would work with the surveyor at first. You know, and I'd hold up the sign, and he'd say, go there, on the left and right. And you know, and you'd just do this. And then we would dig these large holes. And they'd fill them with concrete, and then they put these tremendous towers up to hold the electric power lines on. 

A few weeks after we were in this camp, we heard that the town where our grandparents had been living had been evacuated. Where, we didn't know. We still didn't know that people were gassed or killed, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you know what evacuation mean? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just taken away. 

SUBJECT: Just you leave. That's it. That's it. Now, in this place, there were mostly Austrian civilians who were your overseers, who were-- that you were not fenced in, but you could not leave. But you could walk around. You could have-- you could have a conversation with, with anyone you like. You could see people. You could go at night and-- and be out of the barracks. There was no guards. This was all done by civilians. 

My father there worked as a mechanic and as a semi driver. He would do some driving there and mechanical work. This went on for a few months. And all of a sudden, one day, there's an attachment of SS comes into the camp. And all right, everybody line up. And we're standing there in line, and I'm-- I'm standing with the rest of the boys. There must have been, uh-- I don't know, maybe 50 or 100 boys my age there. 

And there's a boy standing next to me, and he's maybe a year younger than I. And he had all pimples in his face. He had acne. And the-- one of the Germans, the Austrian civilian, said to the SS man that he's with. He said, you know, this kid? He gets me sick every time I look at him. 

So the German took his pistol out, and he put it to the child's head and just fired right into his head. And the kid-- the brain-- his head just split right there. And he stood. And the whole brain and the scalp fell to the floor. He was still standing. And the brain just fell out. And he was standing next to me. And I just-- I just looked. I was just petrified. 

The reason, of course, I said, god, I said, this could have been me. Now, this was the first time I actually felt that, you know, this is incredible, that we are nothing but lice to these people, that we are not humans. Now, at this time, I was about 14 or 15 years old, maybe 14. 

So this was the first time I realized that we are in big trouble. Before that, it was more or less just part of life. Now, I remember the name of this guy very well, that German that had this boy shot. His name was Olenschlager from Vienna. He was an old drunk who never probably did anything worthwhile in his entire life. But he had the power of life and death over you. After that, I realized it. 

Well, we were out one day. I was out with the surveyor. I was working. And all of a sudden, the car came out, and the surveyor, who was very friendly towards us, came over. And he said, you know, I'm sorry to tell you this, but your aunt and your uncle and their child, who was about four years old at this time, has just-- have just been killed. And of course I was shocked and-- and it was a terrible shock, because the child was-- was a beautiful child. And he was-- he was so conscious. 

For instance, we used to hide him, because we knew, you know, that they would kill children. So we used to hide him. And we used to put him inside the bed and make the bed over him. And he would lay there and not even budge. He knew what was happening. He wouldn't-- you couldn't-- you'd come into the room, and you couldn't see him, and you couldn't hear him. He wouldn't breathe hardly, because he knew that it's his life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they kill them? 

SUBJECT: They took them out, and they shot them. They machine gunned them in front of my mother. My mother was working in the office, and she saw it right through the window, her sister and her-- her sister's husband and child being machine gunned right in front of them. And the reason for that happened was that my uncle wrote to a friend, a Gentile friend of his, in Vienna. Who wrote him a letter, and he told him to say that it was his child, that the child was half Gentile, to save the child. And somehow, the letter was intercepted. Or maybe this friend was afraid, and he gave the letter to the authorities. And they came, took them out, and shot them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know that they intercepted a letter? 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't know if they intercepted it, but-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, how did you know about the letter? 

SUBJECT: But they knew that this was the reason for it, you know, that they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then what happened to you? 

SUBJECT: All right, then we stayed. We stayed in this camp till, I believe, it was the fall. And then one day, they came in, and they said, well, this camp is closed up, and we are moving you. All right, so you got your-- you've got your few belongings, whatever you had together. And again, you got outside, and you started marching towards the railroad station, and went into the railroad station. 

And we were taken to a place in Poland. I can't remember the name offhand, but we stayed there a few days. And that was when we were separated from my mother. My mother had to stay in that place, and we were taken, my brother, my father, and myself. We were taken to-- uh, we didn't know where we were going, but we were taken to a place called Blizyn which was a camp. 

And we got there. We were the first, one of the first, people to get into this camp. And we got there. And of course, we were the only German-speaking people. Most of the other Jews were Polish or Russian. 

So we came in. And the commander of the camp, whose name was Nell, N-E-L-L, who I went to a war crimes trial to in 1973. I was asked by the German government to come over there and be a witness. And my mother and I went there. And this man at 73, uh, probably in his 70s then, didn't change in the least. He looked the same. I saw him coming down the corridor, and I knew it was him, had the same bowl-legged walk and the same ugly face on him that he had then. 

And he walked on his own right into the courtroom, not-- and nothing, nothing happened, nothing. During a lunch break, we went upstairs to get lunch. And he was up there, and my mother couldn't eat, because, you know, looking at this man there, living all these years as a free man, enjoying his pension that he's getting it from a-- from the SS in Germany, and killed and mutilated and brutalized so many thousands of people and children. In one day, he had over 150 children killed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw this? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You saw it. 

SUBJECT: Sure, of course. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? Where? 

SUBJECT: Took the children outside the camp and dug a hole and machine gunned them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: I was inside the camp, but you could see-- you could see that the machine gun fire. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the children try to run away? Did they-- 

SUBJECT: No, you were so browbeaten. You were so frightened, that it didn't-- you didn't-- you didn't have a chance to run anywhere. Well, anyway, this was the camp we went into, Blizyn And we started-- we built the wires and the posts for the-- for the wire and the guard houses. And of course, now, this camp was what they called a labor camp. It was not an extermination camp. 

Now, we still, even then, did not know about places like Treblinka and Auschwitz, et cetera. We didn't know Majdanek. We came in there. And of course, we were-- since we spoke German, we were just slightly privileged, let's say. They-- I know one time, we were-- we were cooking some illegal-- we had a little elec-- we found a little electric heater. And we were cooking some soup. And Nell, who was the commander, found us eating the soup, and somehow, he didn't say anything to us, which was just miraculous, because he could have had us shot right there and then. So I feel that he must have felt, I don't know, something. 

Well, anyway a few months later, my mother got herself transferred to us in that camp. Now, my mother was a very attractive woman. She still is. She's 74, and she's still a beautiful woman. And she was a gorgeous woman. And this German wanted to save her and to hide her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For himself? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

SPEAKER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, OK. Just finish [INAUDIBLE]. I want to pick up with that. I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You could leave the room if you wanted to. [INAUDIBLE] so you know you're not stuck anymore. Are we changing tape? 