[TONE] LUCY KREBS: Yeah. How do you-- how do you say that? They called him, in German, Leip-- Leip-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [SPEAKING GERMAN] 

LUCY KREBS: [SPEAKING GERMAN] 

INTERVIEWER 1: In search. In body search. 

LUCY KREBS: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: Body search. 

LUCY KREBS: Body search, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You all right with Aachen? 

LUCY KREBS: Oh, I do that over? You want me to do that over? Yes. We arrived, and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You arrived in Aachen in Germany, in 1941. February, 1941. 

LUCY KREBS: February 1941. It was ice cold out. It was-- there was snow everywhere. And then two SS men came to the car and were very polite and helped me with my suitcases. And they-- and in fact, they spoke to me in French, and I answered in French. I was very naive. You know? They spoke to me in French, I answered back. 

So we went to the passport control. And when I pulled out my passport, which had a J in it, all of a sudden, they were astounded. They dropped my suitcases and were very rude to me and asked me what I was doing here, that I was breaking the law, and so on and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were a young girl of 16? 

LUCY KREBS: 16, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Entering Germany. 

LUCY KREBS: Entering Germany. Wearing a hat for the first time. [LAUGHS] I was-- my relatives had dressed me up to look grown up for the first time. That's what I was aspiring to at the time. 

So anyway, then, yeah. That's right. First, they looked through my suitcases, or somebody else did. We had to go through this-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: Customs. 

LUCY KREBS: Customs. Through customs. It's funny. When I recall this, the German words seem to come out of my-- more than the English ones do. And Anyway, I went through customs, and then they had left word that I had to be examined by this nurse, physical examination. They wanted to check that I wasn't carrying anything, weapons, or documents, all sorts of things they suspected me of. 

And then afterwards, I was called into this room. And I remember the room as an office, sort of. And I sat on a chair, and one sat on one side, and the other one sat on top of a table, there. And they asked me questions. They interrogated me for about two hours. 

And first, how dare I come back. And that I would-- I should be arrested for this. And then I showed my letter to them. I had this letter from the [INAUDIBLE] Commandant that I was allowed to re-enter Germany in order to get my visa. 

And then they tried, by all sorts of tricks, to get me to make a statement that my father had made remarks-- anti-Hitler remarks. And then when it wasn't my father, then they certainly had evidence, they said, that my uncle had made such remarks and what he had said. And they wanted me to make a statement. 

Of course, we were all alerted by that time not ever to say anything that was said in the house. And of course, I knew that. And I said that we do not talk about politics at home. And I never said anything. 

So finally, after two hours or so, a German officer, an older man, came in. And he said-- he screamed, and he said, the whole train is waiting! Why don't you let that girl go! She doesn't have anything! And she's been examined, and the train has to go on! 

So anyway, finally, they did let me go. They practically threw me out of there with my two suitcases. And I faced a train of hostile people hanging out of every window, practically, shaking their fists, calling me a dirty Jew. That I was disrupting the train service. I was holding up the train. And all sorts of abusive language was used. 

And I just stood there and tried to push along with my two heavy suitcases and finally managed to get onto-- toward the train. And then somebody got out of the train and helped me. And it was a young man who had been-- who was a German, who had lived in Belgium, and who was called back to go into the army. He had-- that was not-- that was courage. He got out of the train and helped me with my suitcases. And then he talked to me later on the train. 

So I sat in the train. People came by and said things, but not much happened. I-- my-- my aunt had said, when people are nasty, just look out of the window. And I kept on looking out of the window, you see, constantly. And so then the train left. However, it was two hours late. And the curfew was over when I got to Cologne. And I was breaking the law. I-- I was not allowed on the street when I-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: The curfew was on, you mean. 

LUCY KREBS: The curfew-- the curfew was on. The time we were allowed out was over. We were only allowed out certain hours. And my uncle had said to me, when you arrive in Cologne, you take a taxi. And here's the address. I was supposed to go to the Jewish orphanage and stay overnight there. And they were supposed to put me on the train the next day. And here I arrived, and it was night. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you wearing the star? 

LUCY KREBS: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you wearing the star? 

LUCY KREBS: No, no. They didn't wear stars yet. Not in '41, at that time. And when I got there, I called a taxi. And I told the driver where I wanted to go, and he took me there. And there was this house with a big gate. And it was pitch black, and not a soul was inside. 

And he let me off, and I rang the bell, and nobody answered. And I knocked on the door, and nobody answered. And-- and I knocked and knocked. It was late at night. I didn't know what to do. Finally, this little woman looked through-- opened the door a tiny bit. A little old woman. 

And I said, I'm Lucy Krebs. I've come from Belgium. Oh! Child! We thought you would never arrive. We didn't think you were coming anymore. You know? And she was beside herself. 

And she let me in. And before I-- yeah. And as I walked into the room, I remember, doors were opening up, and all these kids were looking, and they-- as though I had arrived from the moon, you know? And they were terribly nice to me. They were just beside themselves that I had got there during the curfew, at the time when nobody was allowed out, and how lucky I was that I didn't get arrested. 

And I told them my whole horrible story, and they all wanted to know what Belgium was like. How is it? And especially the children. I was up all night with the children talking about what life was like outside of Germany. You know? And I went to school there, and how it was. And we talked a great deal. 

And then they gave me some dinner. And I was-- actually, I was quite shocked. They had herring salad with just a little piece of herring here and there, and the rest was some kind of a glue mixed with a little potato. They weren't-- Jewish rations were very meager in those days, as my parents' rations were too, as I found out later. 

But so was it in Belgium. We didn't have much food either. Because I brought sandwiches. And in fact, I brought a sandwich home, and my mother was shocked at the kind of bread we ate in Belgium, which had dirt in it. With the flour. 

Anyway, I stayed in the orphanage overnight. And then they put me onto a train the next day. And when I arrived in Siegen you know, I had a funny experience. A soldier tried to pick me up on the train. A German soldier. A young man. 

And I remember, as I was told to always look out of the window. And I was looking out of the window very constantly. I didn't look at anybody. And there was this hand going over my lap all the time. And I knew there was this soldier sitting there, and I knew I shouldn't talk to him. And I-- I didn't know what to do. How to handle this. It was terrible. 

And he started to talk about the war and things, that, of course, Germany was going to win the war. And-- but if-- if-- just-- if they didn't, the Americans were going to send the blacks over, and they were going to kill all the Germans, and things like that. I said, yes, probably they will. 

And then he said what I was doing-- where I was going. And I was afraid to lie. I said where I was going. He said, oh, Berleburg, which was in the mountains. He said, what are you doing in Berleburg? I said, I'm going skiing. So. [LAUGHS] 

And then he said he wanted to meet me. He also wanted to go skiing. And so I said, well, I didn't know yet where I was going to stay. I was going to be friends. And I was trying to be very evasive. So finally, he got off somewhere, and I got rid of him. 

But when I got to Siegen, I had changed a tremendous amount between the age of 14 and 16, because I was very under-developed when I left for Belgium, you know? Wore long pig tails, and I looked like I was 12, really. And suddenly, I was a young woman when I got back. 

And I saw my father and my brother on the station, and I-- I waved to them on the station. And my brother said, there! There she is. My father kept on insisting on looking in the other direction. Didn't dare to look at me. And then later, I said, he didn't recognize me, and he was afraid that the idea of rassenschande was so dangerous, that a man should look at a woman who waves, that he was-- it took quite some time for us to make contact. You know? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Rassenschande the non-Jew and Jew having sexual-- 

LUCY KREBS: Well, no. But that was misinterpreted. I mean, if he had smiled at me, it could have also been taken for that. You know? If I had been put up for that purpose. Because in 1941, the term was used any way they wanted to use it, and my father was very cautious, apparently. 

So anyway, they were very happy to have me back, and we-- we went home. And then shortly thereafter, we went to the American Consulate. But by this time, having-- having had that horrible experience in Aachen, I had a dreadful cold. I couldn't-- I had laryngitis. I couldn't speak. I think I had bronchitis by the time I got to the consulate for my visa. 

And there, too, I had terrible trouble. The doctor didn't want to give me my visa. They were very mean, anyway. They-- at the American Consulate. The-- he said I had TB. And he said that I had to have an x-ray taken before he could make any decision, and that was going to take a certain amount of time, again, and my father was afraid we were going to lose our visa again and whatnot. 

So finally, he sent me to a German doctor. And I had a-- an x-ray taken. And the German doctor says, any doctor who says that you have TB isn't worth being a doctor, because you have nothing but a common cold. And he sent me back. And then someone said to my father that he has to bribe, otherwise he won't get me out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To bribe the American physician? 

LUCY KREBS: Yes. I don't know whether it was done directly to the physician, but somebody had to be bribed. And I didn't get my visa, actually, until oh, about three or four weeks later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: American officials-- 

LUCY KREBS: Had-- yes. Were bribed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the German embassies had to be bribed to give Jews exit visas. 

LUCY KREBS: Yes. Certain-- in certain cases. And in this case, in fact, my father also got my grandfather out, who didn't even have a visa. And he didn't want to leave his father behind. And his papers were not in order, but he managed to get him out. I don't remember how. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you repeat it in your words? About the bribery? 

LUCY KREBS: I-- all I heard-- you see, it wasn't discussed in front of us. That sort of thing wasn't discussed in front of the children. I just heard this in a very roundabout way, that with-- in my case, that I was refused a visa because the doctor thought I had TB. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That would be what doctor? 

LUCY KREBS: The American doctor. And I had to have an x-ray taken. And the doctor who gave me the x-ray was a German doctor. I don't remember who he was. He said that this was ridiculous, lunacy. I didn't have TB. I had a cold. And then someone told my father, and it had to be done. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

LUCY KREBS: Bribery. Some money had to be paid. That I don't remember. I don't know. I was never told. And we just weren't told that. You know? This was kept secret. The fact that I found out this much was because I overheard people-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In order to-- 

LUCY KREBS: In order for me to get out and my grandfather-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: To get what? 

LUCY KREBS: To get my visa. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To get your American visa. 

LUCY KREBS: American visa, yes. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your father did bribe. 

LUCY KREBS: I assume. I didn't see it. But my father, I was told this. Well, I don't know if he did it, even, directly. Because my father-- I don't see how my father could have had the money. 

It may have been done through the organization. Through the Jewish organization that were handling all of our affairs there. Because by that time, all my father's property and monies had been confiscated. So I don't see how he could have had the money and could have done it himself. You know? 

But something was done. There were people there who informed him, and things were done. And telegrams were going back and forth to America, to our relatives. So things were done. 

And I got my visa at the very last minute. Because I remember, we got home, and everybody got their visa except me. And I was in a terrible state of depression at that point. 

And when we got home, and my parents were very upset about me, and they sent me to visit relatives who lived in different cities. You know? So I shouldn't be brooding about it. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- you were upset about what? 

LUCY KREBS: Well, I thought I would be the only one who didn't-- who wouldn't get out. This started already in Belgium, when I-- when my sister and my brother and my cousins, with whom I had lived for two years, all were able to leave and go back to Germany in order to emigrate, and I was the only one who left-- who was left behind, who couldn't go. 

So naturally, since nobody could emigrate anymore from Germany, I thought that this was the end of me. I mean, the end was very close at that point. You know? People were making all sorts of desperate efforts. But the way it turned out-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your fear was that the whole family-- 

LUCY KREBS: No, I thought my family would get out, but I wouldn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You would be the only one left behind in Germany. 

LUCY KREBS: Yes. First I thought I would be the only one left in Belgium, and then, when this happened in Germany, I thought I was going to be the one left. And as it turned out, the irony was, my cousin, who definitely thought she was going to get out, she was the one who-- who finally got killed. 

Because her parents-- her father had died in a concentration camp already at that time. He was one of those sent to Oranienburg. They lived in a small town, not far from ours. And so the mother and three girls were supposed to go a month after we did. And they didn't make it anymore. They did not make it anymore. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

LUCY KREBS: Well, they-- they couldn't emigrate anymore. When we left-- well, this is the next chapter. Our departure. So anyway, so finally, we-- I got my visa. And we left in May of 1941. And the only way one could get out of Germany at that time was via a transport which left from Berlin. 

They still sent out transports of about 80 Jews in a transport. And on trains. These were like trains. And we were sent through occupied France to Spain and Portugal, via Portugal. 

And on the way, we were fed. We were not allowed out, only whenever the train stopped in certain places, we could go to the washroom. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was a locked wagon, or-- 

LUCY KREBS: Locked train. Wagon. Locked wagon on a train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Passenger wagon. 

LUCY KREBS: Yeah. Yes, it was a passenger wagon, yes. And we were in that for five days. Five days and five nights, until we got to Lisbon. And we-- we were fed by the Jewish organizations in certain places, who came and brought us bags with food through the windows. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they know you were going to-- 

LUCY KREBS: Oh, it was organized through them. I think the Joint Refugee Organization organized this. And they fed us, and they saw to us. They were paid with American money for this by our relatives. And so it took five days to get through France to Spain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the departure from Berlin, the crossing of the German border, the crossing of the Spanish? 

LUCY KREBS: No. We were locked in. The only thing I remember was-- well, there were always these curfews. When we were in Berlin, we stayed with relatives whom we had there, and they gave us clothes. And we-- to wear. 

We couldn't take anything anymore. We were allowed to take-- I think it was 10 marks, about $3.00 at that time. And of course, we didn't need anything until we got to-- well, everything was paid for. I don't think we needed anything on the way. And 

I remember, when we were in Paris, the train stopped for eight hours somewhere. And there, when we wanted to go to the washroom, we were always accompanied by guards and then were led back to the train. And the first time we were allowed out was in Spain. We crossed the Pyrenees, and there we had dinner in a restaurant, I remember. It was very nice. And we all went for a walk in a cornfield. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like? 

LUCY KREBS: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like? 

LUCY KREBS: Oh, it was lovely. It was lovely. It was spring. It was beautiful. But then, it was beautiful, but at the same time, also very depressing. I mean, the landscape was beautiful. The idea of running out-- I remember, I ran into a field. I just ran and ran and ran. I-- and we had a very nice dinner there. But then also, Spain, at that time, was extremely depressing. 

As we-- when we arrived, the whole station was full of prostitutes and impoverished people and beggars all over, and we had nothing. And we were all coming there. You know? It was Franco Spain. That was terrible. We were very poor. 

Then when we arrived in Lisbon, we were taken to a hotel and completely taken care of. But there, we were practically eaten up by bed bugs. Full of bed bugs. And I remember, I slept in the bathtub. I couldn't stand the bed. 

And-- but we enjoyed it. Also-- yeah, Lisbon, we enjoyed. It was sort of a mixed bag. We did enjoy being in a hotel and eating proper food with wine every lunch and dinner. We were allowed to drink the wine too, the children. And then walked. 

However, there was the last shock. Another shock before we left. And that was that we had no tickets on the ship when we arrived there. At the time, when we arrived in Lisbon, the Germans had just invaded the Soviet Union. And there was panic. And people bribed unbelievable amounts to get out of Europe. 

And somebody had paid-- either the Jewish organization or the shipping company, I don't remember who-- that they gave away our tickets to someone else. And when we arrived, there were no tickets. We had no boat. The boat that we were supposed to go on, we were told we could not go on, and they would find us a boat. 

And here, we were. We were absolutely petrified. We had lost out so many times. You know? My parents, too, had bought trips via Russia, Dominican Republic, and here we were, stuck again. And we, too. I felt just so defeated. Here we were, at the end, we thought, finally we were out, and we were going to be caught again by the Nazis. And we thought surely they were going to walk through Spain because of Franco, and they were going to be there any day now. And we were ready to jump into-- I know I was ready to jump into the ocean at that time. 

And so we heard that the Spanish, in order to make money, are putting up boats, small boats, and are taking refugees across the ocean in those boats. And my French was quite fluent in those days. And in Portugal, most educated people spoke-- spoke French. 

And so my father and I walked from one shipping company to the next until we found one. And we found a company that had a ship that was going to America. It was called the Villia de Madrid. This was-- had originally been a Mediterranean luxury cruiser that the Spanish had outfitted. It was supposedly sunk during the Civil War. It was completely ruined during the Civil War, but they had renovated it. And it had originally been built for 150 people-- 

INTERVIEWER 3: During the Spanish Civil War? 

LUCY KREBS: During the Spanish Civil-- what did I say? During the Spanish Civil War. Yes. And they had originally been a ship to take 150 people, but now they took over 1,000 on it. And we paid heavily for it, all with American money, of course. 

And we booked on that ship. We got onto it, and it took us three weeks to cross the ocean. But the conditions on the ship were horrendous. There were no toilet facilities, of course, for over 1,000 people. 

And in the machine rooms downstairs, they had put up these bunks. And I remember, we slept in these bunks. And every morning when I woke up, I would try to sit up and bang my head. 

Downstairs, when you came downstairs, the toilets were not working, and there weren't enough of them. I remember my sister once walked down and fainted from the stench and fell down the stairs. And then some nights, we just slept on boards upstairs, which was dangerous because the crew were terrible. They were after all the girls, and it was very dangerous. 

My father was terribly worried, and my mother got very sick. She had dysentery and was put in the hospital, and they didn't feed her. And there was a doctor on the ship who was always only concerned with women, not with illness. 

And so I cooked rice for her. Something. Now, and then we got to the Canary Islands. And we were interred-- they were going to inter us there, because this-- apparently, one Spanish ship that had arrived in New York was held there. And they didn't want to let it return, out of political reasons. There was some uproar. 

So they made us all send telegrams to let that ship go, so that we could go. Otherwise we would be interred-- interned on the Canary Islands, which was a horrible place in those days. I know it's a vacation place now. Supposedly very nice, but it wasn't very nice then. Very impoverished. Terrible place. 

But-- and we stayed there for a few nights. A few-- yeah. On the ship. But one thing, when we got there, was we bought lots of bananas, which we ate three times a week for the next-- until they were rotten, which was about a week or so after. 

So, and my mother being sick, and all of us sort of-- nobody was very well by the time we arrived in America. So that they couldn't let us into the country. Because we were all sick. And we weren't-- then we went to Ellis Island. And we stayed-- we were under quarantine in Ellis Island for a week or 10 days. 

My mother was in the hospital there. And that was a very funny experience. Because when we were in Ellis Island, they told us we didn't have anything to worry about, and we weren't going to be sent back. We thought we had arrived in heaven. 

I remember, it was so clean. The beds. And we couldn't believe that we were in a jail. We were all laughing. If this was a jail, we would like to stay here, we all said. 

And all that food! And I remember the breakfast with all the fruit. Fruit, we hadn't eaten for a long time, I guess. That we would take it-- they all said, you could take as much as you want. We would all take it. We were all thinking, the next meal wouldn't have fruit. And we actually liked it very much there, until finally, we got out. 

And then we were faced with other realities, which were very difficult. And that was that we had to pay back the enormous amounts of money that this journey had cost. Well, I'm in America now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. I like that. Any thoughts about those times? How it affected you, what remains of it. 

LUCY KREBS: What remained of it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. What-- how it changed your life today. 

LUCY KREBS: That's difficult to say. You know? Of course these things have very-- have a very deep and unforgettable effect on anybody who's gone through them. 

And they've made me politically conscious. And I don't know how to summarize that in a few words. That's-- that's very difficult. Because it has-- on many levels, it's had an enormous effect on my personality and my-- and my whole outlook on life. 

Yeah, that's-- that's very difficult to just summarize like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Thank you. 

LUCY KREBS: You're welcome. 

[TONE] 

