INTERVIEWER: Your name? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: My name is Anna Goldberg. My maiden name was Steuer. I was born in Drohobych, Poland in 1929. 1939, when the war broke out, I was 10 years old. The Russians entered Drohobych at that time. 

And my family was affected tremendously, because my father was in business for himself. He employed one person. And therefore, he was considered a capitalist. So we were-- our properties were confiscated. And my father had to go to work in a factory. 

Then two years of school, elementary school, which were very pleasant to a child of a 10, 11-year-old. Because you know, it did not affect me as much, you know, the change in living with my parents until 1941 when the Germans entered. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember conversations in your house about your parents, what they felt about the changes? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Well, yes. You mean the changes as far-- when the Russians first entered? My father was very strongly anti-communist. So of course, the fact that they didn't believe in God, it was already-- they had a strike against them, plus the fact that, as I said, they confiscated our properties. And they gave us a six-months passport. 

You know, citizens of Russia, you have to-- they all have passports now. If you are a desirable citizen, it's five-year passport. But we had only six-months passport. Because as I said, he was considered a career capitalist, because he was a property owner plus self-employed person. 

And there were always-- there was always the fear of being sent to Siberia. Any time my parents would-- my father would say something, my mother would run out to check if somebody doesn't listen onto the window. And this was going on for two years or so. 

In school, I did not view as much anti-Semitism as I did before the war, in all honesty. But for the word Jew, they were-- you know, there was something, like, I believe six months jail sentence. So to me, you know, it was a little bit-- for me, it was easier in the school surroundings. 

For my parents, it was very difficult-- and as I said, until 1941 when the Germans entered. The war broke out between Germany and Russia. And the Germans entered. 

And by that time, both my sisters were married. It was only my brother and I that were home. My younger sister had the baby. And they lived not too far away from us. 

The day the Germans entered, my father felt very strongly that the Germans-- Germany, being the most cultural country in Europe, that all those rumors we did hear about prosecution against Jews, that it's all communist propaganda, that there was nothing to it. It's impossible that a cultural nation like Germany should actually be capable of all those atrocities that we have heard of. So my brother was 19-- 18 at that time. And he wanted to join the Russian Army. 

He says, he heard such rumors about what's going on in Germany. He says, if I have to die, let me die fighting back. And my father felt strongly against it. He was a Polish citizen. He fought for the Polish independence and the early 1900s. 

And he says, if it would be for Poland, that's different, but not for Russia to give your life for. And he felt, again, strongly that they were only rumors. So and therefore, my brother did not join. 

And the first day the Germans entered Drohobych, they gave 24 hour free hand to loot, murder and kill Jewish people. So the first time it happened, I have to say that our neighbors were tremendously helpful. First of all, my father lived there for 30-some-odd years. My parents lived on the same property. A lot of them were very good friends. 

Even so, it was strictly-- very few Jewish families lived in that area. Because that time, in European towns, most of the time, Jewish people concentrated their own made ghettos. So-- but my father felt strongly-- you know, he felt Polish. He was a Pole. And that's that. 

He did not feel that he's a Jew in any way. And if somebody felt this way, it's too bad. He felt differently. 

So we were hiding. The first day, he was absolutely in shock when he found out the neighbors surrounded the house to keep the looters out. My mother sent my brother upstairs into the attic to hide. 

And then something came about. She had some feeling. So she climbed the stairs upstairs. And there was my brother making noose out of rope. 

INTERVIEWER: A noose? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Like a hanging-- 

INTERVIEWER: To hang. 

ANNA GOLDBERG: He said, as he saw that the people were coming in-- and most of them were peasants from surrounding villages, drunk, really not capable of understanding even what they were doing. And when they were trying to get through the line of our neighbors, he felt that he would rather take his own life than give them the satisfaction to kill him. So she talked him out of it. 

And as I said, our neighbors were very good about it. That time, they felt, yet, very strongly. It just happened. It was a shock. 

My sister, who was a pharmacist, and whose husband was drafted into the Russian Army when the war broke out between Germany and Russia, lived a block away. And she got petrified. So she sent the baby with a mate-- the Ukrainian girl that worked for her send the baby to her mother's. 

Because after all, she felt that's the safe place is in her parents' house. And one of the neighbors took the baby in. That was our introduction that lasted 24 hours. That was our introduction to the German Army when they entered the first day, when they entered Drohobych. 

I wasn't even home at that time. It was a very-- I was in the neighbor's house across the street, only other Jewish neighbor with a Ukrainian girl playing Dominoes when my-- the girl's mother, Mrs. Steich, was sitting on the veranda with a neighbor. And she ran in and they said something in Yiddish, which I didn't understand at that time, to her husband. They both jumped out the window and left the three kids sitting at the table, shocked, not knowing what to do. 

So we ran outside to see, what's the commotion? And some of the villagers, you know, some of the people from villages where there with knives and axes. And so that other Jewish girl managed to escape. But I was so shocked that I couldn't move at that point. 

And the Ukrainian girl, my girl friend who I grew up, stood by me. And at that time, he said, she is dark haired. She looks Jewish. So there, another guy turned around to me and asked me, are you Jewish? 

And I was so stunned-- you know, too scared to admit it, and yet, too proud to deny it. So I just stood and stared at him. So one of them said, well, she must be Jewish if she does not say anything. When my Ukrainian girlfriend jumped in front of me, she says, no she's not! She's not! 

Can't you see? She is deaf and dumb. She can't talk. And that's what saved me, actually, in this-- at this particular moment. 

So as I said, that was our introduction. And after this, it got progressively worse. And within a year, my mother was killed, my sister, her little girl who was two-and-a-half years old at the time. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: They had actions where they-- first, they would take people to work. The people never returned. And it took us almost a year to realize that there is something wrong. 

Because they would receive card saying how well they are doing. The handwriting was genuine. So they knew-- like, my uncle, the first week, he disappeared. 

And yet, a card came in in his handwriting that he's working. He's doing very well. And that assured the family that he's all right. 

And so what's happened to those Jews at that time is they took them out in the wilderness, and shot them, and buried them, 218 people, I believe. Most of them were leader-quality people. That's the first thing that they would always get rid of. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: How did I know they were leader-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, how did you know they were shot? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I did not know until later on. We found out that they were taken outskirts and were in the woods and killed. Primarily, they were doctors, lawyers, as I said, people of intelligence, people who were capable of leadership. 

But before-- evidently, before they were killed, they made several of those people write notes and addressed them prior-- you know, evidently, while they were waiting there. And he must have dictated them what to write. So in a case, like, you know, this, when the letter came in, the card, the family was much more at ease. 

They figure, well, he's working. He must be well, never knowing that he was dead a long time already. So-- and this was-- after that, within a year or so, we realized what's going on, that those people are never heard of. 

Then some rumors came in from the Ukrainian-- Black Nazis, we used to call them-- the Ukrainian police force, who cooperated with the Nazis. And in a drunken fit or so, they would tell stories. So those stories started to circulate. 

And we realized that there must be some truth to it, because we never heard from those people again. So then people started to-- tried in any way possible to hide, or send their children away, or give their children away to be brought up in a safe place. Some people paid-- that had money-- paid a lot of money to the Christian people, in order to save, primarily, children, you know, that they were trying to save the generation to come. 

And by that time, you know, people were not just waiting around or are willing to go for those calls to work when they called them to meet in a market place and they're going to go to work. They had made it tougher for them to find them. So-- but somehow, it was very difficult, because the cooperation of the Ukrainian and Polish people were so tremendous with the Nazis that it was very difficult for a Jew to hide any place, or as I said, very few undertook, actually, the risk of helping a Jewish person. 

So that's when they came in and they found my mother, and actually, my sister and the baby. Because of the baby, you know, it was difficult. She was two-and-a-half years old. 

She knew she was Jewish. She knew her name, a bright youngster. So there was-- and she would not leave her. So therefore, she could not save herself. 

But my mother went along to see if she could convince her-- she was 26 years old at that time-- that she will take care of the baby if she can convince her to jump out of the train. I understand-- I did not know at the time. But after the war, I found out that most of those trains that they took in action of Jews, they went to Belzec or Belz. 

INTERVIEWER: Bergen-Belsen? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: No. Belz or Belzec, where they had trucks where those people were actually, you know, put to death by gas on trucks, instead of crematoriums. 

INTERVIEWER: I've never heard about this. 

ANNA GOLDBERG: So I know that, you know, my mother, my sister and my little niece were taken the same day and never heard of. So I just surmise that that's what happened to them, since majority of the population from Drohobych was killed in this manner. A lot of people, young people, especially young boys, managed to escape and join the underground. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I was in a camp. This camp had-- it was not a ghetto-- 35 Jewish families. It was called the Gestapo Camp on Janowska Street. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get there? Why did you go there? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: My grandfather was a blacksmith. My father had a place where the buses that travelled from one city to another stayed overnight. And his serviced the buses. But as a young boy, he picked up some of the trades from his father. So he knew a little bit about the blacksmith. 

Now there are not too many blacksmith, Jewish blacksmith. And that was a rare type of a trade. And whatever he didn't know, he added on, in order-- once he realized that that's what can save his life. 

And as a matter of fact, they turned the garages into blacksmith shops and the garages, too. And my father was in charge of it. And we lived in our own house, not in ghetto. 

When they liquidated the ghetto, a lot of Jewish people who were able to escape from to ghetto, there's no place to go. The only Jewish person that they knew that lives on the outside-- outskirts of ghetto, they came to us. And of course, one of the Ukrainian neighbors reported that there was an influx of Jews coming out of the ghetto and hiding in our house. So the Gestapo came in. And they found quite a few Jewish families. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the day the Gestapo came? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I wasn't there. I had the terrible nightmare in middle of the night. And I started to cry. And my brother forced aboard in somebody's-- it was like a stable where they had hay or one of the neighbors several blocks away. And I hid-- and he hid me in there. 

So I wasn't there when they came to take. Otherwise, I would have never survived. Because my father's brother was taken in this action, too. They took her away. And he couldn't do anything. 

He did manage to get my brother out and few-- about three other Jewish youngsters, who were 18, 19-year-olds. Of course, they took him away when one of the Gestapo men said, look, he's the only Jewish man in this trade. And we need him. 

So they got-- they told them to get off the truck, when he says, I'm not moving unless my son goes with me. So they said, all right. Get your son down. 

So once he was down already, he got his composure back. And so he says, well, how do you expect me to run a shop without help? So he says, how many-- he had two kids helping him-- how many helpers do you need? 

He says, eight. He's say, no. You can't have eight. You can have only four. 

So therefore, he would managed the closest one to him, four Jewish boys, get them off the truck, which they were not been working for him, but just to save their lives. He saved their lives for another year and a half. Because a year and a half or so later, they died in concentration camp anyway. 

But-- and then they made us go to this camp, which they had already arranged, but they-- as a punishment for helping other Jews from the ghetto to leave our home and go and live in that camp, this gestapo camp. Now I was hidden there, because I was only 14 years old and you had to be 16 to be able to work. Under 16, you were considered a child. So my father and my brother were hiding me until towards the end of-- the beginning of 1944, that they discovered I am there. 

But by that time, the war changed already. They knew they are losing, the Germans. So they were a little bit easier, you know. They eased off, as far as the killings were concerned. 

INTERVIEWER: You were hiding in the blacksmith's shop? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: No, I was hiding. We had a one-room apartment. And my father both a double closet, like a double wall, where my brother put a bulb in and-- when I had to stay there, I was actually in this one-room apartment. And whenever I would hear the German inspection going around-- actually, what they were looking for is cleanliness. And they just walked in to see if it's clean or not. They never checked the closet. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was the apartment? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: The apartment was on the premises right there with the camp. There were several apartments occupied by the 35 Jewish families. 

INTERVIEWER: You never left the apartment? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I never left that apartment, only at night to get some fresh air-- 

INTERVIEWER: How long? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: --in the middle of the night. For about a year, over a year that I was hidden there. 

INTERVIEWER: With no one? Were you alone? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Well, my father and my brother lived there, too. And my father, they liked him. In other words, he was-- he spoke a very good German. And when he was born, Drohobych was Austria, Austro-Hungary. When I was born, it was Poland. So therefore, his schooling started in a German-speaking school. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do with yourself all day? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Well, I am a reader. And my brother always supplied me with books, which-- that my pastime. Gee, I think by the time I was 14, I finished all the works of Leo Tolstoy. 

And at this point, whatever he could get his hands on, as long as, you know, it was not something very dirty or so, he would always-- he would beg, steal or borrow books if he could, just to bring them to me to read. And I spent most of my time, actually, reading. I was always-- the only jealously and resentment I had of my Christian friends is the fact that they could go to school and I couldn't. 

INTERVIEWER: We you afraid? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I couldn't-- the Jewish children were forbidden the minute-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you afraid while you were in the apartment? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: I was afraid, yes. There was always the constant fear of being killed, you know? There's no question about it that you have to, you know-- you never knew when my time comes or when they decide to liquidate the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: But the inspections, were you afraid you would not know when the inspections would come? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Yes, I would-- no, more or less, I knew they-- always somebody warned my father ahead of time that there was an inspection coming. So I would-- he would just come running into the apartment and lock me in. And then I would lay there quietly until the inspection was over. 

And then I remember one day that I didn't make the closet and they discovered that I'm there. And that was, I think, January. It was the beginning of 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you remember that day? Can you tell us? 

ANNA GOLDBERG: Yeah, not only that day, I remember the name of the gestapo man who found me. And his name was [INAUDIBLE]-- [INAUDIBLE] or [INAUDIBLE]. And when he found me, he says, who are you? What's your name? 

So I said, Dola which was my Polish nickname-- Steuer. So he says, how are you related to the old mann Steuer I was a change of life baby. My father was 60 years old when I was 15. 

So I said, that's my father. So he says, I can't believe it he still has such a young child, and then, how did you get here, and started questioning me. And I thought, well, that's the end of me. When my father came running, and he explained to him what happened, and that otherwise I would have been killed, and that's my youngest child. 

And so he let me stay in camp. He says, at this at this point-- you know, as I said, that was 1944. And the war turned around where the Russians were advancing. And so he says, OK, just let her stay inside. Don't let anyone else see her outside. 

So it was only a few months longer that we stayed. Because in April of 1944, they took us from there to a concentration camp near Plaszow-- near Krakow. The concentration camp was Plaszow. 

INTERVIEWER: May I ask you, was there any attempt by that gestapo man to use you? You must have been a beautiful young girl. 

ANNA GOLDBERG: No. He was a man in his 50s, early 50s himself. He really in no way-- and as I said, as a matter of fact-- 