[BEEPING] INTERVIEWER 1: Describe what it was, what it is that-- that terrifies you at night still when you think about it? Well, wait till he's ready. 

CREW: Go back to [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Go ahead. Sorry. 

SUBJECT: OK. I'll go to-- I'll go to [INAUDIBLE]. So anyway, when we were-- 

CREW: OK? John, are you rolling? OK. Fine. 

SUBJECT: So as I was saying, these 1,000 women were taken out of the-- out of Auschwitz and brought to this camp. At this point, my uncle had even a wilder idea-- this was 1944. And he came to this person by the name of Schlinder. And he said to him that the Germans are going to lose the war anyway. 

So I said, you know, probably, you're going to kill us all. But it would be impossible to kill everyone of us. So one will survive. Now if this one survives, he will haunt you for the rest of your life. But if you cooperate with us, you take care of us, he said, so we promise you, that by the end of the war, we'll take care of you. 

And this guy cooperated. So they all survived. And they took care of him. They first bought him a factory in Germany. He was drinking, and he had apparently big drinking problem. He was enormous, six foot something, guy. Enormous guy. 

I met him when he was in Israel. They brought him afterwards to Israel and decorated him. And then they bought a factory for him in Argentina, which, once again, he lost. And he came for the third time. They said, no more factories. You know? But they set a fund for him. And they all supported him till he died. And he lived a very good life, and they really took care of him. 

I was several times visiting in Israel, and I met with him a couple of times. It was really-- he was very frightening. Very frightening physique. And he was drinking in cups. And I'm watching the small [INAUDIBLE]. He was insisting that everyone will drink with him. 

The interesting thing was that everyone was still afraid of him. And no, I'm not-- I'm not much of a drinker. I was probably in my 20's then, late 20's, when I met him. And you know, he was coming for dinner to our house. My father told me, well, you know, he's this big drinker now. If he says to you, drink with me, now go ahead and drink. 

And I said, but why should I? And he said, he'll get mad if you don't. And it took me years to realize that they were still afraid of him, even though he was now totally, you know, in their mercy, because they-- they took care of him. 

And anyway, I met with my parents in the summer of 1945. It was a very traumatic meeting. I had the picture of my mother but, of course, she didn't resemble my mother at all. They were still dressed in their prison camp clothes with those wide stripes. 

My father, who was 6 foot 2, was about 110 pounds, maybe less than that. Less than 40 kilograms. That would be less than 100, right? They were really emaciated, and my father looked terrible. He was tortured. 

And he had all his teeth hanging out, you know? It was-- it was nothing that I had-- I just couldn't believe that they were-- that they were my parents, as a matter of fact. 

I think that this was the hardest part of it all, to accept him again. And this was something that on one hand- wanted so badly to happen. And then when I was confronted with those disfigured people, I just couldn't force myself to go and to make any contact with them. 

I knew that they were my parents logically. But emotionally, I didn't feel any-- anything towards them. And uh, I used for some period to address them by calling them Mr. and Mrs. I just couldn't bring myself to accepting them. 

You know, the more I think about it, the more complicated it gets in my mind, because this was really the first time that I started to realize what has happened. Until then, I was preoccupied with the everyday life. And I knew that I could take care of myself OK. 

I managed. But then, first of all, I had to become a child again, which I resented. I just couldn't. And of course, they weren't what I-- they came back different. And it took me a while till I was able to accept, something that kind of haunted me for many, many years. 

And once I was safe again, I suppose, this is when I disintegrated. I developed fears. I couldn't sleep. I started having nightmares. Nightmares that were totally abstract, but they were always repeating-- repeat themselves. And uh, kind of this surreal themes that eventually boiled down to kind of this surrealistic, abstract representation of a feeling of helplessness. 

It was like a conveyor belt OK, in which I was moving toward the press that was rolling-- the roll press. And there was no power whatsoever to stop it. I couldn't move. I was just rolling closer and closer. And I would wake up totally disoriented, crying my head off, terrible screaming, all sweat and shaking. 

I couldn't-- I could never go back to sleep. And this went on for many years. As a matter of fact, I would never go to sleep without taking something. Sleep aid. At that p;point, they didn't have Valiums and stuff like that. 

I used passiflora to come as a sedative and barbiturates for sleep, whatever it was. And there were other-- there were three dreams, but essentially, they boiled down to the same feeling of helplessness, and there was nothing that I can do. 

Interestingly enough, when I reached Israel in 1950, I, uh, decided to stop with all the medication. And I was almost free from the madness. And it came back to me a couple of times. One was around the Eichmann trial, which, as I was saying when we began, were denying. 

As a matter, we never discussed it. I mean, after the initial discussion that we had around the world and maybe a mention here or there, it was never openly discussed, but was mentioned, you know, when-- when Schindler was. There were a couple of instances when it came back to me, and it was really terrifying. 

Until at one time, I stopped dreaming. I know that it sounds weird, because you never stop dreaming. But I somehow managed totally to repress all dreams. And I felt that I'm free from dreaming. 

And I'm telling this particular story with a goal in mind. And when Dr ? called me initially and asked me if I'd be willing to participate in this program, my initial reaction was no. And he said, well, why don't you think it over? 

I said, OK, but I was resolved at that time that I'm not going to do it. I mean, it was really of the fear of once again trying to revive the things that I was trying so hard to repress, like we all did. 

But anyway, my wife asked me what it was all about, and I told her. And she said, well, what are you afraid of? And I said, I'm scared. I'm really scared that everything will come back in my nightmares, and so on and so forth. She said, well, you know, you've been living with this thing now for 34, 35 years after the war, and you're still afraid, and you've never talked about it. 

And it didn't work, because you're still afraid, still anxious. So why don't you give it-- try the other way? And we spent a lot of time talking about it. I started to see the logic. And I just-- particular night- you know, we went to bed very early in the morning. And so we talked for the better part of the night, and the next night, I had my nightmares again. 

But this time it was different. It was again the conveyor belt. It was again the rolling presses. It was again the feeling of hopelessness and of terrible anxiety. And for the first time in my life, I have stopped the conveyor belt. I woke up, still feeling very anxious. This anxiety has turned into a wonderful sense of fulfillment and satisfaction. 

I got up. For the first time, I wasn't disoriented. I knew where I was. I knew what happened. And somehow, for the first time I was able to do it. I feel strongly that it has to do with the fact that I decided to open up. Discussing it. It has to do with the fact that-- it's been too long repressed. We have to come up, and we have to talk about it. 

And therefore, oh, I had this thought, if you participate in this kind of problem, is it only for the sake of the other people? I think that for me, it serves another purpose, a very personal one, of trying to deal with my feelings. 

So I said in the beginning for the past 35, I've been trying to convince myself that it never happened. And that I-- oh, yeah, maybe it happened, but I wasn't affected. I walked under the rain without getting wet. This was my fantasy. 

It's only now I started to realize how my whole life was really shaped, how everything that I do and I did was really influenced by it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You weren't afraid of the rain? 

SUBJECT: I wasn't afraid of rain? No. This is just a metaphor that I am using at a later stage in life. Probably, I would have used another metaphor if were speaking another language. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you were not afraid? 

SUBJECT: Afraid? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Afraid? Fear? 

SUBJECT: No. No. No. I'm starting to be afraid now. This is this very right question. I realized that I've lost totally-- I never-- I never experienced fear until-- I still-- I mean, physical fear, you know, the kind that people feel-- and I had discussed this. You can't lift your feet. You feel terrible. 

I never felt it. And it's very interesting, because in the army, I've been in a number of wars and other things, and I've taken all kinds of crazy chances. My feeling being-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you just mention one? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. Well, take the 1973 war. I was commanding a unit, and uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your rank was? 

SUBJECT: Colonel. And I was-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: In? 

SUBJECT: In the Medical Corps of the Israeli army. The Israeli defense forces. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Infantry or? 

SUBJECT: Armor. And uh, well, a number of times, you know, there were all kinds of things. But there were things that I didn't realize that other people have told me. So we were shelled at one point, and I was talking into the radio. 

And it was hogwash but it was running. And I was standing there, just talking very calmly into the mouthpiece. And yeah, I've seen, you know, those shells falling all around. You know, they were falling right-- yards from me. And I didn't feel at all that it concerns me. 

I was just standing there, you know, talking to the radio, into the mouthpiece, and I just felt nothing. And there was a ditch like 50 yards from there. My men were in the ditch, and they were calling out to me, and I didn't realize what it was. It wasn't that I was shell shocked. That I didn't know what to do. Yeah, I know. I've seen but, it was a kind of a nonchalant bravado. That, well, that I really went along with what was my basic fantasy that nothing can happen to me. 

I've been through hell, and I've been out, and there was a reason that I survived. This is beyond my understanding. Totally mythical thinking, that somehow, I survived and, therefore, from now on, nothing will happen to me. I took chances I went into... just utterly stupid. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were there other acts of bravery? 

SUBJECT: I don't consider them as bravery. It was total-- I'd say today it was total recklessness. But you know, there was a battery of heavy guns that exploded. And I went to look for wounded survivors. 

I walked directly-- you know, and there were cannons. The guns were exploding, and I just went there. You know, say I did it once, and I decided, well, maybe-- maybe I didn't see it enough, so I did it again. 

Uh, you know, I would say that to someone that looked at it with an objective eye, it might have looked like the suicidal behavior. But I just didn't feel anything. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE], Stern where you decorated? 

SUBJECT: No. That's another story I refuse to-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were afraid-- 

SUBJECT: I was nominated for-- I was nominated for decoration, but, uh, I refused totally. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why did-- 

SUBJECT: Well, it's complicated reasons. Nothing to do, I think, with this-- it was more in the politics. And the feeling-- you know, you just caught me off-guard, I think, because I never really thought about what might the real reasons behind it be. I don't know. But anyway, I didn't feel that was important [INAUDIBLE]. 

But going back to the experience of Holocaust. I-- since 1950, since we arrived in Israel, I've never really ever parted with my parents. This is the first time for a prolonged period we have parted. This was a terrible experience for everyone involved, both for my parents, and both for me. It was like, abandonment to the end. 

So in many ways, see, everything was really shaped by those experiences. That it took me a while to realize. The thing that I am trapped with right now, or one of the things that I am trapped with, if we don't deal with our feelings, if we don't understand our experience, what are we doing to our children? 

I realized that when my first daughter was born, for a very short moment, I suspected there might be something that I'm doing as a reaction. And this was right before-- right after I delivered her. I delivered my children myself, being a gynecologist. And that privilege was very important to me. 

So I went on a, kind of a mindless spree, buying spree, but it was still a spree, a binge. I spent a couple of hundred pounds on toys. And I bought all kinds of toys that you usually don't buy for a newborn, like an electric and a peddle car. . 

I very proudly prepared everything in the room for my daughter, who was three days old when she came home with my wife. My wife looked at the things, and she said, why did you buy all this? 

And I said, what do you mean, why did I buy all this? This child needs to have toys. Said, yes, but you see, it will take years before she will be able to play with them. I said, what do you mean it will take years? The child needs toys. I just bought some toys. What's wrong with the child having toys? And it took me a long time to realize that I was doing-- I was finally buying toys for myself. 

And this was-- I mean, the start of my wondering of, really, what are we doing to the next generation? And we are as we are. We ca change some. We will never be able to eradicate what happened. We might try to understand some of the dynamics, but we will never be able to wipe it out. It will always live with us in that space, that I'm facing it now. 

The big question is, what will become of those-- are we transferring our anxieties, our fears, our problems to the generations to come? And this is why I feel that we are talking here not only of the last generation-- right, that at the time, they coined after World War I. This time, we're dealing with lost generations. It's not only us. It's generations to come. And I think that this is the biggest tragedy of those that survived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I wish you could make our phone calls for us to those people that are reluctant. I mean it. I don't think I've heard a more-- I don't know. I guess, self-examined statement we've ever collected. 

SUBJECT: This is the guy who started most of it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, you didn't answer my question on tape that I didn't want to go back to you. Are you afraid now? You said you're afraid now. Is it because you've exposed it, so you're afraid? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I think that I am. I was starting anyway to understand-- I still, you know, I hope I am. Because to me, this was-- I didn't realize it as late as 1973. The war of 1973. I didn't realize that there is something wrong with me. I thought that, you know, that people-- this is how people react, and you know, this is how you should be. 

And then after 1973, I had a very good group of officers. And we spent a lot of time talking. That's a whole interesting subject, you know? How you do group therapy without knowing what you do after the war? We were immobilized for about six months after the war. 

So anyway, we discussed it, and everyone admitted that he was scared during the war. And those were people were-- who performed very well. But they admitted that they were scared. And I was sitting there feeling, you know, the oddball. 

And I went home, and I talked with my wife. I said, you know, for the first time, I realized that I'm missing a very important part probably of my being. I've never sensed what it is to be afraid. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, if you don't my first name-- you know, something occurred to me as you were talking. . And I-- for you, this is really-- I mean, I hesitate, but I hesitate only because I hope I'm not treading on your sensitivity. 

It just strikes me that, one, you mentioned that we're missing from you particularly [INAUDIBLE] is your relationship with your wife. Obviously, the relationship between a survivor and a spouse who isn't a survivor is a very sensitive thing that we have not explored. 

SUBJECT: And will not Totally. 

INTERVIEWER 2: No? 

SUBJECT: I can tell you-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well, I didn't mean-- I'm sorry. 

SUBJECT: You know, I'm not-- It's totally pathological. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I just mean that-- you know, [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: No, no, no, no, no. But I'm-- [INAUDIBLE]. No, you didn't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where you were born? 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. We're rolling. 

SUBJECT: My name is [INAUDIBLE] George Fisher. 