INTERVIEWER: OK. I was asking about your reception here in the American community, among American boys and girls. You're 14 years old, or 13 and 1/2. And you've come through a trauma of extraordinary dimensions. And now you're in a normal American classroom. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I started out in Danbury, Connecticut, at the Balmforth Avenue School, I think with my third year in the sixth grade. And the first thing I encountered was people saying, Heil, Hitler, making-- you know, sort of making anti-German-- in my school, they thought of me as a German. And this was the, you know, the war. So um, that was not very pleasant. 

It was a-- a lower middle class, I guess, neighborhood. So in school, my situation was sort of unpleasant to start with, both from this reception, and from the fact that I had trouble with language. And but, that worked itself out. 

As far as the Jewish community was concerned, I think that we were a segmented community in Danbury. Uh, in a sense, we belonged-- there were several synagogues. We belonged, uh, to, uh a synagogue which is, I guess, the rabbi is still-- still rabbi there today, [? Joe ?] [? Molino. ?] He's quite well-known rabbi. 

But the segmentation in the Jewish community was quite pronounced in that the German Jewish refugees were, this time, at the lower end of the pole, while the established, mostly Eastern European, American Jews were at the upper end of the pole. And um, there was tension of a different kind there-- um, reverse of what I had experienced as a little boy in Germany. 

Uh, but I must, I must say that even though the twenty didn't meet terribly well, we were, uh, still, I thought, uh, the reception by the East European Jews of, of us German Jews, was better than what we had accorded to the East European Jews in Germany. But there was tension. 

INTERVIEWER: Did they want to know? 

SUBJECT: Um, very few people would-- wanted to talk about it, uh, in terms of asking what happened in Germany. I found that people really didn't ask very much. Um, I mean-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you want to tell? 

SUBJECT: I wouldn't have minded. I told as what I-- you know, what I knew to my own family. I had written it down, as a matter of fact. I had definitely felt I had to tell. Even as a child in Cuba I wrote essay about 40 or 50 page manuscript, this little boy, and once I had that on paper, I felt better. And I would have been happy to tell people, but I had the impression that, except for the nearer family, that people really weren't interested in knowing too much. They wanted to go it once over quickly. I had a feeling they-- in general, they had, by that time, accepted that things were happening. They didn't want to know any details. But that was, you know, again-- and maybe I wasn't at that level, so I wasn't talking to people in Washington at that time, as a 13-year-old or 14-year-old boy. 

And my father, for the 10 months which we still know each other, was really too preoccupied with making a living, keeping his head above water, getting his family-- keeping his family together. Because he was a lawyer, when he came to the States, of course, he didn't have-- there was no transferability. So he first worked in a factory with his hands, and then became an accountant in the office of that factory, in one of the fur factories which Danbury was used to be famous for. 

And when he died, I went to work at 13, quite illegally in terms of not being 16 yet. I used to work after school from 3:00 to 6:00 every day in stamping-- stamping bags in which they would pack the fur for the felt that was going into the production of hats. And I had on Saturdays all day and Sundays I had a paper route, Sunday mornings. I worked pretty hard throughout my high school. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did other young people that you were associating with, at that time, want to know? After all, you had an accent. You had a different experience. Did they ask you anything? 

SUBJECT: You mean some classmates? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. 

SUBJECT: Well, two kinds of classmates. I said the rowdies, who were sort of-- continue to kind of sort of persecute me. Well, that was a small group. And they were others who, you know, were quite friendly and accepted me. And after I mastered the language, I used to do quite well in school, and I got recognition for that from my classmates. 

But very few who sort of-- one sit me down and say, hey, what's going on in Germany? I don't think that's a very strong proclivity among Americans that they want to hear in detail about stories. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is it only among Americans? 

SUBJECT: Of anybody, I suppose. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you're saying this is not necessarily true for Americans. 

SUBJECT: That's right. People-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't like hearing unpleasant things. 

SUBJECT: That's right. You're right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the parents of your friends ever ask you about yourself? 

SUBJECT: You talking about Jewish friends or-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Just the parents of your Jewish friends, or the parents of-- 

SUBJECT: Again, I mean, I think people go through the sort of formalities of that sort of extended figures level, but not really having a session detail. I think it's quite true that people like to go onto pleasant things, like that go onto the future. How are you doing in school? How you like the United States? How do you like hamburgers? That level of conversation would take over very quickly. Nobody really wanted to hear any details. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me, did you miss Germany? Was there also. You know, I understand that you must have been very happy to be free, but did you also had feelings of kind of divided loyalties? 

SUBJECT: I guess the only thing I missed for some time was the outdoors. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The landscape. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, landscape. Because one nice thing about Germany is that every wooden area is not only very beautiful, as is the United States, but it's also accessible, in the path or the walks, and there is a schloss on top where you can have coffee and cake. And you know, that's something that I've missed a good deal. Here-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about the language did you miss then? 

SUBJECT: The German language? No, because what I wanted, I could still read. And I-- the literature is still accessible to me, and what was good about Germany in terms of contributions of that kind. I still write good. I still read good. But-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: I guess I meant-- 

SUBJECT: --language in terms of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --just listening, hearing. 

SUBJECT: Hearing language. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, being transported into different language. Having to give up something with which you grew up. 

SUBJECT: Not really. Maybe I was too young. I don't have any negative feelings towards German when I hear German spoken, although I never want to live-- or I don't want to live in Germany again. 

I did go back to Germany quite a few times, because I had a couple of uncles, that I haven't mentioned, who migrated in the '30s, but migrated to Latin America, two to Bolivia, one to Brazil. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: Again-- why they go there instead of somewhere else? 

INTERVIEWER 1: And why did they leave? 

SUBJECT: Oh, in the 30's, because of Hitler. I mean, that was-- they just had-- they were earlier. And left with some of their belongings. And again, it was a question of who would take you, and you know, you went wherever they were quotas. United States had a limited quota, Brazil had some, Bolivia had some. Another one went to-- actually, two went to Bolivia, and one to Brazil. 

Anyway, some of those uncles, after the war, went back to live in Germany. There are two reasons for that. One is the Germans, as you may know, provided incentives for Jews to come back and resettle, financial incentives, as part of the restitution-- beyond the restitution. But also, I had the feeling that both-- well, all three of these couple weren't terribly well integrated into their life in Bolivia and Brazil. They always felt as outsiders, which is another whole story. In any case, they went back, and so I've been-- I went back to Germany to visit them. And-- but it never occurred to me to want to live there again. I find it uh, very- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they feel there? 

SUBJECT: The two who went back-- one of them had been, actually, associated with my father. He was my father's brother-in-law. He married my father's sister, and then they became partners in law firm. He was even more German than my father had been. And he left earlier, and when he came back, he was appointed special assistant to the mayor of Darmstadt. He got kind of an honorific job, which appealed to his ego, and so he was quite happy until he became quite old. 

And his son, by the way, refused to go back. He stayed in Rio de Janeiro, and he's still in Brazil. He's a Brazilian citizen. And then when he was very old he and his wife, my aunt, went back to Brazil, and they died in Brazil. 

But they spent another 10 years in Germany, sort of I guess you might say they satisfied the Germans needs for making restitution. I think they shouldn't have done that. I think it was too cheap. They sold-- they sold themselves too cheaply by going back and letting them make a big hero out of him, but that was him. He felt quite good about that, it made him happy. 

The other one went back to live near Frankfurt. And he said he never felt any discomfort compared to Bolivia, where he lived, in La Paz. He felt more at home back in-- of course, La Paz is a very difficult situation too, if you have to make that comparison. I know very few Jews who migrate to this country who went back and I think that that's part of the explanation. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- You said that you didn't talk about it, because people didn't want you-- didn't want to hear so much, and because your father didn't because he was making a living. I wondered about the element of trying not to be noticed, in other words, that whole fear of being noticed and therefore picked or taken away, or whatever. I wonder if you have seen that transferred here or elsewhere by people who went through that experience. 

SUBJECT: Well, I suppose there are some Jews who feel that one should not take up the culture and be visible and noisy every time the actual or imagined slight. And I suppose before I-- maybe in the beginning, particularly, before I would sign the petition or march in a parade, identify myself with a cause, I have to be a little more-- I want to be a little more careful than I might have been if I have to analyze myself. I think I've outgrown that partly with becoming more conscious and assertive Jew. It might have been a phase in my life when I-- early on, when I might have just been quite happy to get lost in the shuffle, and you know, make my career and not stick my neck out. I don't think that's speaking for myself only. I don't think that's a pronounced feature, at this point, 

But I think there are-- you know, we all have our markings to bear of whatever has happened to us. I think that, probably, I'm still too coward by authority in a sense that I still probably-- although, things have changed a good deal, and I think very few thinking Americans would accept the word from on high, these days. Probably there was some of that. Although, I must say that with respect to the Vietnam War, for example, I was one of the early outspoken critics, and perhaps if I had not had this experience, I might have-- I might have been even more willing to sign petitions and be-- and expose myself. Then-- then given this history, that's a hard one, you know. What makes one's-- one's-- what makes one's total psyche is-- is a very complicated matter. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, the question always arises, however, of why the survivors-- as was raised recently-- why 35 years later they are willing to talk? Why didn't they speak when they first came? 

SUBJECT: Nobody asked us. You weren't around though. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But I- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Perhaps one needs certain distance from one's experience, you know, to talk about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you feel that way, that you needed a distance? 

SUBJECT: Well, with me, it is a change of, you know, age group. At 12 and 13, I was-- as I said, I felt very pent up, and I wanted to talk and I wanted to write about it, but there wasn't anybody really interested. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't marry a person who was also a survivor. I find, in these interviews, that many people feel the need to have, as their life partner, someone who also experienced this. Without intruding into your personal life, I just wondered if there's any explanation in your mind why you did and they didn't, and they did and you didn't, and whether you found it hard to translate this experience to Rachel and to the children. 

SUBJECT: Well, not to Rachel because she's a very unusual person, you know? I don't think she-- I don't have any difficulty. She's interested in, she wants to know about it, and she's-- she has sympathetic vibrations about it, even though she wasn't herself. But she's only-- you know, her parents were migrants from Eastern Europe. She's not-- she was brought up in a relatively non-integrated way, and so I think that's part of the explanation. I had thought, initially, that I would probably end up someone with a similar experience, but it just didn't work out that way. 

What does frustrate me more is perhaps the children's indifference. Not all of them, but two out of three of my children really couldn't care less. I couldn't get them to watch the program the other night. 

And in fact, um, I hope you'll cut this out that, well, I-- I'm still not speaking to my daughter, because she wanted to watch some other program. And I said, it's very important for me, and I want you to watch it. And she said, there's this program on and I've got to watch it because my-- the kids at school talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old is she? 

SUBJECT: She's-- she's almost about 13 year. 

And you know, I find that hurt me a lot. And I think that's two out of my three children really-- you know, really it's not interesting to them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think they're afraid? 

SUBJECT: I don't think so. No, they just-- they're just part of America, and this is just a story from the old days, which-- it's like telling them how tough things were, you know, when I was a kid. And they don't want to hear that, they don't want to hear about Germany, and they're just not interested. That's not true for my oldest, but it's 66%, 2/3% is high enough for me. 

And it's nothing-- I can understand it. I don't think they're bad people. I just somehow wish-- wish I-- wish I could create an interest in that, because you know, it's not just because it happened to their father. I think it's because an important lesson for them to understand and learn about, and benefit from. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, that's what I was leading to is what lessons can be learned? I mean, this was a heinous event in human history. It was a singular event in the sense that it, you know, there's never been anything of this quite of this dimension of total genocide, final solution, all that-- I don't want to make a lecture. So I just wonder, how can you learn from something that was, in a sense, unique? 

SUBJECT: Well, it's-- certainly my daughter, we've had big discussions about Cambodia and the Cambodian refugees. She has picked up, whether in school or from classmates, the notion this country is already pretty full. You know, we've got unemployment, we shouldn't take any more refugees. And we've had these big discussions about Cambodian refugees. Rachel is involved in resettlement of some Vietnamese families. 

So I-- the reason-- one of the reasons I wanted her to see the program, and I wanted her to understand what life was like in Germany, because if it hadn't been for people who said, take some refugees, I wouldn't be here and she wouldn't be here. In a very selfish narrow sense, very important that try to explain to her that there's always room for some more people to be taken in. There's so much misery in the world, and we have it so good, that we should share. That-- that is one of the reasons I wanted her to watch the program, not just for purely sort of self-indulgent reasons. 

But I'm having a problem with her. She-- you know, she's having a very nice suburban life, and she has everything she needs and wants. And somehow I wish we could put people to a pressure cooker, a time capsule, and make them experience a little bit of what it was like, so that they can enjoy what they have. They don't just take everything for granted. 

I don't know how to-- you can't do that. You can't artificially make their life difficult. I don't want to, but I think there's a real problem of character building, which these kids just are missing and I feel bad about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think it's more for children of survivors-- as you are a survivor-- than for others that they don't want to know, and they don't want to feel, and they don't want to be hurt by that which hurt their parents? 

SUBJECT: Well, I wish it was that noble. I think it's just a problem in affluent society, which becomes, in our case, hardened. And it's hard to-- you know, even when you talk about things which are different around the dinner table, the pressures of the peer group, the neighbor kids talk about, the neighbor's parents-- kid's parents talk about, are very, very formidable. And it's to-- it's hard to keep one's attention on more-- more important and the more universal kinds of issues. 

You know, I don't want my children to pay for something I went through. That's not the point. I just want them to have a little interest and understanding, so they can appreciate a little bit what they have. But that's-- I think it's a human failing that we all-- not only don't we want to hear bad news, it's more than that. 

I think we-- we react to adversity on a very time limited basis. And once we've overcome that, we don't appreciate what we've gained, when we worry about the next level of problems. So we often have to think of ourselves and say, well, look, we're pretty lucky. We haven't got these terrible problems. You got some other problems. But we somehow have a tendency to elevate lower level problems to a higher status, and we go on from there. 

And so what she worries about are her friends and a fight she might have had, or how she's doing in mathematics, and that becomes just as important to her and the level of worry just as important to her as-- when I was her age I was sitting in the gestapo waiting for whether I'm going to live or die. And that's a tragedy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's a very hard thing to hear such things coming from parents. 

SUBJECT: It is hard. I'm sure it's hard, but I-- you know, I just don't-- I just don't know how to convey to her that the things she worries about are really-- yeah, she should worry about them, she is human, but she also try to open herself to other things. But I don't hold it against her, because I think we all do some of that. 

We all forget, you know? Rachel and I worry about silly things in our daily lives, and you know, I'm sure we all do that. We all lose perspective. But that's a-- much broader than Holocaust and the memories. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I hate to let you go, and yet I know that it's not fair. I just wondered if there's anything that I haven't thought to ask you, or Iza hasn't thought to ask you? You're-- you're so giving of yourself. Is there anything-- since this is a document, hopefully for all time-- that we just are too ignorant or too reluctant, or whatever it is, just haven't thought to ask you, that you feel is important for people to know? Not just for now, but for maybe-- hopefully this meeting can be transported 1,000 years from now. 

SUBJECT: Going to put in a time capsule? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, we're going to do that. 

SUBJECT: Yeah? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. Holo-- holographically hope, or some other kind of format that keeps it. 

SUBJECT: All right. I think-- I think, no. I think we've covered everything I could. I think you've elicited more than I should have talked about. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, one of the questions that you ask I think is impossible to answer. How did one-- how did it influence? 