SUBJECT: I wonder how my children are going to take it. They're going to have a tough time. 

CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: Go ahead. Just continue from where you were. 

SUBJECT: We were marched-- Lublin is a city. And the train disembarked near the city. And we were marched off towards Majdanek, which is a concentration-- or was a concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: The conditions in the cattle car? You were there for how many days? 

SUBJECT: Oh, hard. Oh, I don't know whether we were more than, um, perhaps 24 hours or so. It isn't that far. 

All of Poland isn't big enough for a longer travel. And we were just traveling further south. I don't even think it was 24 hours. 

But water was scarce. I believe toilet facilities were some type of communal urinal or whatever it was. I don't even remember that. 

We were packed together. People were fainting. People were hurt because of the shooting, like myself, bleeding and per-- perspiration aggravating the condition. And, uh, so they were very, very bad. 

And, uh, when we disembarked in Lublin, that was the first time that they started to select-- first of all, they separated the men and women. We immediately knew. We always stayed apart. We were never together with the men. 

And then we were marched off. Women were marched off to Majdanek. And I always pulled my mother with me, right in back of me. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say-- 

SUBJECT: I just pulled her, period. I used that trick right through. And she stayed with me until I could no longer perform that miracle. Whenever I was chosen to do something, when the SS woman passed and I was supposed to step out, she was yanked, whether she liked it or not. 

And so in that, uh, Majdanek, which was a work camp concentration camp with the stench of burning flesh day and night. They were burning, if I'm not mistaken, in open fields. That was my introduction. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father? 

SUBJECT: No. We no longer were with him. They were left in Lublin Proper, whatever that was, part of Lublin. And women-- we were in a women's camp. It was far away from men. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you say goodbye to your father? Was there a moment-- 

SUBJECT: He marched out, my father and my boyfriend, waving their hand sort of in this fashion, as if to say God is willing, wearing funny looking, something that looked like pajamas. And he thought, as did all the others, now that he went through the sauna and gas didn't come through the heads, he too was chosen to survive. God is willing. 

That's-- these little things added up to a willingness to wait for the next miracle to happen. And everyone thought that he and he alone was the someone special destined to survive or indestructible. I never get sick, me, the athlete and the swimmer and the-- so forth. I couldn't possibly die, even on little food. That was my belief. 

I don't know what placebo effect that had. Maybe it did. But we went working in the fields. And one day, we were late from the field. And as a result of-- we were positioned in front of all the lines, lineup of people, which is known as Zahlappell, where they would line up and count for hours to find that one losing-- one lost number. 

And it was on that day, approximately 10 days after we arrived in that Majdanek, that they were looking for seamstresses, really looking for seamstresses this time. You never knew it was for real or fake. And I was in front. 

Usually I would be positioned way back. But because we came late, I was in front where they assess women, were actually picking seamstresses. And there was one thing you-- you knew. If they looked for any profession, you were it. 

I couldn't make a stitch that was even in that time. But sure, I was a-- a-- a-- a seamstress by profession. I raised my hand. And she looked at my, um, Aryan face and had no qualms about it. I was small, but very healthy looking. As I said to you, I was always an athlete. And so she chose me. And as soon as she passed, my mother was in back of me. I went forward with my mother hidden in back of me. 

And that was it. We were marched off. She didn't even know that an older person was among us. She only looked for young girls. 

And truly, we were shipped off to a small working camp in Poland where we were put to work. And it was a very unusual place, because some people who were there from the rest of Poland actually had some of their belongings. They were so much better off than we were. We just had the funny looking skirt on ourselves, barefoot and nothing else, the Bialystok contingent. 

But the natives who were in that camp before we came there were-- were from the interior of Poland, Radom. And they were better off. And they had some type of bedding that they brought from the ghettos. And we worked in that camp. 

And it was in that camp in January that all of the command, all the commanding officers of Majdanek-- it was to that camp that they were shipped, because they exterminated all the Jews that were left. So we escaped, at that time, death by a sheer accident. I was at a proper time in a proper spot and brazen enough to claim that I was a seamstress and Aryan looking and brazen enough to pull my mother with me. So I ended up having a chance to survive one more year. 

INTERVIEWER: And the SS-- 

SUBJECT: And the rest of the camp was exterminated. All of the Jews. Machine gunned had to dig their ditches. And because I knew that my father was in the or-- orchestra and then discovered that the orchestra was playing to muffle the noise of the shooting for the Poles and other Aryans, I know that my father had to witness all of this till the very, very end. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father in the orchestra. Tell us about that, because we ran out of tape before. I'm not sure we knew about that. 

SUBJECT: My father was a violinist. And for some reason, somebody must have-- they must have been looking for musicians. Whether he volunteered-- perhaps he did, because that meant some extra bread or whatever. 

He ended up being in the band. And the band was made to perform when the work, um, commandos were coming in and going out. That was a normal procedure. They would be playing. 

It was a nice, jolly place, after all. That was one of the gimmicks employed both in this camp and also in Auschwitz. But at the end, where they, under the pretext-- they found some weapons in the camp-- decided to kill all of the Jews. The camp was left without any Jews whatso-- all of them exterminated without gas chambers, machine guns. They were made to dig their ditches. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know your father was in this orchestra? 

SUBJECT: Somebody saw him. He was a well-known person in Bialystok. He was a well-known musician, very well liked. 

INTERVIEWER: How did that person escape? 

SUBJECT: The place where we went to work also got a contingent of men from where my father w-- uh, worked of tailors and whatever else. So we met. And they told us, gave us regards. They saw my father in the orchestra. That was the last I heard, except when we were in the small camp. And that wasn't very far from Lublin. 

We had, um, um, logs-- burning logs come. These were wood-burning stoves which were in use. And in it, inscribed in Hebrew, was the story of that November 3rd massacre, how many thousands of Jews, how it was done. So we knew probably in December what happened to my father. And my uncle was there and everybody. 

INTERVIEWER: What did it say on these logs? 

SUBJECT: That's a matter-of-fact account given of so many thousand. It took so many days. The ditches were dug. People were made to stand at the border of the ditch, shot in the back of the head, piled up. Commandos were burying them while the orchestra was muffling the noise. And then the orchestra went too. No Jews were left. 

So we escaped, for the time being, only the camp was very poorly kept and it had an epidemic of typhus. And both of us had it, my mother and I. My mother was very ill. 

I always somehow managed to help myself with my-- the talent of my hands, you might say. This time I collected scraps of wool and knitted sweaters and sold it to people who were better off with some money and bought some extra bread. And eventually I was one of the last ones with the typhus. 

The Germans just disbelieved that I was sick with the typhus. I was so healthy looking. I just always was very healthy looking. 

And I did. I survived it. I had to stand upright while I-- instead of being in the hospital, because the epidemic was over. And I wasn't allowed to be in the hospital. And I did that, too. 

And then we started, towards the spring, started hearing heavy artillery from the east. And we knew we would be shipped forward, only we didn't know where. We were shipped to Auschwitz. 

And the German commando told us that we would not be-- nothing will happen to us, because we're working women and men. Whether true or not, I don't know. But we weren't touched. We came to Auschwitz. Other transports were coming and being burnt. We were left alone, for one reason or another. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember entering Auschwitz? I have heard that it was very-- 

SUBJECT: Mm-hmm. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --well kept garden, swimming pools. Can you de-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. I entered Auschwitz. Then I entered it three years ago again. I retraced my steps exactly. And I found the block in which I was sleeping. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe the-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: Well, this is that part. I was in Birkenau, not in Auschwitz. That's different. 

Birkenau also had a gate-- two red brick buildings with a gate. And the train would pull into the inside. Hidden in a grove of beautiful poplar trees, idyllic as could be, were five crematories. The crematoriums always had saunas attached to them so that you went, you got your soap and you got your towel. I had no idea then that I was next door to the crematory. I discovered that three years ago when I went there. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't smell anything? 

SUBJECT: No, not at that time. That was in the spring. And they didn't even shave our heads at that time. 

But they did tattoo us. I had a tattoo here, which, by the way, was removed here at the Yale University when I first came to New York. And I had to hang onto the subway strap and everybody peering at my hand. I did something that I now regret. I had it removed. 

So it must be somewhere in the archives there in, uh, uh, preservative, formaldehyde. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you-- were there gardens in Birkenau? Or did you see gardens or-- 

SUBJECT: The current crematoriums were housed in a very pretty poplar grove. Now-- it's-- it's tall now. It must have been not as tall then, at that time. But it's a very pretty, idyllic looking spot. Very, very pretty. 

INTERVIEWER: Swimming pools? 

SUBJECT: No. Just that. And next to it were warehouses known as Mexico, Canada, and such, where belongings were sorted out to be transported to Germany-- bedding, books, towel, bibles, teeth, eye glasses. 

I went to Auschwitz now through the museums. Millions of pairs of spectacles and glasses, combs, children's shoes. I know how they were gotten. That's how. 

People worked at assorting the better ones to be exported. And people who went into-- in the direction of the crematoriums-- in other words, that was the entry to the camp. You went all around, enter the camp if you were allowed to survive. 

They didn't-- they never exterminated everybody all at once. The design was to have you see some people go out intact. And you never started counting. And like the story with the Iranian uh, um, um, with the Iranians. If you don't see them all together, you don't know if they are still the same people. So once you see one or two friends coming out, they say, oh, well, this is not a crematorium. And so we confidently went to that place, and, uh, the Germans looking on while we undressed, laughing, smiling benevolently, not brutally. 

That would have been giving away where you were going. And they would have had a tough time. But it's such an easy time of it. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean by dissembling, the people went easily to the gas chamber? 

SUBJECT: What are you talking about? Go and get washed, my-- my-- my child. We need you for work. We wouldn't be going through all this trouble. Here's your soap. Here's your towel. 

Oh, that's nonsense. This isn't here. You don't want me to look. I'll look aside. 

Once they were doing-- the only time that they were not playing a game is when they didn't have to, if they didn't expect a revolt. When they were shooting people in the woods, they weren't doing this. But they needed our cooperation. 

They had no facilities to gas everybody all at once. And this was the end of the-- you-- uh, Judenfrei Europa was happening, Europe. And they were getting everybody in all together. There had to be some law and order. There had to be some orderly disposal of people. 

First, so and so, so and s-- even the selection. You could so clearly see they were selecting. They made sure you saw they were selecting older people, diseased people. And you would say, ah, that's not me, is it? 

The point is you never knew what was left and what was right. And when they were selecting, you never knew which side was the good side and will you come out. But if you saw the older people, that was reassuring, older people going, older women, children going. We knew. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean that sometimes when they sent you to the left, it meant one thing and-- 

SUBJECT: It meant to the showers that had the gas in them. 

INTERVIEWER: Always? 

SUBJECT: Always. There were different shower stalls. And we were actually given a shower. I remember the trepidation in my heart, trepidation in my heart. 

What's going to come? And when you finally see the droplets of water-- I will never forget that feeling. I am really getting washed. I'm getting a shower once again. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother with you? 

SUBJECT: Still with me. Still dragged with me wherever I went. That's where she went. 

They didn't even have a chance to select. She would stand upright because I marched her that way, pulled her beside me. And they didn't bother. She passed. She wasn't, at that point, as emaciated as she's become later. 

And so, once again, we ended up in Auschwitz in a-- in a con-- concentration camp, period. I never worked there, maybe once. You just had to-- well, you had to just survive the days that went by. And once again, I think I survived it in two ways. 

One, I tuned out. It was happening, but it wasn't happening to me. And two, I sought out human contact. 

I went from one block to another seeking out the young people from foreign lands, new arrivals. And we talked and we talked about things that were and things that are going to be, how it was in Paris. What did you do in your high school? What are you going to study? 

I went for days. My poor mother was left alone sitting in front of a block while I was gallivanting like this. And in this way, once again, I stumbled upon a contact of a political organization. 

I knew that they were going to blow up the crematories. I wasn't completely in on it. They didn't tell me very much. But I did know that the French marquis had some people there. 

And I was given a pocket to hold and give. Men would be coming, working. And it was dangerous for them to carry things to the organization. So in one instance, I was asked to be the emissary. I was given a pocket, which I was supposed to deliver somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you have the strength to be sashaying around, as you describe yourself? 

SUBJECT: I hate to say it's genetic. But just as it is very difficult for me to lose weight now, so apparently it was difficult for me to lose it then. I wasn't-- I survived on the meager supply of food. 

I-- to this day, I don't know. I discussed it with physician friends, how I could have survived so many years on approximately 800 and some calories. That's what we figured. 

I went down to the bone of me. But better than this, there is a genetic difference in people. They trace it back to the so-called brown-fat cells today. So I was always a chubby teenager. And I had enough to lose. 

And apparently that, to some extent, saved me and being active, blocking off-- really blocking off the-- the unbelievable side of it, being involved with things that are going to be. Yes, they're going to be. If I'm working with a political organization that's going to-- that's giving soup. In one instance, I was just pass soup in between the electrified wires. Somebody was being gotten out of camp. 

And the Russians were heard. The chances were some were to survive. And we kept on repeating this tale that Hitler was going to have something to show to the world. Oh, no. I didn't kill Jews. Here they are. The young and strong survived. The rest, they're good for nothing. They can't work. They died. We didn't kill them. And so we were going to be the showpiece of Europe. 

That kept me until November, I think, of that year, 1944. And then something happened. I must have contracted a virus. I started vomiting. 

And my mother was taken away from me to what was always-- has been in the past-- the last stop from there to the crematorium. And it is-- that's the first thing that happened to me. I was no longer a spectator. 

And I screamed. And I threw myself after her when she is being taken. And the SS woman said, why, by all means, come on and join mommy, young girl. 

But my knowledgeable friends dragged me by my clothing. Don't you dare! So screaming, I stayed. I was just demolished. 

That was the one thing I had, my mother. That was my baby. I cared for her. So long as I had somebody to care for, all was well. And here I was left. 

I escaped from my block and endangered myself and slept that entire night under that infamous chamber of doom. Then I painted it later. And I have it at home, the way it looked. 

But this was after the crematoriums were demolished. And apparently or truly Swiss commission was coming. And they were supposedly preparing an altenheim, a nursing home, home of the aged. 

And so they left this little contingent of elderly women. And when I saw her alive in the morning, I truly believed in it, and the day after that, and the day after that. I went there every morning. And she was still there, free to come and go as she pleased. 

And I said well, they are not killing her. Only I was dying. This time I was going. Something happened and I just couldn't retain my food. 

And something was telling. Meanwhile, things were progressing on all fronts, and they were going. And so they-- and they were really low on labor. And they started taking Jews out to work. I know it was to work partially, because German civilians were coming to pick workers. 

And I stayed behind to be with my mother, but I was dying, because without food-- with food, yes. Without food, no. And vomiting means more. It means dehydration. Something told me-- common sense-- that getting out of here, going somewhere else, to Germany-- perhaps I will survive. And also why should my mother see me die in front of her. And she was alive. And she was well provided for. 

So what I did, I had a friend physician who promised me she would have her name taken out of this house and put her with a workforce whenever possible to also be taken to Germany. They were gradually eliminating the camp. I was truly sent to Germany, to Westphalia, which was not too far from Aachen, where the American front was progressing at that time, to work in a munition factory. 

To-- to moralize behaving like a little baby, I slept together with somebody else's mother, who dubbed for my own mother, composing songs. I got typhoid fever, which I weathered beautifully once again. And I befriended an SS man who was a Pole-- Pole, who told me he became an SS man because he was a communist. And they gave him a choice. Either he joined the SS or they were going to shoot him. 

And he claimed he came from the town I came from, Grudziadz, which I had a tough time spelling for you. And he told me he knew my father. And he brought me to that typhus barrack some onion, which was full of vitamins, which helped. 

And he wrote a letter to another comrade of his assessment in Auschwitz. And the letter came back, Auschwitz was liberated. And this was so soon after I parted with my mother. And then I said to myself, well, my mother was liberated by the Russians. And that made it a whole lot easier. 

While I was in that small Westphalian town until April 1. We had a true April 1, because that's when I was liberated by the American Army. What a surprise. 

They were-- the British were bombing during the day, I believe, and the Americans during the night. And I was in a munition factory with shelter drills day and night. But they didn't touch us. We are actually working. 

The German civilians were coming and asking us. Tell us. Is it true what we hear? 

And in April, they marched us out of the little camp to our final destination, Buchenwald. We were escaping the Americans and the British. And we were caught by the Americans in a field. Sitting in a dish-- ditch, there was the American tide passing. And something told me, don't try and scream because they couldn't hear you anyway, and the Germans will shoot you. So I didn't. 

Now, sitting in that ditch, all of a sudden I see one by one the SS men disappearing on us. And then we saw something that looked, um, linen drying, only these were white sheets and pillow cases. And the village surrendered. 

Later, at the end, I, in front of all the girls-- come on, Irene. You speak English. Go. I go with a blanket on me. There stands the Yankee tank with a gum-chewing Yankee, nonchalantly looking at me and laughing. We looked like a bunch of maniacs. Women-- 200 women wearing blankets. 

He says to me, where the hell are you from? And I back to him, where the hell are you from? What do you mean? He says, I'm from America. I said, how did you get here? 

I just couldn't get it straight. Did he swim across the ocean? I wasn't aware that the Americans were in the war. I expected the British. I wasn't quite ready to accept that the Americans were in the war. I didn't hear that part. 

And so we were freed in a little town, Kaunitz. And we occupied the town. The 200-some women chased the Germans out and lived in the town with the Americans' help. And we had our first Seder. 

Seder was late this year. It was in April, the first chapter in that little town. And the disbelieving GIs-- we were the first Jewish women liberated. And they were so disbelieving that there were women who were left that they would come to us with their mezuzah-- you know, that dog tag and the mezuzah. 

What is it? Thinking maybe we were some hidden Nazis. Gentiles were trying to pass for Jews maybe. They accepted it. And we lived in that town. 

And I, with my knowledge of English, immediately volunteered my help for the American army. And I did work for the American army, helping repatriating. I became a secretary And a, uh, translator. I spoke all the languages. 

And we organized transports of Russians, PWs, TP camps. For a while, we caught some Nazis hidden. And, uh, the operation was maintained by the former CID and CIC. 

And so I worked. I had the pleasure of being a translator at the Allied meetings and where high office-- high-ranking Russian officers and British and Americans were meeting. And I, with my dubious supply of, uh, sophisticated vocabulary, was translating. I must've pulled a lot of political booboos. 

One I did. I told my captain that there was going to be Russian tea. I knew darn well it wasn't go-- was going to have everything but tea in it, because the Russians drink vodka straight. And they surely didn't expect. They thought there was tea. Well, anyway, I was in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: And your mother? 

SUBJECT: And people started coming from Bergen-Belsen and greeted me, hello. Regards from your mother. I thought I left her safe and sound, liberated by the Russians. 

I was-- I begged the chaplain to lend me his Jeep and his driver to go and look for my mother. And I did. That was my first trip. 

The old camp was still burning. And I looked among the dead, among the living, and among Russian women and Hungarian women. No trace. 

I went back totally demoralized, ready to commit suicide. I didn't want to live. I saved clothing for my mother, ready to receive her. 

A couple of weeks later, somebody else-- what do you mean you didn't see your mother? I saw her. She was sick. She was in a lazarette or that field hospital going to the bathroom. Surely she was well enough to go to the bathroom. 

At that point, I worked for my captain. An American captain with whom I worked gave me his Jeep and his driver. Once again, I want. 

The Swiss commission and this, I looked through lists. No trace of my mother. Not on the list of the dead. Not on the list of the alive. 

Then the-- this area switched hands. The British took over. And I worked for the British army, once again as a translator-- dolmetsch, as they said. At that point, I spoke English fluent. I spoke-- always spoke French and spoke Russian and Polish. And that's what they needed. 

And once again, I went to Bergen-Belsen again with a driver, this time a Scottish driver whom I couldn't understand at all his Scottish brogue. And we had a jolly old conversation all the way down. And once again, I couldn't find her. 

It was explained to me that people died unregistered in that interregnum time where the British weren't yet-- weren't in and the Germans weren't-- or were out. And the camp was left with nothing. And they just died like flies. And no one knew who died. And so the cadavers I looked at were later edition of the same holocaust. 

And so, until very recently, I accepted the fact that my mother died a natural death of starvation, dysentery, and premature aging, except my sister, who copiously collects all literature having to do with holocaust and Polish, read to me a passa-- passage indicating that that altersheim where she was, that these women were shot, and that the Russians came and buried them. So I have written to the Museum of Auschwitz and have received a reply from Dr. so-and-so, who is in charge of the museum, asking if perhaps the Russians have taken down the names, the tattoo numbers of those women who were executed by the Germans whom they found. No, such a thing didn't happen. 

So now I don't know. And that's very hard to take. It's a little easier to take the fact that I left my mother, and she was given a chance to die halfway in a normal way. 

And it's much harder to hear about the death march. How could she have ever marched to Bergen-Belsen? And harder yet to see her also being marched to her death. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your sister? 

SUBJECT: My sister was in Poland. I worked-- after I worked for the British army, my last bout, I realized that the only way I can find my sister is to go to Russia. That's where I left her. That part I didn't know, that it became Polish again. It was Soviet before, I knew. 

How do I get to the Soviet Union? There's only one way I can get into the Soviet Union. I become a Soviet citizen. And I spoke fluent Russian. 

Not only did I go, but I dragged with me three other Amer-- three other Polish girls who couldn't speak one word of Russian. And we went into Poland as supposedly nurses just to get to the Soviet Union to look for our beloved ones. And I passed through the screening by the NKVD, maintaining with a, uh, blank face. Of course I'm a Russ-- a Russian. What do you think I am? 

These three girls hidden behind me, they never even saw, the Soviet Union. Well, we got into the Soviet Union. And they went looking for theirs. And I went to Lvov in Lemberg. 

There I discovered that all the former Polish citizens were asked to go out to newly formed satellite Poland, among them my aunts, who were in hiding here. And this became Ukraine. Now how do I get back to Poland? 

Well, at that point I became what I really was, a Polish Jew. And they allowed me to go back to Poland. And I went to Krakow. 

And through a Jewish committee which was formed there, I discovered the whereabouts of my aunts. And I came to see my aunts. And they asked me where is our sister? What did you do with your mother? 

That was a 77th blow. I should not have let her die. I should not have left her. It was my obligation to die with her. You don't leave a mother. It was hard to take. 

And then I discovered that my sister, my little Jewish sister who was twice as Jewish as I was and was given to me as an example, christened herself. She was in the hiding with a Gentile family. And she refused to come and meet me. 

She said if my mother was alive, she would. And it was after pleading, she finally came to meet me. And while I was with her in Poland, she went to a 7:00 or 6:00 mass. 

So I picked myself up. And I had papers in which it said, To Whom It May Concern, Miss Irene Hass, is employed by the 7th Irish battlery, the British Royal Artillery, et cetera as our most, um, valuable interpreter. I had the nerve to take the paper and put a British flag on my lapel and go to the Polish border with a box of British cigarettes in my hand and speak English and refuse to speak Polish. 

No, I am-- see, this is my citizenship paper-- and be lucky enough not only to be allowed to cross back to Germany, but the Poles shouted across, which I understood, to the Russians on the other side. Hey, no monkey business. She is-- she's our ally, meaning I wasn't a German. And so rape was not in order this time. 

I went back to East Germany. I went to We-- to, uh, East B-- West Berlin to the British authorities. And they had a DP camp. 

I was so unsure of myself. When somebody spoke Russian in front of me, a Polish, that when they asked me who are you? Who are you? W-- w-- why are you coming here? 

I kept on saying I'm a British subject by birth. I am a British subject by birth, which I was maintaining all along with that flimsy little paper in Berlin. They knew darn well I wasn't a Britisher. And they realized what I was doing. I was just not sure that they weren't going to send me back, so I kept on maintaining that. 

INTERVIEWER: You left your sister there? 

SUBJECT: I left her. She didn't want to come with me. I left my aunts. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened? 

SUBJECT: They stayed in Poland then migrated to Israel. My sister was left, married, has two children now, and is lost to the Jewish people completely. And so are her children. Very ill. 

INTERVIEWER: But she collects this material? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. She has a Jewish soul. A totally lost young person. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see her when you went back three years ago? 

SUBJECT: I see her all the time. I have to go there. And it is-- to me, this is martyrdom, because I must pass for a Pole when I go. 

Her children don't know that she's Jewish. Her neighbors-- nobody knows. I sit through anti-Semitic jokes and the kind of talk that sometimes whites have if there are no blacks around. It's constantly "them," "they," "you know who." We're a joke. And I must keep my mouth shut. 

When I go to Poland, I have a shot of vodka early in the morning to get me through the day and then one in the afternoon, because I must put up with it. That's been my decision. I go there periodically and pass for a Polish-American aunt to her children, who sends packages. I pleaded with her to at least let me say that my husband is Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: Has she ever come to the United States? Would she? 

SUBJECT: She came to visit. I would rather not continue that. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't she see signs that-- she didn't bring her children? 

SUBJECT: She did. 

INTERVIEWER: Didn't they see the Jewish symbols 

SUBJECT: She was very young then, my niece. I shouldn't be talking about it. 

INTERVIEWER: What has it left you with, this whole thing? I mean-- 

SUBJECT: What has it left me with? With all this. Basic belief in humanity. Basic belief that all people are equal and the same. And given proper philosophy, whether it's Nietzsche or Kant, things are dragged out of human beings that may perpetrate this type of ferocity. 

I still refuse to label nations as good or bad and that it can happen only there and not here. And I've attempted to read enough about the American Civil War and what has happened. And I have been all over the world. I'm a world traveler. 

And I have seen concentration camps for purportedly communists, but they house only one minority-- the Chinese. And I've seen blacks killing blacks in Africa. And I've seen it happen. 

And my basic belief is, given proper education and proper conditions, humans can be kind and cooperative. I've seen magnificent deeds of kind-- my mother, who shared her bread with a poor, hungry child in a concentration camp, who shamed me because I wasn't willing to do that. Now, how do you-- that's humanity. 

And others. And the people who did give me help, that adopted mother, who was w-- mother, who was willing to-- to have me become her daughter, make believe, who understood that I missed my mother. And I have seen good and bad in every nation I come across. 

And it goes counter political beliefs, party belongings. And I came out of it with wanting to be with the humans. It's getting a little rusty nowadays. But it's still there. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you believe that people can learn from history? From knowing history, I mean. 

SUBJECT: I am not sure, because what happened in Germany was a total rejection of the common heritage. Did we not have history prior to this? Two million Armenians slaughtered by the Turks? That was in history books. And it was not very nice. 

Did we not have history of enslaving people before we had black slaves? And that wasn't very nice in the Roman times and other places. And yet it repeated itself. 

I think more is needed. I think that a type of education. Sort of, kids refer to it, psych yourself into. Psyching, in some way, a concerted effort at getting to like the other human being and not seeing it as a threat to our little ego and so the only way we can come up, if the other is down. 

We are human and beautiful. The other is ugly. And look, it's been happening in the neo-national revival. Each nationality doesn't say, I am beautiful, too. Let's get together and be beautiful together. No, I am the most beautiful. 

It's been happening now. And that-- that's-- if carried to the extreme, and nash-- and fascism in general, even-- even, um, Spanish-- not Spanish so much or Italian so much, but to some extent nationalism. But in Nazi Germany, that became, um, synonymous with racism. Pure and simple. 

And I am using racism, literal meaning of the word, where some populations of humans, because we are only genetic populations. There are no human races really in that sense. Some human genera-- human populations, which accumulated perhaps in major type looks or accumulated certain characteristics through history and through their background and to some extent through gene selection perhaps, and I don't know, they were said to be inferior. 

So the Jews weren't said to be lazy and to be dirty. They were said to be too smart. And they were said to be conniving. That's only slightly different from the other minorities that are downed because they are murderers and they are lazy and they are-- et cetera, et cetera. 

Who looks at history and says, it's that history that create the difference which I don't like, so let's undo the history and let's better the conditions? Who looks at Jews today and says, they are the way they are because they were never allowed to be a normal nat-- um, nation or mor-- normal people with a, uh, bell curve distribution of characteristics, some farmers, some this, some that? The survival of the fittest was predicated upon their ability to do some little business in the ghetto, pray, be wise enough, be intimidated and not go to pieces. 

And likewise, the history of the American slave was predicated upon playing a certain role. And some were just weeded out by-- by the history. And so if this was possible, I don't know any. 

I know myself. I think we're all, to some extent, racists. I make pronouncements of anger. "They" littered my city. 

It's-- it would have to be worked upon just as much as energy consciousness, environmental conservation, cannot be legislated. The same people who are self-indulgent, middle-class wasters of Great Neck and Scarsdale go on marches against nuclear power and still maintain four cars in the family and everything is electrical. Why, that's phony. 

Will they recycle their clothing and stand up to the mighty clothing empire and say no more fashion dictating, we wear last year's dresses? What will you have to do? Consciousness raising by, uh, women's liberation? Even that isn't making a dent. I'm constantly meeting with my friends who didn't really change. They advocate it so long as they don't have to do it. 

And so, yes, it's easy to advocate. Oh, sure, we should be all brothers. But it isn't going to be me. I don't like Jews. 

And I'm taking the prerogative of going on my own-- a-- a-- about my own ways the way I used to. I don't see it as an easy answer. Attitudinal teaching, every basic textbook and pedagogy. Attitudinal teaching is the most difficult. We don't really know how to do it. 

How do you change attitudes? There is one way in which you can speed it up, by living together, by enforcing summer camps, integrated summer camps, Gentile and Jews, children meet. America is a meeting ground of many people. 

You have a different type of a Jew because of that. And I don't believe that so long as neo-nationalis, exists there is going to be the dividedness of people. Maybe they will coexist one next to the other. But will they truly consider themselves equals? Or will they regard the other as just a little bit less? 

INTERVIEWER: Last question. You don't believe in neo-nationalism? All the things you said. Israel-- how does that-- 

SUBJECT: I do believe in it. No, no, no, no. I didn't say it. I said I do believe in it as a necessary developmental stage. And for Jews, this is an absolute necessity. They, too, must be a nation. I would do anything and everything to preserve Israel. I very strongly urge and believe in it. 

This is as necessary as was the nationalism of the 19th century. History was written in terms. And neo-nationalism is employed by those who did not have the chance to be a nation. 

The British don't need neo-nationalism. They're an empire. They need to un-learn neo-nationalism. 

INTERVIEWER: Why don't you live in Israel? 

SUBJECT: I would say, to begin with, it was just an incident. I was offered an opportunity. I came here as a student. There was a medical school in Heidelberg. 

And Truman issued a collective visa for 2000 professionals and students to come to the United States. And JWB, which was in charge of that part, Heidelberg, gave me the opportunity to be one of those, the first 2000 who came here. And I was at the point of saying, why not America? 

Would have been France. My uncle prepared papers for me to go to Israel, could have been Israel. At that point, I needed a point of attachment. But it must be said that I developed a great deal of liking to Americans with whom I dealt through the army. 

It was somehow a feeling that they were free of the ills of the Europeans. And I had a better chance there to begin-- start anew. it's as if I was transplanted to a fairly normal, healthy soil. And that couldn't be true-- could not have been true in Israel and could not have been true anywhere in Europe. 

And sin-- since I primarily wanted to study and establish myself professionally and I had an uncle, who I told you about, who taught here. And he was the one who-- they discovered me because my-- the Philadelphia Inquirer took my photographs of the medical school. And-- and my cousin noticed it, recognized my face. So we started correspondence. 

And he invited me to come to New Haven and possibly enroll at Yale Medical School, which I attempted. That's how I ended up in America. I've gotten to liking it very much. 

INTERVIEWER: You're a documentary. 