INTERVIEWER 1: Do you miss anything, Frank? 

[INAUDIBLE] 

OK, you just begin. 

NEWTON SCHENK: I am Newton Schenk. I have lived in New Haven, oh, about 27 years. I'm a lawyer in town, and I served as president of the New Haven Board of Education for the years 1965 to 1969. 

I'm going to tell a little story about my personal experience during World War II as an anecdote for whatever value it may have. 

It all started for me as an undergraduate at Yale University, where I was in the Army artillery ROTC program. Because of this, we were put through Yale in three years, going in the summers, and I graduated in June of 1943 when, of course, the war was at full tilt. We were in the position of watching many of our classmates leave us before ourselves, many having been in the Army for a couple of years, or the other services, and some casualties coming in. 

So we had a sense of guilt about our own delay in getting into the action. Nonetheless, the Army at that time had plenty of young artillery second lieutenants, and we were sent off to be privates in an MP camp in Blue Hill outside of Boston for the stated purpose of protecting the people of Boston against a submarine attack. Finding no submarines, we spent a good deal of our time in Boston in the evening, where we were always greeted and welcomed at the bars and the like. 

But before very long, the Army, having changed its policy and having made forward observers of young artillery lieutenants, up on the front lines with the infantry, the casualties had risen to the point where they needed a new supply. And we were sent off in about the late summer of 1943 to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, where we trained with others from all over the country for four months in that semi-desert and eventually got our lieutenant's bars, after a rigorous session, but one at that time where the esprit de corps and the spirit was such that it was as enjoyable as difficult. 

With second lieutenant bars on, we came back home for a week or two of holiday. I remember very well taking my time getting over to my home in order to walk Fifth Avenue with two or three of my friends, simply to display our new bars. We were pretty excited, sad as that may seem today. 

We went to Fort Bragg, an artillery center in the East, that winter and then split off to divisions. I went with one or two of my friends to the 106th Infantry Division, then on maneuvers in Tennessee in the March mud. This was a very exciting experience, indeed. And after I had arrived and messed around in the mud with the other youngsters for a week or two, trying to drive the big trucks, move the guns around, and the like, and trying to get the idea of how a 19-year-old could command a, uh, a battery when his battery commander was off duty, uh, my colonel, Vaden Lackey, a coal dealer from Nashville, asked me one day, if I had my choice of all the jobs in that division I would like to have, what would I choose? 

I said, uh, aide-de-camp to the general, whereupon he put me in fatigues and sent me to be a motor officer in the Third Battery, the lowest position a second John can have. I worked my way out of that only after considerable time and effort. We went to Camp Atterbury that summer in Indiana and had a good training summer in the Indiana farmlands. And then that fall, we went on our way, by train to Boston, and by troopship to England, where we arrived just before Thanksgiving Day, after not running into any submarines in the convoy. 

Just one bit of a story before we get to combat, there outside of Salisbury in England was the camp where American troops massed and then went by LST across the channel. I was the supply officer, the education officer, the orientation officer, the motor officer, and any other job, as the junior man of my battery. And this time, it was a pleasure because I was allowed to take my jeep with my driver, a Midwest farm boy, married at 17, and my gunner-radio operator, a youngster from, I believe, Chicago, and drive through the English countryside to seek greens to decorate our Thanksgiving Day table. 

We came through the hedge rows to a magnificent property with holly hedges and the like, stopped at the gatehouse, knocked. Two ladies rushed out in long black dresses with lace at neck and at the wrists. And we asked if we might clip a few greens. They fluttered, said they had no authority but would be glad to take us to the main house and see what could be done. 

Obviously, this was to get a ride in our jeep. We bundled them in and went up the mile-long driveway to the house, which looked like an English country mansion. And there at the door, we were flooded with schoolgirls, who surrounded us, climbed all over the Jeep, and made much of us. This was one of England's fancy girls schools. 

The head mistress, an aristocratic woman, asked us in to high tea. And we sat with about several hundred women and girls around us, drinking, balancing tea cups on our knees, and dragging our muddy boots through their-- across their fancy carpets. We had a lovely time. And the whole school clipped greens for us, so that we went back to camp looking like a Christmas tree. 

This is all said simply to give you an idea of the naivete with which youngsters at that time perhaps rendering the action, despite all that we'd read. And it also gave you a sense of the spirit of England in those dark days and the determination to make life continue as always in a civilized way. I've often thought of that school. 

Within a few days, we were across the channel. And the LSTs took us up the Seine, passed the French houses, so close to the water that you could look in and watch the families at their meals or at their chores, north of Paris, where we disembarked and drove night and day straight to the line at the edge of Belgium and Luxembourg, near a town called Saint Vith. We went online in what was supposed to be the quietest sector of the front in early December 1944, so quiet our leaders thought that we had a signal company on our left flank and a cook's company, as I recall, on our right flank. And we were a brand-new division with no military experience at all. 

A division then consisted of three infantry regiments, and three supporting artillery 105 howitzer battalions, and one battalion of medium guns, 155 millimeter. We went online. And I was sent by my colonel as a forward observer from the guns in the rear up to the infantry line, where I lived in a pill box with my gunner and my radio and my driver for about a week. 

Gradually, we began to get some German artillery fire coming in, but very little else. One of those shells caused the first casualty to my artillery battalion, killing the captain of one of the batteries. And the last time I saw my colonel, Lackey, he said to me, in tears over the death of his captain, uh, Schenk, as he called me in his Southern drawl, now you take care of yourself. Uh, your mother would never forgive me if I let anything happen to you. 

He had no control over the situation, whatever. But that showed the kind of feeling he had for his men. One morning, about a week after we'd been there only, we woke in the pill box to hear shells falling all around us, moved out, and learned that we were under severe attack. 

The Battle of the Bulge had started. Before we knew what had happened, the German tank columns had broken through both flanks, completely encircling our division. And while we lasted for, oh, four or five days, uh, we were in a pocket, left behind to be cleaned up by second-grade German troops. 

One quick story here-- I, of course, hoped, as a junior officer, to be of some help to the infantry. I don't know that I really was. But one day, we had advanced on a little town to try to retake it, and there was a German artillery spotter in a church steeple. And an infantry captain who was with me said, Schenk, can you bring in your guns and knock off that steeple? 

Well, 105 howitzers a mile away can hardly be expected to knock down a steeple, but I tried. The first four shells were over. The second four shells were short. And then to my amazement, the steeple was gone, simply gone. 

And this captain turned to me, shook my hand, and said, the town is ours. But at that point, as I was beaming, a major, an anti-tank major, walked up to us, to the infantry captain, and shook his hand as he turned his head and said, my gunner has got a pretty good eye. Don't you think? 

And there, this anti-tank gun had taken straight aim at the steeple and knocked it off. And I was as humiliated as I guess I've ever been. Nonetheless, we took the town and lasted for a few days. 

But the Germans began to close in on us. We began to run out of our own ammunition. Everything was in turmoil. And Colonel Cavendar, the head of our regiment, infantry regiment, finally surrendered the whole kit and caboodle, leaving those of us who wanted to to try to walk out. 

My two men and I made the effort. We walked I don't know how long because we were so tired by then you could hardly remember and were finally pinned down on a hillside and forced to walk down, turn in our pistols and carbines. And we were marched off with other pockets of prisoners that were collected to the rear, leaving behind a lot of wounded and, of course, more dead than you like to think of. 

We walked until we pretty nearly dropped, whereupon some of us were able to climb into wagons which were returning from bringing supplies to the German front, mostly drawn by horses. And we would pass Germans going to the front with their pails of barley soup and sardines from Portugal, which looked to us about the best food you could imagine. We ended up that evening maybe 15 or 20 miles behind the line in a town close to the Rhine, I guess, in a German hospital, where some of us who'd been nicked or bandaged or what have you got some help from the German nurses on duty, who were sturdy what you might call frauleins, dressed in starched white, and while gruff and severe, gentle in their handling of us in their way. 

There, for the first time, I think I got the question that so often was put to us. I could speak a little German. I had taken it for years in school. Why are the Americans fighting the Germans? 

Why aren't we allies, fighting the Russians? This was a constant theme. From that hospital night, we were put on boxcars and sent off by train to the north, near Hanover, Germany. 

On the way, we were subjected to several air raids by our own planes, of course, from England, which were very, very frightening. But that night at least, the aim was not too good, and our train was not hit. We were sitting on wooden benches that had been set up. And this was about, I guess, the fifth night in a row when we had not been able to-- well, had not had a night's sleep. 

At Hanover, we got to a prison camp-- this was getting close to the middle of December-- which was a mixed camp with many English, French, Russians, and others who had been in prison camp for quite a while and who quickly showed us the ropes, but who had pretty largely become quite passive after these years of incarceration. And for some reason, perhaps because we were fresher and began to stir things up a bit, after a week or two of that camp, the Germans took the American officers and sent them off to the camp where I ended up. 

We went by train from Northern Germany through the Harz Mountains to Franconia, to a little town called-- this took, I guess, three or four nights of freezing cold, uh, beautiful snow, but in the mountains and very rural, but as that train went, but awfully cold and very little to eat. And when we got to Hammelburg, we marched, or walked, from a little town, which was a wine town from Charlemagne's time, up the hillside to what had been a German Army camp before it had become a prisoner compound and in through the gates to huts and low buildings, where we were to spend from early January until our release. 

Um, the-- it was a small camp, as these things go, and mostly Americans, but with one separate compound filled with Serbian, uh, Yugoslav officers, who had been there since Hitler had overrun Yugoslavia and who had learned how to deal with imprisonment. They had learned how to make radios secretly. They had learned how to conserve their food and to make the most of it. And they were simply, taciturnly, and patiently waiting for the war's end, not looking forward too much to going back to live under Tito, since they had mostly been of the royal Serbian background. 

We couldn't see much of them, except through the wire. We had, uh, we had-- in the way-- in these huts, we were given, uh, nothing in the way of accommodations other than double-decker, wood-slatted beds with straw sacks on them, no blankets or anything of that sort. And each-- each barrack room received daily a garbage pail, if you will, full of soup, um, uh, generally sauerkraut soup with maggots floating at the top. And a piece of bread, a chunk of black bread, which, uh, was, I have since learned, at least one third saw dust. But at least it was heavy, and it gave some weight on your stomach. 

Very rarely did we get anything more, except when the Red Cross packages arrived. And then instead of getting a full Red Cross package, uh, unopened, as the Geneva Convention called for, we were generally given half packages or opened packages or whatever. It has been said that the Germans took what they-- some of it out and gave us what was left. It's also been said that the supply was too small to go around. 

It was obvious, of course, that the Germans were coming to the end of their rope. The guards, the ancient guards, uh, were almost as disreputable looking as we had come to be, being left behind, the better troops having been sent up for the last gasp. Our commander was a old general named Von Gekkel, who, I think, developed a fairly decent relationship with the American chief, Colonel Cavendar and later Colonel Goode. 

There was no-- not to my knowledge at any point any physical beating or the like of American officers. We were treated, of course, a cut above others. However, the problem for the Germans had come to be that American officers were ingenious enough to find ways to escape, no matter what the Germans seemed to do. 

One story was that when the gate to the camp, or a camp, was opened, and the guards were painting a line down the middle and went off to lunch, a bunch of American soldiers in their disreputable clothes, not looking unlike the guards, simply grabbed the paint brush and painted themselves right out the compound, around the corner, and into the woods and escaped. In any event, the annals will disclose that many American officers were able to escape. So the Germans, whether it was for lack of supplies themselves, or whether they were deliberately trying to stop this, the energy to do this sort of thing lowered the level of food for American officers until, at least in our camp, very few, only the most rugged, would have had the energy to try to do anything. 

We began to be flooded with dysentery, a good deal of pneumonia. A number of officers died from malnutrition or illness, and the rest of us became pretty pitiful to look at. I believe I went from about 190 pounds to about 150 pounds in a very short period of time. 

We really-- the most-- we became, um, how should I say, unable to focus on anything much but the thought of food. Uh, and we would lie on our bunks and talk to each other about what we would want to eat if we had the opportunity, things that you never would eat back home if you were having the right kind of diet. For instance, I can remember distinctly talking about wanting a Milky Way with a Hershey-- flat Hershey chocolate bar as bread, and the Milky Way in the middle, and just eating that. 

When you lose sugar in your food, you crave sugar, even though you may never have wanted to eat candy when you were back home and well. So we thought about food constantly and about little else. However, when a Red Cross package came in, and we could have a bit of chocolate and some spam and whatever else was there, then the-- the resurgence of energy and the spirit was-- was remarkable. 

And we would begin to think about writing home. And we would write letters, none of which ever reached my family. But we'd mail them out, and we'd began to play cards or even-- even to read. 

Years before, the Red Cross had sent into this camp some books that they had collected from all around that people had given away. And they might well have given them away because the books were largely extremely uninteresting, if you were craving some reading matter. I remember reading a biography of Noel Cowherd, an autobiography, written when he was about 32. 

It still strikes me as unusual that a man at 32 would write his autobiography. That wasn't so interesting. But another book that I absolutely ate up was by a woman who lived in New Hampshire on a farm. And it was all about how early in the winter, in the spring, when the winter snows were melting, you could go out and cut wild-growing herbs and plants and so forth, like skunk cabbage, I guess, and cook it up and eat it. 

I can't imagine anything less interesting to me today, but that fascinated me under those circumstances. As the winter progressed into early March, many of us were continuing to go downhill. I myself caught pneumonia and was put in the hospital infirmary, where we were tended by Serbs. 

The conditions were no better. We had by then frozen feet, so that you didn't want anything on your feet. And you-- you-- you took whatever covering you could get and-- and put it up on sticks over your feet so that nothing would be on your feet. 

There was no better food, particularly, and no medicine. The only thing that the, uh, German doctor could offer us, or wanted to offer us, was a calcium shot. Now I think anyone will tell you that that does little other than to make you feel warm for a bit. There was no sulphur of the sort that would stop pneumonia. 

There was TB around me and, uh, Serbs in various conditions, quite serious. Well, that in a way was a lucky break for me, to have pneumonia, because while I was in the infirmary, there occurred the remarkable American tank breakthrough to that camp, led by Captain Abel Baum. It so happens that when Patton got within 60 miles of Hammelburg, he sent a crack tank group with 300 men, under the direction of Captain Baum and Patton's aid, Major Stiller, crashing across the river, through and around the town of Gemunden, where the group shot up a lot of the railroad yards but incurred a lot of losses, across the countryside, and up to the camp at Hammelburg. 

We all thought we were being freed by the main American advance, when it was by then just a half a tank group and perhaps 200 men left. They cracked through the wire. The Germans, of course, uh, and general Von Gekkel quickly withdrew, and we were delirious with excitement. 

We climbed all over the tanks, stuffed ourselves with the food that the tankers gave us to the point of vomiting, and then eating again, just as fast as you could, and vomiting again. But before very long, Captain Baum pulled us together with our leader, Colonel Goode, and the remarkable Catholic priest, Father Cavanaugh, who had done so much for our spirit during this period. And they told us that there was no way that we could get on those tanks or in those halftracks, all of us who were there, several hundred, and get back to the American lines. 

If we wanted to try to walk out on our own, OK, go ahead. A few elected to do that, but most were too weak. The rest simply had to stay there in the camp as the tanks started their motors and drove back off. 

Now what was the purpose of that, uh, sally? Well, Patton said it was to try to feint, to throw the Germans off the track as to where his main force was going. The big controversy that has gone on for many years is whether he didn't send, um, that-- those crack men in because his son-in-law, Colonel Waters, was a prisoner in our camp, as he was. 

The sad thing is, whatever the motivation, as the tanks came in, Colonel Waters received a shell shock himself in his rear end and had to be left behind in the infirmary, a very, very badly wounded man. He did recover and became in his day a, uh, general. But that was not a-- a good night for him. 

I, knowing I had pneumonia and being lightheaded, decided that I definitely was going to try to get out. And I did get on to one of the tanks, and we drove, uh, not very far from the camp before roadblocks met us. Obviously, the Germans had begun to move in with their 88s and their troops and all. And we were soon circled on a hill, in what has been compared perhaps to Custer's Last Stand. 

And Baum made a final, brave effort with his remaining guns and his troops to hold the fort there, and hoping he could break out. But, uh, no luck at all. The 88s moved right up and blew his remaining weapons and trucks out one by one. And then the Germans sent in their infantry. 

And after that, for those of us who were left, hiding in ditches or what have you, they sent in bloodhounds. And gradually, what was left of us came down to farmhouses, to German infantry, to what have you, and were recaptured. I myself was taken to a farm-- or walked, I should say, down the hill about a little-- 8 o'clock in the morning to a farmhouse, where I spoke a little bit of German and where they were perfectly decent to me, wondering how soon the Americans were coming, and knowing that it was all over for them. 

I asked them if they would hide me. They were scared to do that. They gave me an apple, put me on the farm wagon, and drove me, with other prisoners they picked up, back to Hammelburg, where I, of course by then, was really sick and spent the next few days totally under the weather, right very close to Colonel Waters who was, as I say, badly wounded. 

The sad, sad thing that had happened was when Baum's tanks left, the German general, Von Gekkel, had ordered the remaining prisoners who could walk-- and this was where I was lucky because I was considered not-- not a walking case-- to take off with their guards towards Nuremberg. And as they were walking, several days later, along the road, American strafers came along and killed a great many of them who were left, believing they were a German column, so that, for instance, Captain Losh, one of the battery commanders of my battalion who had been with me, lost his life at that time, as did a number of others. 

The rest of us who were left behind waited not more than a week or 10 days until Patton's main army did crash through. And for this time-- this time, it was for real. And, um, I was taken back in due course to a, uh, French camp, to an American camp in France, a field hospital, where they stripped our clothing off of us-- it was caked on by then after four months without a change-- shaved our heads because we were full of lice, gave us a shower, and, uh, uh, put us in bed. 

And eventually, I, uh, went to a larger hospital, further in the rear, uh, in the Vosges Mountains in a little resort town, what had once been a gambling casino and hotel, for further, uh, recovery. And there, I met, uh, Captain David H. Clement, a young doctor who was specializing in that time in, uh, malnutrition cases, went on later to some of the stalags to help and to study the people who had been there, particularly the Jewish population, for so many years, but at this time, uh, was working on ex-POWs such as myself. 

Uh, he sent a picture of me, uh, back to my parents, along with my first cable back. I picked out a code message out of three of four we were allowed to send. I meant to say, uh, am OK, home soon. The message my parents got, the first they'd heard from me in four or five months, was send more money, quick. Uh, my father had no idea what to do, of course, was absolutely delighted to hear from me, but was simply told he couldn't have gotten a better message under the circumstances. 

When we arrived at New Haven, my wife and I, some years later, and had our first baby, my wife selected her pediatrician. And the day after she came home from the hospital to our little apartment out on Whalley Avenue, the Beechwood, one Sunday morning, my mother and father were there to see the baby. The doorbell rang. I opened it. 

I looked at this gentleman. He looked at me. It was David H. Clement, the doctor who had taken care of me during the war. He had settled as a pediatrician in New Haven and is certainly known as one of the leading doctors in his field in this community. 

So it's a small world, to say the least. I've kept touch with very few of those who went through that experience with me, but with a few, including my former battery commander. Another battery commander, I might say, whom I admired a great deal, was named Irving Chapnick. His cousin practices law here at New Haven. 

I-- I think-- I've told this anecdotally. Um, I-- I think it's-- it's perfectly clear that American prisoners were mistreated to a fare thee well. But it's not so clear that the Germans weren't themselves, uh, at their-- pretty much brutalized and at the end of their tether. 

I do know, for instance, that when Captain Baum's tanks went through one of the little towns, the townspeople who were left, the civilians, rushed out with white flags to surrender very quickly. And after Baum's tanks went through, 200 young SS troopers who had been on their way to the front and were now pursuing Baum, the toughest kind of Nazi youngster, dragged 10 or 12 of those townspeople out of their houses, their own countrymen, and shot them on the spot for surrendering, uh, to that tank column as it went through. Um, I cannot, uh, say more than my personal experience, as I have tried to relate it, but there it is. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Newt, have you ever thought, uh, or considered the question that comes up over and over again about people not resisting in the concentration camps? And what is your attitude about that, having suffered somewhat similar circumstances? 

NEWTON SCHENK: Well, uh, I think you can see in what I have told you the answer to that. Uh, it seems clear that American officers, for certain, so long as they had the energy, resisted as hard as they could, tried to escape, tried not to cooperate, tried to organize themselves, uh, to show their spirit in every way they could. The problem is that when you are suffering for so long from too little food, too little medical care, the spirit almost necessarily flags, I think. And you do not-- simply do not have the physical energy to do the things that you're able to do as soon as your, uh, your, uh, tank is filled again, uh, so that those people who suffered for so many years in prison camps with inadequate food and medical care to the point where they were simply bags of bones, uh, I-- I find it hard to see how they could have, uh, resisted in any effective way, under the circumstances. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about the discomfort you experienced not having bathed or changed your clothes in four months? I mean, what did that do to your mental processes, to your general sense of self? 

NEWTON SCHENK: Well, it dragged you down. There's just no question about it. Um, you really got to the point where it was difficult to think about much else than your own misery and the misery of the person next to you. 

Uh, and as I said, only when the Red Cross boxes came, and you got a shot in the arm, so to speak, did you have the energy to, uh, to really do, uh, uh, much more. Uh, the-- the priest who there, Father Cavanaugh, our leader, Colonel Goode, were magnificent, strong men who, uh, did their best to pull us together, to, uh, to, uh, uh, enspirit us. And they did a lot. 

But, uh, when some men can take this better than others, some seemed to be able to survive on very little and to keep up their spirits and all. But others, when their bodies fail, their spirits fail. There's a medical connection there that perhaps Dr. Clement can tell you more about than I. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever lose hope? 

NEWTON SCHENK: No. Uh, we never lost hope because we-- we, through the underground radio and one way or another, we were confident that the Americans would break through. Our concerns were, one, we much preferred to have the Americans reach us than the Russians, and we weren't certain who would first. But still, it would have been nice to be freed, either way. 

Uh, the second was, of course, what Hitler in his madness might do to prisoners before the whole thing came down in flames, so that we did have some concern that we might be lined up against a wall. And, of course, what happened was that the remaining prisoners were marched off towards Nuremberg to try to prevent their being freed as long as possible. And many, as I say, died on the way. So we had fears, but not-- not fear that the Americans wouldn't reach us in time. It was just a question of how and whether we'd be there when they got there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: While you were there, did you ever know about what was going on to others who were in different kinds of incarceration? 

NEWTON SCHENK: Only-- only the, uh, the camp in Hanover, where we were for a brief period of time, we had no way that I know of of knowing what was going on in other, uh, well, in stalags elsewhere. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- I was wondering whether, um, you would like to ask a question of Mr. Schenk, since you were in another camp, kind of camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What were you feeling-- I-- I was wondering what your physical sensations were when you were hungry. I mean, you said you talked about food, and you talked about candy bars. Uh, how did you feel physically? 

How much did you sleep? What did you do? How did you spend your days? 

NEWTON SCHENK: Well, it seems-- you must remember that I had, uh, very-- of the four months that I was there, I think that at least two I had, uh, bronchial pneumonia of a sort, or some deep infection, so that I'm perhaps not-- not typical. But as-- as I recall it, as we gradually lost weight and dysentery hit us and all, that you became more passive in the sense that a lot of the time, you just lay. Uh, you did not have the energy to do much else. 

It was hard to, uh, make yourself more active. Um, I don't think I recall feeling actual pain from hunger. I did from my feet, and I did from the dysentery. But the-- the constant emptiness, longing, craving, particularly for sugar, uh, I suppose almost reaches the level of pain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you have done any work? Could you have stood, let's say, in formation at hours at a time under these circumstance? Or did they make you? 

NEWTON SCHENK: No. They would-- we would have to come out every, uh, every day for-- for, uh, and line up to be counted and for any orders that were to be given and the like. But I think it was against the rules of war at the time to make American officers, or officers, work. We might have been better off if we had because they would have had to have given us enough food so that we could have worked effectively, I suppose. 

Anyhow, um, when we had food, uh, as rarely we did from the Germans, but or through the Red Cross food boxes, then, yes, you could certainly think and operate, as I recall it, fairly-- fairly effectively. You'd get some of your strength back. You could write. You could play cards. You could have discussions. You could-- going to, uh, church meant more and so on. But in the down periods, particularly at the end when food began to fail, there in that prison infirmary where I spent the last, I guess, maybe six weeks, um, uh, mostly we'd just lay around. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long did these roll calls take every day? I mean when you had to line up to be counted. 

NEWTON SCHENK: I can't-- I can't recall. Uh, uh, I don't think-- well, I'm sure we griped about being kept in line much longer than they needed to, to do whatever they were doing, counting us, or one thing, or inspecting us, or one thing or the other. But I can't particularly recall being stood up for 10 hours at a time or anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Have you ever talked your-- over your experiences with, let's say, concentration camp victims? Have you ever had that opportunity? 

NEWTON SCHENK: No, I really haven't. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I wonder how you react to what you've heard them say, in light of your own-- 

NEWTON SCHENK: Well, I think their experience, uh, was far, far worse than ours, without any question. Uh, we were American officers who were supposedly in a somewhat preferred position by the rules of war, uh, whom the Germans, many of them, wished were their allies in the upcoming attacks by Russia. So that's a very different position for us to be in than those who had been taken, uh, from their homes in Germany and thrust into, uh, concentration camps as-- as, uh, as persons without status and therefore without hope, so that for all the years that German military might seemed invincible, these people in their camps were living not only without the necessary physical support, but without the necessary spiritual support, the hope that we always had. 

We were treated by the German guards, uh, with some dignity in the sense that they recognized us as fellow officers. Um, that, of course, wasn't true in any sense in the concentration camps. We weren't even referred to as a concentration camp. This was a prisoner of war camp for American officers and Serbian officers. They were all officers, too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Last question, did you ever discuss with your German guards their perception of what the outcome would be, what would happen to you, what was-- just the future? 

NEWTON SCHENK: Uh, very little, except in the, uh, the guards on duty weren't to talk to us. And we weren't to talk to them. When I did talk was perhaps a little bit on one of the trains when the guard came through, or in that original hospital, or perhaps during the confusion of the break-away period after Baum's troops arrived. 

And when we talked, with a civilian, with a German guard, didn't matter, their attitude, as I recall it, was, uh, we know the Americans are coming. We know we're done. Oh, wouldn't we like to change places with you, because you'll be freed soon and go back to your homeland? And we are left here, to we don't know what fate, particularly if it's the Russians that come through. But these are people, you understand, simple people, non-privates, a peasant, occasionally, something like that, who had very little knowledge of the bigger picture. 