INTERVIEWER: Can we sit? 

CREW: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. 

CREW: I want you to be looking-- no. Take your chair up there. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. 

CREW: In order to-- you're not going to be looking up at each other. You know what I'm saying. 

INTERVIEWER: That's all right. If I can sit on the thing, maybe that's better. 

SUBJECT 1: [? [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?] 

SUBJECT 2: You would move it, moving it? 

CREW: No. You should be sitting over there. 

SUBJECT 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Here? 

SUBJECT 2: We will be able to hear without the mic? 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: No. Forget this. Don't say anything. We won't use the voice. In other words, when you're doing film making, very often you jump from one side to the other. And you can't have somebody sitting here like this and then a split second later they're like that. So the only way you can do it is if you're showing the person who's speaking. And then you cut away, as the expression goes, to the people who are listening. And that's one way of being able to edit. And it's a technical thing. 

And if I don't have it-- your story for example, we interrupt it at midpoint so we could change for Ruth-- and then we-- could use Ruth and we went back to you telling your story. And I would like to maybe string those two parts of the story together. But I can't have you, you know. Don't answer me. And you tell me, Craig, when you're-- uh, because I keep talking nonstop like this. And it's boring for them to have to hear me like this. 

CREW: OK. well, you can stop and move over to the other side. 

INTERVIEWER: You want me to go to the other side now? 

CREW: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: OK. And uh, you don't have to look in the other direction. So we're done with you. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Teddy doesn't have to look in that direction. But what about Ruth? How can Ruth-- 

CREW: Ruth doesn't need it. 

INTERVIEWER: Ruth doesn't need it. So I'm just-- 

CREW: Just talk. 

INTERVIEWER: Right. So that's right. Because they are looking at both cases. 

RUTH: Tell us where you're going next. 

INTERVIEWER: Where I'm going? 

RUTH: Where are you going-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well, that, very, it's-- we just got an assignment in Westwood, would you believe? But uh, the truth of the matter is, I really have to stop this city-by-city documentation, because we're working now on the world gathering. We're working the world gathering. I'm doing 13 films. I'm going to start. I haven't started yet. 

13 documentaries which will be shown over public television. Well, eventually. But in the meantime, will be used as inserts, thematic inserts, for a satellite telecast from the world gathering. You know, when you do a happening like the Olympics or something, you just can't the happenings, because it's boring. You have what they call backgrounders. 

So you have to show profiles of the people. In this instance, the profiles, instead of being of a single person, or a life or whatever, or an actor, it'll be-- 

CREW: It's about [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: The march to Lodz ghetto, which is one of the reasons-- 

CREW: John, stop the tape. 

INTERVIEWER: They could stand this. 

CREW: We're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Bork, would you continue with your story for as long as we have? 

SUBJECT 2: Where did I cut off? 

INTERVIEWER: Well, you were going to, about to leave the ghetto. 

SUBJECT 2: Oh yes. And uh, my brother, we left, we had, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: You went to Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT 2: Auschwitz, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And you were going from camp to barracks to-- 

SUBJECT 2: Then from Auschwitz, from Auschwitz, uh, I will selected and sent then to Bergen-Belsen, I told you. And in Bergen-Belsen, they had these, um, they had these-- with, like, pieces of trees, what, what, would, in the back, hold you back in the back. And that you sat on to move if you need it, for your, uh, uh, to urinate on, move your bowels. 

And on the back of you, there was stepped up the, uh, uh, the watchtower, the soldiers. And, uh, and they could still enjoy themselves seeing how we have to struggled to be able and sit and not to fall into it. 

Because it was very easy to fall in. It was, the space was big enough in between to fall through. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean the soldiers were watching you? 

SUBJECT 2: No. They were there. They were in the watchtowers watching out as uh, as, being, uh, we were like animals caged in, into this, this-- uh, space. Uh. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had to be careful you didn't fall into what? 

SUBJECT 2: To the, to the, to the, the, the ditch that we were supposed to be, uh, uh, for human waste. And when you had to, to to, uh, move your bowels or, to urinate, this is what the spirit of the place was. So we were sitting on one of these um, what do you call it, 

SUBJECT 3: Beams. 

SUBJECT 1: Beams, yes. 

SUBJECT 2: Beams. One of these beams. There was a beam, one lower, for you to sit on. And a beam in the back. But you could easily fall into it. And this is how we lived until more people have been sent then to uh, Bergen-Belsen. 

And there was a selection in Bergen-Belsen. Often to send people to work. So I was selected from Bergen-Belsen to be sent out and to Salzwedel, near Magdeburg in Germany. And ammu-- ammunition for factory, where I was working on bullets. Making bullets. 

I have something I have collected that we have been working on this. This is the bullet that was unfinished. As you know how, you probably know-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get it out? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, this is-- when we were liberated, in, in these factories. So during the liberation, there was cha-- chaos. Shortly before the liberation, they knew that it was- that it was going-- that it is coming to an end. The Germans, who have been working with us, they cut off the, the the, water in our camp. And there, there was no food for two weeks. And there was chaos. 

So, no. And we weren't searched. Because there was nothing to search us for. We didn't have anything except the dress that we wore on, on our body. So there was no reason for them to search. I took these things somehow, for, I felt, sometimes, maybe if I'll survive, they may come in handy to show what I have done. And, um. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any effort to, for sabotage in that factory? 

SUBJECT 2: I did a lot of sabotage, too. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT 2: You see, these little shells were came-- came wider. And that, about, about uh, uh, less than a half an inch in height. They were thicker. And that went into a machine which had like fingers. Like five fingers. It was called the Dorns. 

And this narrow one, this wider one came into the thicker Dorn. The second, when it was stretched a little, it moved it into this one, and until that continues out of the end. Then it was as long as this. 

And from this one it went into a machine, was, which also had five pointed ends which stretched the points. And this was filled with lead inside. And finished with a little ruby, finished, polished up, and this is what it was finished. I finished one-- 

SUBJECT 1: In order to sabotage. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you sabotage? 

SUBJECT 2: And the sabotage, how it was done-- I was in charge, since there was a German woman who uh, saw that I had, I was talented to take over her job, while I was working on the machines, I fixed the machines myself, instead of being beaten. Because there was beating for any little thing. Everyone got a pinch. The Meister, the one who was in charge of these machines were, who didn't hesitate, whenever he went to fix a machine, to give you a kick or a pinch or something, to hurt you. 

And uh, I found that by taking a screwdriver and helping him taking the machines apart, when it needed to be fixed, that I wasn't beaten. And uh, when it needed to be, these things had to be weighed and measured in the grams and milligrams. 

And when needed, I, instead of having to be beaten, I took one and went over to the scale and scaled it And uh, helped out with this. And that helped me a lot, in not being, I haven't-- 

INTERVIEWER: But how did you have sabotage? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, this I'm go-- I'm coming to it. When I, when this woman left, when I was capable of taking over her place, then I was in charge, not of the-- working with these things, but in charge to see to it that it was being measured and weighed. 

So by weighing and measuring, I could give them with a couple of millimeters larger. So I what I did, I measured it larger. And I, when it came in, when it was larger, it wouldn't go into the rifles. 

SUBJECT 1: Rifles. 

SUBJECT 2: Or to, or to the gun. And so sometimes, twice a day or, sometimes three times a day, they didn't know what had happened. They thought that these things came defected into our machines. So I wasn't caught. 

And it was shortly before the liberation. It was about a few weeks before the liberation when I really got through a lot of sabotage. And they had no time even to check out how it happened. But these things had to be delivered more and throw it, and wasted the ones that were too big. And this is-- and this is how I could uh, help with, with uh destroying things. 

INTERVIEWER: Ruth, I wanted you to ask your father about those pictures. 

RUTH: OK. This one, if you could just explain to me about this one here. 

SUBJECT 1: This was Rumkowski. He was a Judenalteste. He was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold it up please? 

RUTH: Hold it up. 

SUBJECT 1: This was a Judenalteste in the ghetto Lodz. Rumkowski, Chaim Rumkowski. Everybody knew him. And on his left, yeah, left side, is Biebow. He was the Commandant of the Lodz ghetto. And they were always in touch. 

SUBJECT 2: He was the German. The German who was in charge. 

SUBJECT 1: German commander. 

RUTH: Did you ever come in contact with either of them? 

SUBJECT 1: No. I never came in contact with either of them. But occasionally sometimes... 

RUTH: And what about these? You've had those for a real long time. How did you get them? 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, no. 

SUBJECT 1: That's what-- 

INTERVIEWER: That's what I was afraid of. That's why I was pushing and rushing and I'm sorry. I just-- I, that's what it was getting-- 

