[TONE] INTERVIEWER #1: Say who you are and where you were born, what year and then talk about the place. And imagine that we are sitting in an old-fashioned living room with comfortable furniture and there are no cameras, and there's no matter of mistake or not mistake, and you're opening an old picture album with brown, faded pictures. And you flip the cover open, and you're on the first page. 

SUBJECT: I must tell you that, this is just my observation again, uh, I would do a much better job alone. I'm not saying that this could be done. I would do a much better job if I would be all alone, because-- not because of things that I cannot say, but it's just, uh, uh, I don't know, like you sometimes want to read a book and you can't-- you don't want any people around you. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Uh, should we look the other way? 

PAULA JULIE: No, no, no, no, no. I've agreed to do it. I'm going to do the best I can and-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: The hint is that we should simply stay out of the picture. So why don't you begin? 

PAULA JULIE: Now, when you interrupt, you-- you stop it-- then you have something to correct, you stop the roll. 

INTERVIEWER #1: I was going to say something about that. The questions that we would ask at different points would not be for greater accuracy but only to try to-- 

PAULA JULIE: To guide me. 

INTERVIEWER #1: To get a clearer picture, to get you to be-- 

PAULA JULIE: Oh, in other words-- in other words, if you see that I am sort of going from one subject to another and sort of not continuing, you would try to put me back on the right track. Is that it? 

INTERVIEWER #1: And to create a fuller picture, right. 

PAULA JULIE: Of-- of what I'm saying, because-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: Not the accuracy or the-- 

PAULA JULIE: I understand, because sometimes people speak and they think they are explaining themselves but-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: That's-- if you do that-- 

PAULA JULIE: Then I'm going to-- 

INTERVIEWER #2: No, no, on the-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: This is your voice. Your voice is going-- 

PAULA JULIE: It's going, oh, oh. It's going-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: This is your microphone, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER #2: Microphone. 

INTERVIEWER #1: The wire. OK. We're beginning now. 

PAULA JULIE: Um I was born in Radom. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Your name? 

PAULA JULIE: My name is Paula Julie. My maiden name was Baumgarten. I was born in Radom, Poland on October 8, 1921. 

Uh, I can't really say much about my early days. I don't remember much. I only remember my school days. I was, what I would say, a perfectly happy child. I had an older sister. I had a young-- two younger sisters. I-- we were four girls. 

My, uh, my father was a worker. He was a-- he was not a shoemaker. I can't really explain the right name for that trade, but he was making the upper part of the shoe. We had a little sort of factory in the house. He was like a contractor. And, uh, he wasn't doing too well, but it was-- I never knew any hunger. I had enough clothes. We had-- we didn't have any luxury, as far as food, but there was enough food. And I sort of lived a pretty happy life. 

I remember seeing the beautiful shops on the Main Street of our city, Radom, and beautiful clothes and very good food, like oranges and bananas and things like that, that were never part of our table. But we learned to do without it, and we were never-- we never felt that we were deprived of anything, because this was food for the rich and the wealthy. 

Only sometimes when there was a wedding or some sort of a celebration that my mother and father were invited to, and they used to bring home an orange, and we'd divide it into six pieces, so everybody got a piece. And we were very happy. Sort of divided the certain things that belonged to others and things that we could have. 

As I said, there was no luxury, but there was enough food, and I was a pretty happy person going to school, to public school. I was attending a Polish school, although there were Jewish schools in town. But that probably was because of the part of the city I lived in. This particular part of the city, I belonged to-- I was going to a Polish school. And it was a coed school with boys and girls, Jewish girls, boys-- mostly-- the boys were not Jewish really, because the Jewish boys were going to cheder, different type of school. These were Gentile people, boys. 

And I was-- I have very, very good recollections of those days. An important thing in my-- during those days is that my father was very religious. And Friday night, Friday, the wintertime, the Sabbath started about three o'clock. And he didn't like me to go to school, because I was going to school from one to five or one to six, I don't remember, and that would have meant going to school during the Sabbath. 

And he had to go through a lot of red tape, so to speak, in order to get permission for me to stay out of school Friday afternoon and Saturday. School-- school, in those days in Poland, was six days, on the one-- we-- Sunday, we were off. And I remember he got the permission-- I got the permission of not attending school Saturday, and I was the envy of the rest of the class. But my teacher had one-- agreed to it on the-- on the one condition, that I had to bring my homework, everything had to be perfect Monday morning. 

And she was always calling on me. Monday morning, I was the first one to answer all questions, because I was out Friday afternoon and Saturday. And I used to wait for my classmates at the church. I happened to live across the street from a church, and I waited for them when the services were over, when mass was over, whatever it's called. And they used to give me the homework, and I really had to be up on everything, because this was the first thing was calling on me to make sure that I do my work right, which, of course, was no-- that wasn't difficult. I was a pretty good student. And I think I finished school in 1935. I'm not sure about that. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Any particular friends, boys or girls? 

PAULA JULIE: Yeah. I had very many friends. I have many friends. In fact, some of my friends, they're still with me today. One of my dearest friends lives with me right now on the same block. And we have-- I had a lot of boys and girls, friends. In fact, I had, in those days, a girl of 13, we were very much sheltered, and we were-- we were really good, good girls. We-- if I had met a boy, I used to come home and tell my father who he is, who his parents were. And he, most of the time, knew everybody. And he used to say, oh, this one is OK, but this one's parents is not so good so stay away from him. 

And they used to come into the house. Of course, there were conditions. Like, Saturday when my-- my father went to-- to synagogue, we-- we had to sit and have dinner. All four girls, we had to sing the proper songs at the dinner, and the boys waited outside until we were finished. And that's the only time we could leave the house. 

INTERVIEWER #1: You were-- in the family, you were the youngest? 

PAULA JULIE: I was the second. I had a sister 2 and 1/2 years old-- older. And, um, people used to kid my father since he was not a rich man, that he has four girls, and how is he ever going to manage? But he was very happy. He says, I have no problem with my girls. Somehow, we'll make it. 

And, um, he was, I mentioned before, he was a religious man, but he was a very modern man. Although he wore religious clothes and that the-- the typical religious hat. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Schtreimel, 

PAULA JULIE: No, no, no. He was not that religious. That round, black hat with the peak in the front. And not-- and he was a very big patron of the rabbi of the town. There were quite a few, and Saturday afternoon, at-- at the dinner, at the family dinner, we used to go out with the boys and girls. And my father went to sleep, and in the-- in the early evening, he went to the rabbi for a little bit of Torah reading, and a little bit of eating until Sabbath was over. Then it was the prayer. They have dola, I think it was called. 

And then he was home. And sometimes, he used to come home and start working, because he had work that was supposed to be done. And so he caught up on that in the evening. In other words, he was a very modern, religious man. Belonged to organizations, to groups like, uh, a union, we would call it here. And he was also very good with this co-workers. 

I recall very, very happy, happy perfectly comfortable home life. Never thought of going anyplace else then, in spite of the fact that no one really liked us, liked the Jews as a-- as a rule, but I somehow didn't feel it. I was so comfortable in my surroundings. At home, we spoke Yiddish. Outside of the house, I spoke Polish. I had friends, but the-- the general feelings in those days about the anti-Semitism, there was, in those-- in those days, I remember the universities had students standing up and not taking part in their classes because of certain restrictions, but maybe I was too young to be concerned about it. 

But life was sort of pretty good. I belonged-- I didn't belong to any political organizations, although there were quite a few. There were the Zionist organizations in town. I belonged to a library, which was the library with the, um, Hashomer, Hashomer Hatzair. It was an organization that I didn't want to belong to, but I belonged to the library, and I remember felt very good about this, reading very interesting books. 

And a very important thing in my life in those days was that I wanted to go for it. I wanted to continue my education when I finished seven years of public school. Which, of course, I didn't have the nerve to talk about it, because there was just no money of any-- there was no money for that at all. So I had to do something to work or try to learn how to be a saleslady or something like that to make a living, to-- to-- to bring in some money for the house. 

INTERVIEWER #1: About how old were you? What year was that? 

PAULA JULIE: Well, I was born in 1921. Let's say, school started at six. That was 17, 16. I don't remember. You figure-- figure out how old I was. I was-- school started at six. Seven years later. How old was I then? How old was I when I finished? 13. And what year was that? 

INTERVIEWER #1: You were born in '21. 

PAULA JULIE: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER #1: '34. 

PAULA JULIE: '34, in other words, I think I graduated school, '35, '35. Now, this was not a pleasant time in my life, because I really didn't know what to do with myself. I wanted-- one thing I wanted, to go to school, and I couldn't. So I remember my mother urging me to be a dressmaker, and I didn't like to sew. Well, anyway, I started doing-- I was teaching children that didn't know-- didn't do good in school, and they needed help. So I liked to do that. 

And that-- I did this-- I occupied my full day with that. I was just gone from home to home. Every hour was taken up, and, uh, I made some money. I-- I bought my own clothes, and I was very proud of that, until, of course, 1939, September. 

We-- we knew that-- we-- I-- I should say, I was too preoccupied with myself to really know exactly what's coming or what's going on and what's waiting. Although, I knew that things are very bad in Germany. I knew. I knew-- I heard about Hitler. I knew about some things, but I was not young, but I guess I didn't pay too much attention. 

When I-- when I really-- when-- it actually started with the-- when the-- when we-- the week before the Poland was occupied. In other words, in Radom, in our city, we were bombarded for one whole week. And, uh, There were a lot of dead people very close by. And the fear of the-- of the bombs was so great, that I remember praying and hoping let anybody come in as long as the bombing should stop, because this was terrible, because we were seeing people dying in front of us. 

So two days before, we were-- the Germans came in, we decided to run. The family packed up small bundles. And everybody was running, because we knew the Germans were coming and then everybody was running towards the Russian border to-- to-- to get away. And it was a lot of chaos. And we didn't know what to do, but my-- my mother and father decided, since everybody is running away, let us run, too. 

So I remember everybody got a bundle together, and I remember my father took only one thing. He took the prayer-- the-- the shawl, the prayer shawl, and the-- the, uh, the tallis, and I don't know how you call this in English. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Tefillin. 

PAULA JULIE: The Tefillin and he had two pairs of tefillin and I-- that was back, he was going to daven and to shul every single morning, and it was quite heavy. And we walked two blocks, and then he said to us, let's stop. And let's just see what we do. He said, look, we only walked two blocks, and we are all exhausted. And I don't think there's any sense in us running, because we're probably not going to make-- we're not going to get too far away. So I-- I think I'm making the decision we should all go back and just pray and wait and take our chances what's going to happen. And we all returned back to the house. 

And two days later, the Germans occupied the city of Radom. I remember standing outside in front of the house and watching them coming with the tanks. And as much as we were afraid of the looks, because they-- they looked terrible, but we really didn't know what was coming. We had no idea what's waiting for us. 

So for a day or two, we were so happy that the bombing stopped that we sort of relaxed, and it didn't take long. And the different announcements were coming every day. So many-- things were happening so fast. 

First of all, it started with getting the people to work. The SS was going around from house to house and getting the men to work, and pushing the people off the-- the sidewalk. 

INTERVIEWER #1: What did you see? 

PAULA JULIE: I did. I saw. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Yeah, describe. 

PAULA JULIE: Yeah, I-- the first thing, when we-- when I went into the street, I don't know how they had a way of telling who is Jewish and who isn't, because, of course, later on, the-- our Polish friends did help-- help a great deal. But I remember pushing, the Germans-- the SS was pushing us off the sidewalk into the street, and we were walking in-- in the street together with-- with-- with the car-- with the horses and wagons. 

And the-- the-- the next very important thing that I remember is that three SS people came into the house, knocked on the door, and looked for the men. And we heard them coming. And my mother said that we should-- we should-- we should put my father into the closet, because they were going to get the men to work, and my father had a long beard. And we also heard that they can't stand people with beards, that they pull on the beards and that they hit-- they hurting them terrible. 

So my father was pushed into the closet, and my sisters and I were petrified. We're standing in the door, and they knocked on the door. And my mother walked over to these two SS men, and she spoke to them in perfect German. And I was astonished-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: Do you remember what she said? 

PAULA JULIE: --to hear my mother speaking to them in German. I never heard her say a word in German before. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Do you remember what she said in German? 

PAULA JULIE: She said-- she must have said, well, what is wrong? Or is-- is anything wrong? Or who are you looking for? And I remember the look on their faces. She was not speaking Jewish. She was speaking German. Which, later on, I found out that my mother-- I knew my mother was going to high school in the days of the Russian occupation, but during the changes between the Russians and the Germans, she also took up German, and she spoke beautiful. We never had a chance to hear it. She also spoke beautiful Polish, but that we knew. 

And somehow, they were so impressed with her speaking, they turned around and walked out and never even bothered looking if there are any men in the house. And I remember, I ran over to my mother, and I kissed and I hugged her. I said, Mom, you saved the day. You really helped. You saved the day. Where did you get to speak so beautiful German? Well, that was just one incident. 

The days that followed after that, most of the time, my father never walked out of the house, because he was afraid to be caught, because we saw what was going on. But if-- that if-- if they-- if they took a man-- if the Germans got somebody to work, and they took him to work that day, the next day he came back, he was no longer able to work. 

So our function was, my sisters and mine, was only one thing, to-- to protect my father, to protect him from being caught, because we felt that it would probably be the end of him. 

INTERVIEWER #1: When you say they were no longer able to work the next day-- 

PAULA JULIE: They were hitting them, beating them, mercilessly. 

INTERVIEWER #1: You would see the people come back. 

PAULA JULIE: Come back not able to work, because the-- the type of-- it wasn't just work, it was like work especially to-- to sort of kill while they were working. This was the purpose of it. It wasn't just a day's work, because everybody was able to work. But there was a special place in Radom where they took these people. And many of them didn't come back at all, and those that came back were sort of finished. They couldn't-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: People you knew. 

PAULA JULIE: Yes. Yes. I knew particular of a cousin of mine, whom I spoke to. And he said to me, Paula, I came back this time, but I'm leaving. I said, where are you going to go? He says, I don't care where I'm going. I will not face this again, the humiliation the way they beat-- beating us and what they-- what they doing to us. I will not-- and he really left Radom, and he went to-- he was in Russia. 

He was in Russia during the time. He made his way to the border somehow, and he lived-- they let-- the-- the-- the years that we were in the-- during the-- at the concentration camps, he was in Russia. And he came back after the war. He is now-- he's now alive, living in France. I remember him telling me this. 

Now, the next thing that, uh, was-- is horrible to me, was the hunger. Since my father was constantly sort of being watched, and we were trying to push him somewhere where he could be, not could resurface, nobody had a chance of making money. Nobody worked. There was no work anyway, and there was just no money in our house. And the situation of feeding us was just horrible. 

I really don't know how we did it. I don't know if my mother had any money saved. I don't think so. But surviving a day meant a great deal. We-- I-- every morning-- and, of course, the food was rationed. The bread was sold in the bakery in the morning one hour. After one hour, the bakeries were closed. 

So we had made a plan in our house. My mother said that we're all going to go, each of us are going to go to a different bakery during the night. We got up during early hours, like five o'clock in the morning. And each of us is going to stay in line in the different bakeries, and maybe one of us is going to come home with a loaf of bread. 

And many times, it happened so that sometimes we came home with two loaves of bread. But one particular day, I remember, we were all standing in line in different bakeries and we came home with no bread at all, not-- not even a drop of it. Uh, [SIGHS] and there was such hunger. 

I really don't know. I really don't know how we lived. I don't know how my mother somehow made us eat. I-- I-- I can't recall what we did, but this was the late 1940. And 1940, that was the year when they formed the ghetto in Radom. 

INTERVIEWER #1: Can you describe how it began, what you saw, what it was like? 

PAULA JULIE: Yes. There were announcements weeks ahead that everybody who is going to stay at-- the-- the entire population of Radom had to be-- was pushed into, like, three or four streets. And-- 

INTERVIEWER #1: How many Jews? 

PAULA JULIE: I can't tell how large this is. I can't recall how many-- how many streets. It was just. I will just describe an incident that happened in my house. 

The street that I lived had to be part of the ghetto. In other words, according to the first announcement, my family was supposed to remain in the house we were staying. And it meant that two other families had to come into our apartment. We had two rooms, and we were very happy, because it was always better somebody to come in to you than you had to give to somebody else. 

The last minute, when everybody was placed, the entire Jewish community was placed in the ghetto, they had another announcement telling that our street that was supposed to belong to the ghetto they decided will not. That means they had to take us out and all the other people from that street and place us, put us into another family. And there was really no place where to put us. 

Well, the final decision was that we were put into a room, which had no room for us. There was just no room for me where to sleep in our new surroundings. There was room for a bed, a table, the sewing machine that my father used. And another bed was opened for my mother and the two other sisters. There was actually no room for me to sleep, and there was no room where to put-- to open an extra bed. 

So I went to my friend, and I asked her if it's possible that I should stay with her, I should sleep in her house. And she said, OK. She says, as long as I have a bed, you can sleep with me. But I felt terrible about it. I just-- I was during the day with my family, and at night, I used to run into her house. It was also curfew. Until eight o'clock, we were allowed to be in the streets. 