SUBJECT 1: No, it was [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, I know they had a pogrom back there. 

SUBJECT 1: A pogrom there. But not the only one. 

INTERVIEWER: But that I've heard. What I haven't heard is what you experienced. 

RUTH: Talk about the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Ruth, I'm going to let you conduct the interview. Go ahead. 

RUTH: OK. OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Go ahead Ruth. 

RUTH: Why don't you tell me something about-- I remember you've talked about the taking care of children right after the war. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh. OK. I actually was liberated in the English zone. This is in Hanover. This is Bergen-Belsen. This is the same thing as Hanover. 

Anyway, when we moved over we talked, and the Americans will only to be able to confess the truth, whatever. Wherever we can go. I want out from Germany. 

So we came to-- Ba-- Bavaria. We called our little city Kraiburg. And during the war was there, a, a, a, a military camp for the Germans. 

And so we took it over. A few of-- a few of us. 

SUBJECT 2: The Anders' 

SUBJECT 1: The-- OK. The Anders' was giving us, you know, whatever we needed, food and clothing and everything and possibilities. And so we-- uh, we, we were divided in groups. 

Some of them were traveling around all over Europe and finding children who survived. Some children was given-- by parents, given away, you know, to uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: Gentiles. Gentiles. 

SUBJECT 1: Gentiles. To convents-- [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 2: Convents, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: Convents. 

SUBJECT 2: Monasteries. 

SUBJECT 1: Monasteries. In some other-- this is the way. So we found it out. And we started getting all those children. And we brought them into Bavaria in that particular place where I was there. 

And there we taught them-- we give them some kind of start and skills with say, electricity, a Hebrew teaching, a tailoring and shoemakering, and we were doing. And I was working there in the particular thing. 

And there, so, that time was the, the-- illegal aliyah to Israel. So wherever you could catch a boat, you put a map on the boat. And you send them over to Israel. 

If they got through they were lucky. Some of them couldn't get through. And they were caught. And they were arrested. And they were sent into Cyprus, another camp. Do you ever hear from the exodus? This was the exodus. It was our children. We sent out a ship with the children. This was called the exodus. 

RUTH: How old were these children? 

SUBJECT 1: Children was various ages. Some of them didn't know even their Jewish. They came in, they cried. Because they said, I know I'm a Jewish, but they say I'm Jewish. Was children was-- but they were infant. Was left, they were about seven years, or eight years, or six years, or 10, and were even 12 years, boys and girls. 

So we established the schools. And UNRRA supplied whatever we needed, food, uh, beds, blankets, clothes. And they took charge of the things. So I was working there for a long time. This is the document. I was working there. 

RUTH: What was the name of it called? 

SUBJECT 1: It was called the Henrietta Szold. 

SUBJECT 2: Children's-- children's camp. What is it here-- 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 2: It says here. Henrietta Szold Jewish children's camp center. At UNRRA [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 3: Did you ever find out how many of your children made it? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, if we hear that-- we didn't hear anything, we knew the children went. They get through. We hear something, you know, we know they went to Cyprus, Or they were shifting around in the waters. 

SUBJECT 2: But eventually they all wound up in Israel. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Eventually, yeah. And how many-- they-- you see the replica in, in, in, in there-- in, uh, in, uh, in Israel. In the Yad Vashem No. It was not in the Yad Vashem. It was in the, what do you call it, the cemetery. The ship was sanked. The children was-- 

SUBJECT 2: That was not-- that was not-- this is not right. 

SUBJECT 1: Where-- 

SUBJECT 2: This is from the war from [INAUDIBLE] 

RUTH: Wow. 

SUBJECT 1: No, no. But the children was there and, and and-- 

SUBJECT 2: Not after World War II. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Did-- would-- did you actually close out the camp? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. We did. 

SUBJECT 1: We closed out the camp. When they closed out the camp, so we had nothing to do. So it was our way-- our mission is finished. We did what we could do. And then I said to my wife-- 

SUBJECT 2: They were on the last transport. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: We had sent away. It was sent to Israel. We heard that they have safely arrived in Israel. That's when we decided to leave. 

SUBJECT 1: So now it's time for us to leave. And I would say we're going to-- wha-- wherever we'll be, we'll start all over again, to do with our work. 

SUBJECT 3: After liberation-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 3: Or after liberation, what was the mood of the people in Germany and in Europe? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, the Germany and-- well. You see, these are the piles. After the liberation in Bergen-Belsen. 

And we could march through twice a day during, you know, work time and back and forward. And they saw us every day. And after the liberation they said, the Germans said-- we never knew how such a thing has happened. 

Strange to us. Was no SS. Was no SS men. There was no Nazis. Nothing. Nothing would happen. They denied everything. 

RUTH: How did you get those pictures? 

SUBJECT 1: This was made after the liberation. 

RUTH: But they're made-- they were taken during the war. 

SUBJECT 1: No. This was not taken during the war. 

RUTH: They were taken after the war? 

SUBJECT 1: After the war, because-- the-- see, in other camps, it was differently. In the British-- the Britain was different to us too. When the so-called Allies, the Britain, just in Bergen-Belsen, they, they, they-- the German, uh, uh, guard, they gave their rifles to the Allies, so they could be our protectors. And so we couldn't get out of the camp. 

Instead they give us food. Because our body wasn't used to any for five years. It couldn't-- we couldn't tolerate anymore, any food. We had to be treated like children. 

So with some of them, we'd start to eat. You know, because they started to feed us. The thousands that died, they got the dysentery. They fall in those outhouses-- not outhouses, we made those from, from those things. 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 1: And some of them who, who thought of it, let's say, for instance, I, I was taking every hour a spoonful. Because I knew, if I'll start to eat myself, I'll eat myself to death. So you-- you-- your brain had to work all the time. You had to be on the ball. Otherwise there was no way out of there. 

RUTH: Were these-- why are these printed as like postcards? 

SUBJECT 1: They-- all, all-- in this time, we had no papers, special paper in that time. 

RUTH: Mmhm. 

SUBJECT 1: See. It was made, you know, of whatever we could put our hands on it. 

RUTH: Oh. So this was-- these weren't used as, as actual postcards. 

SUBJECT 1: No. This is not, you see. There is no company, nothing, no name on it, in the back. It's plain, you see. This is actual little pictures. 

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with? 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: What has that whole experience done to you? 

SUBJECT 2: What it has done to us, well, we are left with loneliness. We are, as long as we live, we are lonely. We see people getting together, comes the holiday, families, parents, relatives, they get together. We are left with heartaches. 

It is only our little family, consists of the four of us. He, he has a surviving sister which lives in Sweden. So we could see her only twice, once that we went to see her. And once when she came to visit us. 

My sister escaped in Russia, the war. And she lives in Israel. So how often can you see one another? We saw her. We went twice to see them in Israel. And they were here once. And this is what we have. So. Max? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: The same question. 

SUBJECT 1: Same question. 

Nothing to say. Sad. 

SUBJECT 2: Our children never knew of the joy of having being-- having cuddled or, or-- or given any kind of little gift like other children had from their grandparents. And it was, as little as they were, they understood these things as if they were senses-- they didn't know, but they sensed it, that that-- if they don't get it, they didn't-- they didn't expect it. They didn't, uh, ask for things that they knew that they could-- what that other kids have. 

And somehow, I don't know how it turned out. But they have since knew that it's not like-- they are not like other children. 

INTERVIEWER: Ruth, you have formed an organization. You must have a response to the same question. What are you left with? What is [INAUDIBLE]? 

RUTH: Well, first of all I think I'm left with a lot of strength. Because you can't have parents like this who survived some very, very ugly experiences and managed to build a life afterwards. And to still have some hope. You can't have grown up in a household like that without having many, many strengths, first of all. 

And second of all, something that I have, as a child of survivors, which-- first, second and third gener-- generation American people don't have is, still some connection with the rich Jewish cultural heritage, which is gone now. This is my connection. 