INTERVIEWER 1: Without pointing to it. Just-- 

CREW: We're rolling. 

SUBJECT: You see, in Budapest, this time wasn't too bad yet. Uh, the Jews that lived freely, right, as you know, they had synagogues. I never went to synagogue there. And I turned 13-- I was very religious until I was 13, after gathered. It was synagogues and it was Jew sections, you know. 

I find a friend down there. I met a friend. He was older for me, 40 years. He took a room by a Jewish lady, by an old lady that was in Old Pest I used to live there, and I ate the [INAUDIBLE] that I could, right? And I lived. In the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And the papers? 

SUBJECT: Papers we had. I had papers. That wasn't illegal, nothing bad. As a matter of fact, in 1944 I got sick. I had scarlet fever. Scarlet you call it, right? And I was in the hospital in the quarantine for six weeks, I guess so. Usually they are six weeks. And then they released me and I went home. 

In the meantime, my brother came before that. He was with me. He was a furrier. I found him a place to work like a furrier. He's in New York now. And he did live in another place. We couldn't live together. I was in another place. 

And I went home after the sickness. And then came Pesach, right? And then they took us to the ghetto. And my brother never been to the ghetto. I went to the ghetto, and from the ghetto we went to concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: All this year, until '44, did you know or think of where this was going, or the Jews in other countries like Poland? Did you know something about the war? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. See, I tell you, til you don't experience a thing, you don't believe it, it's true. A lot of people are this way. Not everybody's a believer, right. Most of the Jews didn't believe this could happen, a tragedy, a thing like that, a barbarism or thing like that. 

We know there are concentration camps. I knew it. I heard about it. I didn't read about it. Officially they mean nothing, you know what I mean? You didn't believe it. 

The propaganda of Germany and-- of Germany was they to take you to working camps. All the family will be together, and they will come place to work and everybody will get home. It's stupid to believe, but you know, to tell the world the truth, that is really not to believe. But how could you believe the propaganda? Like, well, it's a stupid propaganda, right? 

They take you from your home. They take everything away from you to put in a working camp, and later you could come back. It doesn't make sense, right? Yes, the Jews believed it. God will help. Call God for help, right? And Jews went, and those who did went like lambs. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So how did this get to begin? One day? What? 

SUBJECT: One day, this was plain, like that from the sky. By us, it used to come to the public area in the village, right? One guy comes with a drum. He drummed it. He said, all the Jews take all the family and everything. It has to be ready in this and this time, and they will go, the whole family together on a wagon, to Satoraljaujhely That was this bigger city. There was a ghetto, right? 

And that's it. And all the Jews went. This was the job for the Hungarian gendarmes, right? You know, there I got the first smack. For the gendarmes to pick up all the Jews and watch them, they should get there together. I was, everybody was on the wagon, and I went down the wagon. I don't know for what. And the gendarme gave me a smack. 

And we came to Satoraljaujhely They put us in a big shul, and then they had already the plans where everybody got some kind of room. Was there a few weeks, and from there they sent us to Auschwitz. 

That was-- see, I tell you, with the mind of an adult, the mind of a teenager, the mind of a kid, that's three different things. And the parent of the kid, and of the teenager, and of the grown up, and there you was and how you got the whole deal, you know, how you interpreted the whole thing. See, it was of lack of leaders, I guess. We didn't have leaders who were able to lead us and tell us we're about to die here. Then we don't go. 

No organization-- the only organization was there were Jews. That's no organization. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What about the melamed? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The melamed. 

SUBJECT: God. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, your teacher. Didn't he become a leader? 

SUBJECT: He's God. God will help. You know what I mean? God says you have to help yourself. You should be helped, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said there were three different perceptions, child, young adult-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, it depends. For example, a child didn't think nothing. Maybe he had a thrill. He goes with the whole family for ride, right? A teenager, he thinks twice. A teenager says, something fishy goes on here, right? A grown up will say eh, that's some-- that's bad here, all together. Forget it. We have to give up or do something about it. Everybody give up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why do you think we gave up? Because of no leaders? 

SUBJECT: We didn't have no leaders and no choice. No choice, no leaders. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Instead of getting on the wagon and going to the ghetto, why didn't you run into another town or the woods? Something. 

SUBJECT: Not too many people did. No, nobody did it, really. Not just this, why, I ask all of the question, why I didn't have the brains to kill a German, take his gun, and shoot down Germans, and let me shoot-- let, let me be dead too. Why not? If all of the Jews would do this, there wouldn't be Germans, right? 

Why not? I would do it today. I would do it 20 years ago, 30 years ago. If somebody would take me today like that, I would shoot what I can and I would say, kill me. That's it. I will do it today. I guess a lack of leaders, right? Lack of-- of-- of-- of confidence. Something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were perhaps used to being denigrated, Jews, always... 

SUBJECT: Yeah, yeah very low. They broke you down. Made for you zero. You know what I mean? Even-- see, antisemitism in Poland, Czechoslovakia, all the Slav nations always existed. Czechoslovakia wasn't so bad. It was still there. It was still there. 

And I was a kid, you know, I went to school. We had, you know, the Jewish kids were Jewish kids, the Christians were Christians. Even I had Christian friends. But if you was always fighting with each other was a difference. 

The religion made a big difference. Even when I grew up the kids. Even I would go home today, they would recognize and they would kiss me. When we grew up, this was a difference from Jews to non-Jews. You know what I mean? 

And you grew up with this some time, and you said, and you was like underprivileged, you know? Unprivileged or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It was more than just feeling different. It was feeling a lack of confidence. Why? 

SUBJECT: Lack of confidence? You see, you lose confidence-- in practical life, when you lose confidence, you don't have support, right? Or you are a hero or you lose confidence, right? Or you do what you are told. If you don't want to be hero, you don't have a leader to be a hero, you just lose confidence, right? Because you just follow the stream. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And is that what happened in the shul, in the synagogue when you were put together? 

SUBJECT: In the shul? 

INTERVIEWER 2: On that Pesach, 1944. 

SUBJECT: Or after Pesach or after [INAUDIBLE]. Everybody went like lambs. I think back, you know, I'm ashamed to do-- I am ashamed to think about it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Describe it. Can you describe it? What do you see? 

SUBJECT: Cripples, sicks, young babies, old-- they went like lambs. Go there, do this, do this-- nobody said no, heck with you. How come? It's bothersome, you know? That's what bothers-- it don't bother me nothing else. 

Why, why, why, why wasn't there a leader to take something and give me a gun-- I could hold it right-- and say Zoli shoot. I would. I would, you know what I mean? Then that's what bothers me. The rest don't bother me nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So what happened in that shul? 

SUBJECT: In the shul we passed the night. The next day they put us to the rooms, right? And we was in the ghetto for a few weeks. And the ghetto is ghetto, you know, stars, you know. Talk, cry, and [INAUDIBLE] and [INAUDIBLE] speculating what will be, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the speculation? 

SUBJECT: Everybody had a different kind of thing. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like? 

SUBJECT: I remember my mother, my mother said one thing. If we have to die, we die together. There was a question I couldn't get out from the ghetto, you know. I couldn't get out from the ghetto. And she said, come with us. If we have to die, we die together. You know what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you mean by ghetto is ghetto. I mean, you said that. A ghetto is a ghetto. 

SUBJECT: Ghetto, what is a ghetto? They housed us like, for example, a guest house. You've got ten rooms or how many rooms. In every room, you stick a family or two families. And then you live until there comes the turn, and you take uh, take your way to there, to the train. That's all. 

There's nothing special about it. You just push the ? God will help. What was supposed to be will be. And that's all. You have Christian friends, maybe. We had Christian friends. They sent us some food, stuff like that. Because a ghetto is a ghetto. It's nothing else, so what you could do about it? 

Actually, like I said, you was demoralized. You was a zero. You didn't fight nothing. You just joined everything. You know what I mean? And that is sad. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To what Jewish community leaders? What was demanded 

SUBJECT: They was going along with everything. Right, who wanted to die? Who wanted to die? First of all, they took away my father, you know. They took them away. They took him away to Zwangsarbeit. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did this happen? Do you remember the day? 

SUBJECT: Oh, no. I don't know. They took him away, they sent them away, he was-- I don't know how you call it, like a prisoner, for no reason though. Work, and then he came home, then took him away again. And then we went to the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see people being taken away to the camp? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was happening to the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: You mean when they started to load the people? There were sections, like sections of the streets, right. They took the people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But how did they-- what do you remember seeing, hearing? How did they take them? 

SUBJECT: Plain, they just told you, take your stuff. Just the necessary things, yeah, just the necessary things. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Who would do this? Who would-- 

SUBJECT: The Hungarians. And they said that section, the whole thing goes out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When they talked to you, were they talking through a loudspeaker, from a truck, from calling you on the telephone, how did they tell you? 

SUBJECT: No telephones, no. They mostly scream. They yell, come on out. Everybody takes necessary things and go. It wasn't no formality or no technique to it, nothing allowing it, you know. It was everything, the plain way done 

INTERVIEWER 1: Suppose you didn't come out. 

SUBJECT: They went after you. They went through the houses anyhow after. For example, they emptied our street like that, right? They went through everything and they checked everything and everything left. Everybody left. You couldn't escape. I don't see how you can escape. 

Like I said, you could escape, but where you should go? You had-- well, you should go to the mountains, right? That's it. Then who would you contact out there? You had problems all over. The same thing like, you could escape from Auschwitz, a proper escape, right? But then where would you go? The Polish will take you or the German would take you? Who take you? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember knowing that your street is next? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did it happen that your street cleared? 

SUBJECT: In the morning, one morning, I just heard we have to go. So everybody took our valises or something and we packed the necessary things. We went. We went to the train. 

Then we had to take off all the gold, everything to throw it in a, in a basket down there. And they put us in trains, you know, in close like, like you know, an animal train. And the jammed in hundreds of people, and they took us to Auschwitz. 

We had food down there. On the train we had food, well our own, you know. When we got there, they took everything. We had to leave everything that we kept in the train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And all the food? 

SUBJECT: Everything. We couldn't take nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you lie down in the train? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No room. People lay down on each other, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it hot? Was it cold? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, it was hot. You didn't feel it. You know, if you-- you suffer for one. Same way, if you've got a headache, then you get a toothache, you don't know which one is better. So you don't know if the heat is better or the tsuris what you got. You know what I mean? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were still with your family? 

SUBJECT: I went for my family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because everyone says on the trains that they didn't notice the discomfort, yet the discomfort was horrific? 

SUBJECT: That's that I say. That was the tsuris. That was the tsuris what you had. I didn't realize in what position you were. You didn't know, really, what goes on with you. You was living like in twilight zone. 

You didn't believe, actually, if I would come to you and I would say, hey, miss, you have to leave everything here and I take your son away to a working camp, right? You would get shocked. You would say, well this is not-- something's wrong here, right? Something like that, right? You would realize what could happen to you. 

That that's what happened, actually. People didn't believe it could happen. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But then they had to believe it. They were in the train. The train was hot. It was packed with 100 people. 

SUBJECT: They was taking you to a working camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I know, but while [INAUDIBLE]-- 

SUBJECT: Or you was of the insecurity. You didn't know where you go. They make you believe-- I mean, you made yourself to believe you go somewhere, you will exist, right? Or you didn't believe, it really. You cheated yourself, you know? 

You cheated yourself. You didn't believe what they tell you anyhow. You cheated yourself. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I guess the question I'm asking you is you didn't believe it, but how could you stop feeling the discomfort that being packed with 100 people for many days without food or water must have been? 

SUBJECT: Like I said, maybe the emotions took over everything. You know, you was, you was just like-- ah, you was just lost in space. You didn't know what goes on. You didn't believe your-- it's hard to express yourself. You didn't believe what goes on, in one word. 

From a normal life, normal life, to have to happen? a normal life to a zero life. You know I mean? You know, how could this happen in the 20th century? You know what I mean? And that's what happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't believe you were on a train? 

SUBJECT: No, not actually, no. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's just a dream? 

SUBJECT: Uh you, you go, you go to nowhere. You go nowhere. They take you to nowhere. You don't go on your free will. OK, you go on your free will. Sometimes you sit in your car, you just drive. You want to go somewhere, right? You don't go nowhere, right? But they take you somewhere, you know, and nowhere. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was it dark? Was it light? 

SUBJECT: It was light, was light, was light. I remember we went to Auschwitz, right. We went through Czechoslovakia Everybody, here's Slovakia, here's Poland, here's this. Where are we going in the train? You know, I was looking through. You could read, you know. It was Slovak, so you could read the Slav letters. 

Finally we got to Auschwitz. They opened the doors, and I remember it like today. Come the haftling in the striped thing. They are mostly Polish Jews was. And they had to take us out from the, you know, just from the train to tell us, come on, let's go, and put us in line. You should leave everything there. 

And the line was big, you know, just a lot of lines. It's a big train, long train. And Mengele was there [INAUDIBLE], you know, tall SS man with a leather coat. I remember him like today. He was going like that. 

And my mother and my younger brother, the little, the youngest brother, and my younger sister, they went together. They went this way. It means to exterminate, you know, exterminate. And me, my father, and the girls went the other way. But me and my father went, they took us different than my sisters. And I was with my father together. 

In Birkenau, in Birkenau we came to the transit lager there. It was a nice day. We saw the crematoriums there, burning. And the, and the Polish Jew said, and see down there? It's people. He said it. He said it, it's people. 

And we went to Birkenau. There was a transit lager down there. From there, they select people to go all over, you know. The first time I got beat down there, I made the line. We shouldn't go to the line, cross the line. 

And I was with my father, and my father was talking to somebody. And I was around with my father, go around, you know, look at-- what's the story? All this was outside by the barracks. And I crossed the line. 

And the blockalteste, he beat me up with a piece of wood. That was the first day. That's how it started. And it went on, and that started real life 

From Birkenau, I went to Birkenau Landwirtschaft. They took us, me and my father in a group. Landwirtschaft means farm. This was a concentration farm. This was in Auschwitz, actually. They called it Birkenau Landwirtschaft. This was a group of people, it was one barrack full-- how many people was that? 150 to 200 people. 

We had to wake up every morning, 3 o'clock. It was nice and clean there. Three bunk beds, right? 3 o'clock til 9 to 10 o'clock to work every day. And in the morning we got the black coffee. Lunch time we got a bowl of soup, and suppertime we got a Zulage, bread, dark bread with bloodwurst I don't know what it was made of, bloodwurst but we ate it. It was all right. 

The camp was very tough camp. It's a lot of work and very strict. It killed a lot of people. A lot of people commit suicide there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see any? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, oh yeah. It's a lot of them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you tell about one? 

SUBJECT: I remember-- I remember in uh-- you know, you-- you-- you-- you know about it already, when from Holland and Belgium the Jews came. They came a little bit later, right? In October? No, in August? I don't know when they came down there. They came in big cars, strong cars. 

Actually, every week was bringing a few new people. They'd already killed them, already died, or they commit suicide. You know what I mean? They had to replace them all the time 

They came in big cars. I said to me, oh, they will be good workers they could have. You know, it would be easier on us having them there. 

They couldn't take it. They went just flies. A lot of them committed suicide. I remember especially a guy. 

We used to get mahorka, you know what is mahorka? No, mahorka is the Russian tobacco. What do you put in, newspaper, you don't remember? And you smoke it. He used to get like a Zulage once in a while. 

And he gave his bread, he trades his bread for the tobacco. And he smoked the whole deal up, the whole deal up. When he's finished smoking, he went to the men's room, right, and he hanged himself after that. Strong guy, I remember his face, even. He was from Belgium. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know his name? 

SUBJECT: Nah, I didn't know that. I-- I-- I-- didn't know nobody's name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why is that? Everybody says that. 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you, he was an animal, number one. Number two, no conversation. You didn't even talk. If people talked-- the older guys to used to talk. I remember, I was under third bunk bed. 

They used to talk mostly cooking. How delicious was this? How delicious? He was cooking. Everybody was eating and cooking in the past, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, they were thinking about it. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, talking about it. It was talking. You know, what I have to talk about those things? I didn't have too much conversation. For what we should talk? Noise you couldn't make, right? You couldn't make noise. You had to be quiet. 

And you didn't have much to talk, really. I was always the youngest out there. I was one of the youngest. There wasn't too many kids like me there. There was a couple more. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Well how did you call each other? 

SUBJECT: For what you should call? What business do you have to call each other? 

INTERVIEWER 1: At night, when you didn't feel good, didn't you call somebody, help me? 

SUBJECT: As a matter of fact, you see, I used to work in a group where we used to cut grass or wheat or stuff like, you know, with a sense. How do you call that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Scythe. 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: A scythe. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, a scythe. And one day, I pulled down on it somehow, an accident, and I cut myself here, you see here? Deep like that. It was bleeding terrible. So I took some dirt and a piece of my shirt from the bottom and I patched it. 

And it actually swelled up like that so I couldn't go to the doctor. Well, they told me I shouldn't go. It was an older guy. He said, don't go to the doctor. Don't go. Just hold it like that, put dirt on it, you know? And I was for a few weeks was like that, and I was looking like that. 

You didn't call, you didn't-- you didn't talk too much, somehow. You talked, you know, well, you talked about the past. For the future, you couldn't talk. You didn't have a future. For the present, you didn't have a present. Well, you will talk how he treat you, what he will do to you, or stuff like that. See, you was too tired to exist. 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]. This is the end of 1944. You knew that there was a war, and Russians were coming, and Americans. Were you starting to talk about the end of the war? 

SUBJECT: No. First of all, you was afraid to talk. You was afraid to talk. And second of all, you was indifferent to everything. You was like a vegetable. 

I don't remember myself if I was thinking right. I didn't care. I didn't care if they would kill me in a minute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did they put the numbers on you? 

SUBJECT: When I came to Birkenau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So you didn't have the numbers on in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT: In Auschwitz, yeah. That is in Birkenau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Birkenau was the entrance to Auschwitz. Did they do it right away? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is the number? I can't see it. 

SUBJECT: 810,030. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You kept the number on your arm. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why? 

SUBJECT: I don't have no reason to take it off. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Does it bother you when you look at it? 

SUBJECT: Sometimes, yes. It just depends on the mood, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It is still as readable as it was then? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I got a special large number. I don't know why. Usually they put it here in a smaller number. I don't know, my guy, what he was thinking, too. Maybe I had a smaller hand in the spread. I don't remember, really. He put me a big number on it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: At night, people get sick or they feel worse. Your sister told me in her woman's barrack, the women would scream all night, yell. 

SUBJECT: There was screaming, Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the men's they did not? 

SUBJECT: They did. I had a Block-- Blockalteste, they carried us. They took them out, they send them next day to Auschwitz or something like, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When they called-- when they called out, when they screamed, didn't they scream someone's name? 

SUBJECT: I tell you, I was young, and I slept. And when I was tired, I was sleeping. As a matter of fact, like I told you, my father was with me in the landwirtschaft, in the farm, right? And he was with me just 10 days. He couldn't take it. 

He was one of the lucky ones. They took him, they send him to Auschwitz, and they let him live til September. He was working in the kitchen. And we had our guy who used to bring soup every day from Auschwitz to us on a horse and wagon every day. And my father sent me a couple letters with him. And he even sent me the last letter and he said bye to me. 

He knew that they select-- he was selecting-- was in September a big selection in Auschwitz to send, you know, everybody to the crematoriums. And he said good bye to me. And said good bye for my mother and for everybody in this letter. 

And I had the letter with me until I went to Buchenwald. In Buchenwald, I had to undress myself, and they took everything away. The letter left, went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they shave your head too? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, they shaved all over, you know, any hair. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you cold? 

SUBJECT: It depends where. In Auschwitz, it was summer. And later comes fall. In Auschwitz, we get shirt. We got jacket, pants, and shoes. You know, that was-- we got it from-- from-- from the transport when they came. 

Like, most of the time when the transport came, we had bread soups and stuff like that, all leftovers, you know. They made a soup from it, and we ate it. And later we got beet soup, we had bean soup, you know, big [INAUDIBLE] bean soup and stuff like that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said the wagons brought the food from one place to come from Birkenau to Auschwitz. How big was this whole area? 

SUBJECT: Auschwitz? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Birkenau, Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT: Ah, that depends which one. The Auschwitz, I don't know really the territory of Auschwitz, how big is it, just a lot of camps was down there. But my camp was a farm camp, right? It was a group 180, 200 people. We had horses, cows, and mostly wheat, hay, and stuff like that. We was raising the milk, sending to Auschwitz for the SS men, right? 

And then there used to be Birkenau, they used to have factories, they used to have lot of things. When we didn't have a lot to do, we went to cut grass, you know, for our cows, for the horses to Auschwitz by the crematoriums, you know. Right around the crematoriums, we used to cut all the grass and pick it up and bring it home for the-- for the cows. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think of when you were cutting the grass around the crematoriums? 

SUBJECT: I saw a lot a lot of things. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What? 

SUBJECT: I remember one day was a transport, Hungarian transport. A woman was screaming and yelling, please let me live. I'm strong and healthy. I could work. Screaming, yelling and the SS men [INAUDIBLE] and punched her. Go to the transport. I remember. I was working like that from the crematorium, like here by that thing. 

As a matter of fact, there was so many people I saw, so many people gassed down there. Well, they couldn't burn them so fast, and they piled them up like wood, and they put gas on them and burned them in the open. They used to do it like that. I used to work like that when like that. I didn't go in it, right? Just near it. But we cut the grass there and everything. 

And another thing was there was a lot of gypsies down there in Auschwitz one time. The gypsies used to build roads, and we used to meet them all the time. While I was in the field, you know, our group, in they came to build the roads. 

One day, no more gypsies. And they said in one night they burned them all, in one night. So many gypsies were there, and in one night they burned them all. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Didn't it smell terrible when you were cutting the grass? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Was there a river? [INAUDIBLE]. Was there a river? The river was black from ashes. Black from ashes, from ashes. I don't know what they did to this river or what kind of river was it. I don't remember. This river was black from ashes. Then later on, I crossed it a couple times to work, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: On a bridge or the water? 

SUBJECT: No, on a bridge. You know, field work, stuff like that near the river, you know. There was another river too, but our fields spread for many miles. You know, we had big, big land down there. There was another river, but the wide-- the widest civilian population between the-- the prison [INAUDIBLE] I mean the prisoner people, you know what I mean? 

And this river was very nice. I remember one-- one day, a Polish guy was fishing the other side and he caught a fish. And the SS men told me I should get this fish by him. He bought the fish by him. 

And I [INAUDIBLE] get me a belt, and I swim through. I was pretty good swimmer. I swimmed through the thing and I put the fish [INAUDIBLE] through his mouth, like that, you know. And I was coming back, the fish came alive and almost pulled me down. I couldn't-- I didn't have the energies to make it, almost went down the river. Yes I made it. 

See I, I tell you, see I was the youngest one out there almost, and I was a pretty good worker. If you ever-- you never went to a farm, right? They got a big land with wheat, for example, right. I said when you cut with that machine, it's different. I used to do it with the hand down there. 

The SS men came to me, Kleiner he called me, right, little one, right. You see this tree? You go straight ahead. And, you know, and I was-- behind me was 50 other guys and I was first. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The lead. 

SUBJECT: The lead. And what's happened? I had little privileges there, too. He liked me this one. He was a devil. He could of killed next guy to me. To me, he kind of was "Was machst du Kleiner?" You know what I mean? 

I say, if you see some pears or apple, he brought me. He gave me to eat. And for example, when we get-- we get soup, right, what's left over in the barrel and he was around, right? He said Kleiner, come here. Nimm dies. I should finish it. You know what I mean? He just had a lot to say. That gave you a little energy. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see him beat some of the others? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Kill somebody? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You saw him kill? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. See-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you think? 

SUBJECT: I-- what I was thinking? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. One guy, he was from Kosice, not far from me, from me. He was a tall fellow. And he wanted, you know, he said to SS men, wouldn't be good to have beer today? Like that, was hot day, you know. Wouldn't be good to have beer? 

And the SS men took him, come here, I'll give you a beer. They got together the three SS men, and they start to hit him, you know. As they hit him, you know, punches here, punches there. And with the fist they killed him for he said this. And I saw was a short. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They killed him with the fists? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Yeah, you push him there with the fist, the other one, back and right, just like that. A big guy, he was skinny this time, you know, or a tall fellow. And like for example, this was a short SS guy. He was a Schwab, I don't know from where. A Schwab, a short fellow, German. 

He was a little killer. He used to send-- hey, get this stone down there. You know, actually, they have some kind of control down there. I don't know, I was thinking they got some kind of control. They couldn't kill everybody like that, you know, they have to have some kind of reason to put it right. And they sent him, get me the stone down there, and he took the gun, buzz, shoot him, just like that. 

But, it'll-- for example-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Same man gave you food? 

SUBJECT: Same man gave me food, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And when he gave you the apple, what was-- what did you think? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 2: When he gave you the apple-- 

SUBJECT: I didn't-- I didn't think. 

INTERVIEWER 2: About anything? 

SUBJECT: I was numb. I'll tell you another thing. When I was cutting wheat, right, I was chewing on it. You can't do this, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Forbidden? 

SUBJECT: Oh, sure. Couldn't chew nothing. I was chewing and an Oberstammfuhrer, you know, the higher, he saw me. He took my number. Nighttime when we came home, we had to make an appell, right, a headcount, right. As he called my number and he took out his leather, how you call it? You know, what they hit the horse? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Whip. 

SUBJECT: Whip. And he starts to hit and whip. And the SS man would-- he was my group. He said to him, don't do him. He's a good kid. He works hard. He's a good worker. I got about 12 or 13 , you know, and he listened to him. I was not [INAUDIBLE]. 

He could have given me 100. I didn't care, really. I didn't scream or yell nothing. I didn't scream even. But he listened to him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you bitter? 

SUBJECT: Mhm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you bitter then? 

SUBJECT: I was bitter. I was bitter more after the war, I guess so, when I realized the whole deal. I could have gone wild after the war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Killing? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, easy. With no remorse. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What stopped you? 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What stopped you? 

SUBJECT: The normal life-- I uh, what stopped me? If-- I got liberated by Americans. The Americans helped me. I was 58 pounds. I was skin and bone. Another two days, I wouldn't make it. I wouldn't of made it. And [INAUDIBLE] I was healthy otherwise, I don't know, strong natured, right. 

And then the Americans, they helped me. They gave me injections. In a couple months, I was OK. And a normal life started. When I was with Americans, that, I tell you, remarkable]. 

You know the Halle bei der Saale? You know? You don't know Germany. Ach so, Halle bei der Saale the Americans occupied. They gave it back to Russia. I was liberated there around called Barenburg. That's all I remember from the names. 

And they used to-- the Germans came and they used to pick up the butts, cigarette butts, you know. And the Americans throw out a lot of food, right, they used to come and pick up food. There's one day they called me, hey Zoli some generals pick up here, this. 

So I let him pick up everything. When he picked up everything, I took some gas and I put, and I light it. And I kicked him, you know, the German. The American was happy. The American didn't like him either. They saw so much injustice as they-- they-- I guess if they would let the American kill him off, they would kill him off, too. 

And the nicest thing was when I was liberated, the Americans-- oh, we jumped too much ahead, right? It doesn't matter, really. I was liberated by Americans. I was in a German family. When first one, the first day, right, before the Americans took me away-- well, if you want to hear the whole story-- no? 

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell us about this German family. 

SUBJECT: The German family was their mother, daughter, son-in-law. They had a brick factory, right? They had Zwangsarbeiter working there, you know, like Russians. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Forced labor. 

SUBJECT: All forced labor, yeah. And the lady says to me, Hitler is a good man and had good [INAUDIBLE] for us for uns. He's a good man. He wanted good for us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Hitler? 

SUBJECT: Hitler. I remember her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you said? 

SUBJECT: Hmm? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you answer? 

SUBJECT: What should I have? I was 5865 What should I answer? What should I answer? Even this time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Even after. 

SUBJECT: Even after. This was a day after the war, a day after the war. The day after the war, she answers, she said this. Because a lot of time, you take judgment if everybody is guilty or somebody is not guilty. 

Like when I was liberated and I was sitting in the office with Americans, right, was there a tech sergeant, a red head fellow. And he asked me, if I would have the power to do to the Germans anything that I feel like, what I would do to them? I said, plain. Five years up, I would kill them all. I wouldn't have left not one of them. Unless its in the block, and this would repeat. 

He said no. We have to show them a better way of life, how we have to treat humans. And with that, our conversation ended. He was right, and I was wrong. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel now? 

SUBJECT: Thank God I got a nice family. I work hard. Anything I got, nobody gave me. I love this country. It's a good country. It's a free country. I was in a few countries already. I've got good days, bad days. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Bad days? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Bad nights, good nights, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What are the bad nights? 

SUBJECT: I never got a penny from the Germans. I never asked for it. I don't want it. I don't want the good and I don't want the bad from them. Nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What are the bad nights and bad days? 

SUBJECT: You know, bad dreams and stuff like that. The [pits?]. See uh, I don't know how I stand with God. If you want to listen or not, yeah. 

See, as you know, in Auschwitz the Russians came January around 18, something like that. There was a lot of people who left the last minute, right? They evacuated us. We had to march, and we took our horses and cows. We had to go on foot to Katowice, I guess. Gleiwitz or Katowice? I don't remember. It was about two nights to walk, you know. 

And then they put us in empty, in open trains, you the big uh, big trains, the long ones, about 130 to 150 people. And open this was generally, rain, snow, freeze. You couldn't-- you would stand like that to each other, you know. It was all jammed in. Seven days, seven nights, no food, no nothing. 

And when we came to Buchenwald, as they opened the door, there was about 80 people dead. A lot of people-- I was covering-- I was covering myself with dead people. You know, I was covering myself with dead people. I didn't know the people, any of them. I was covering myself with dead people. And a lot, you know, went nuts, you know, screaming, yelling, running, and a few left over healthy ones. 

And we came to Buchenwald, was there a bath. They told you strip, right. They cut your hair off all over. And you had to go through disinfection like that, right? We was all naked in January-- in Feb-- January was it, right? Yeah. All naked all over, freezing temperatures, all outside. 

As a matter of fact, you know what happened down there to me? Some transport came from Auschwitz. They had margarine. And I saw a pack, a part of margarine, it used to be [INAUDIBLE]. Half a kilo, right? Yeah, half a kilo margarine. 

I was so hungry, I didn't eat for sev-- I-- I-- that's-- the-- on the wagon, on the train, you used to, you know, make sugar for sugar beets, right? And the fact that it makes sugar, they sliced it up small. It was glued onto the wall down there, and I scrapped this and I ate this. I saw this and I scrapped this from one corner, and that survived me. I guess that's how I made it. 

As we came out from the wagons, right, and I see the margarine down there, I ate the whole pound of it. And I stayed in the corner down there. Everybody stays in a line, right. There's a lot of transports there. I sat down. I got so sick, and I was just dying, for the margarine made me so sick. 

Somebody picked me up down there. The guys, they're around me, said get up. They will see you. Get up, they we will see you. In a few minutes I was better. 

And we're standing. We got close, right? And they took us to the transit lager. You, you-- you were in Buchenwald or you were from Buchenwald. That was in the bottom. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In the bottom? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, this was a special transit lager. Well, they had many kind there. Abteilung. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's a transit lager? 

SUBJECT: Like that is you come and go, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What's a lager? 

SUBJECT: Lager is a camp. And there we was a week, and that was good. I don't know, good, you know. A lot of people died there after the fact, you know. They put us in bunk beds, big ones, you know, like herrings, you know, head to tail. 

If somebody died, we kept them and we get a bowl of soup for him, you know. We kept them til it was too strong for a couple of days. And there I was maybe 10 days. And every day a bowl of soup and a piece of bread. I felt better. 

Someone came and he said, anybody who's got a profession, like-- like-- like electrician, plumber, locksmith, something, should raise his hand. So I raised my hand. I was a locksmith. I was thinking they would put me somewhere to work. In a factory would be better, right? 

And they took me like a locksmith next day, right away. They put me in a wagon-- not me, a lot of people. And was getting with a transport deep to Germany. I remember Germany's usually flat land. It's nice land. And one day-- I was travelling for two days or three days. One day, the Americans come in to bomb us, the train. 

They bomb us. And the nicest thing was the SS men was in the middle and we was on the sides like that, you know? They had their own compartment. We was in the side. And they bombed us. 

And an SS men was shaving, you know, dressed up nice. And they came to bomb us, and with the bullets, the SS men got killed. You know, the Americans killed him. Nothing happened to me. Of course, a lot, a lot of prisoners died, too. I was happy about the SS men. I remember him, too. He was stretched out down there like nothing, [INAUDIBLE] too much. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were liberated then where? 

SUBJECT: No, I wasn't liberated yet. Then I went to a camp near Halberstadt by Magdeburg. It was Hermann Goring Werke. He was building a factory under the mountain. That was the worst thing-- well, you could imagine down in this camp. I came down there, it was February, right? That's a Vernichtungslager. 

There we have to wake up 3 o'clock in the morning. It's wintertime. No clothes there. You had just jacket and pants, no shirt, no shoes. The Holland shoes were rags or stuff like that. That was real bad. No bed, no water, no nothing. 

As we went 3 o'clock up to woke us up. We had to stay head count til 5. 5 o'clock comes to march to the work, about an hour and a half. Then we start to work. At 9 o'clock we came back. No food all day long, nothing at all. Nighttime we're supposed to have a bowl of soup if we was lucky. 

Most of the-- most of the time it was the planes, English or American they came, you know, they fly, they flew around, right. So they put out the lights. The stronger one grabbed the soup, right? And the weaker one didn't get nothing. There was a lot of Russian prisoners, too. A lot of Russian prisoners. And there people died like flies. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you liberated? 

SUBJECT: Barenburg. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the next thing? 

SUBJECT: There I was in this camp several months, March-- about two and a half months. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let me ask you one question, maybe as an ending question. Why did you invite us to do it now? 

SUBJECT: Plain, it should be in history. I don't know if this will help. We learned in school history from-- from Attila the Hun. Didn't do nothing about it, right? Maybe 100, 200 years from now it will be the same thing. This will be in history. We read about it. 

This wouldn't do any good for the Germans, right? I hate them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So maybe you-- 

SUBJECT: I hate them. Rest in history, nothing wrong with it. I can't do nothing else, right? 

INTERVIEWER 2: To-- to the Germans? 

SUBJECT: Yep. You know why? I wouldn't hate them if this-- this would happen maybe-- maybe in a country where the people wouldn't be so intelligent, right, and advanced. Germany was intelligent, advanced in any aspect, right? And it's happened down there. 

They did it with knowledge, right? It's scientific means, right? It's a good reason to hate them for it, right? Plain. That's it, right? 

INTERVIEWER 1: The camera was overheating and I was afraid it would-- 