INTERVIEWER 1: More striking-- which was your confrontation with the gun. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right. Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: They [INAUDIBLE] 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 1: I'm trying to understand what this-- maybe I won't ask any questions. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You may not ask any questions. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any questions. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You just-- 

SUBJECT: Tell a story. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You tell us when. Are we rolling? 

CREW: Still rolling, John? OK, good. 

SUBJECT: OK, my name is Alex Lazutin. I was born in Kiev in 1936. So now, I left Kiev, approximately in '41. The reason that my parents left Kiev was because of my grandfather's background. He was appointed by the Tsar as a general, because he worked on the Trans-Siberian Railroad. He was a photographer. 

And after-- when the Communist government or regime began persecuting people-- the White Russians, I suppose-- and he was questioned and interrogated, released, and finally re-interrogated and went to prison-- and tortured and subsequently died. With that kind of a background, my parents decided that Russia was not-- no longer a place for them to live. And in '41, when the Germans occupied Kiev, they decided to leave Russia. 

At that point, I was 5-years-old. Things that I remember is, basically, traveling on trains-- constantly moving, as gypsies, from one location to another, from one city to another, but always heading west. Because that was our-- my parents primarily-- primary motivating force was to get out of Russia. So we were moving in that direction, towards the west. 

And as a child, I remember riding on the trains, being left in the railroad stations, while my parents would be inquiring, when-- where would be the next train going to? A different city in Czechoslovakia or Poland? And I would be sitting by the suitcases, wondering if my parents would ever come back and find me or I'd be, just, stolen or herded or arrested by the German people, and never to see my parents again. So there were always those kind of fears in my mind, that we would be separated and I would no longer see my parents again. 

But fortunately, we did stay together. There were incidents that I recall, when we were traveling with my parents, where we were sort of in a convoy of horse-and-buggy-- drawn through a sort of a wheat field. And I remember, we stopped. And somebody came running over and said, hey, you, come over here. There's been a terrible accident or somebody was shot. 

And so I remember walking into this clearing in the wheat field and finding a mother and a son shot to dead. I don't know if it was by the Germans or underground or whatever. But it was quite an experience for me to go-- to witness that kind of a horrible death. 

We've-- again, traveling from from place to place, you never get to play with children, like normal kids would do. You're always either with your parents and you don't have a chance to go out and play ball, like normal growing up kids would do. But there were some instances in some of the concentration camps-- even though we would-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mention camps. But how-- were you always free to travel? Or sometimes not? 

SUBJECT: Um-- at the beginning, we were traveling on our own, my parents and I. I think, at the point where-- where they tried to cross into Bavaria, that's when the Germans would not allow them to do that. And we were turned back. And I'm recalling this from my parents relating this story. So they went-- they went back to Czechoslovakia and tried again. And I think, at a time of crossing the border in Bavaria, that's when the Germans finally took them in. And that was the beginning of our lives in-- from one camp to another, from that instance, as I recall. 

And these camps were primarily work camps, where my father and mother would have to work. My father was a carpenter. So he would have duties in the carpentry shop, making boxes for shipping things and stuff like that. And-- and in this one particular camp-- it was in the winter, I recall. And the children were-- were sledding down the hills on sleds that we-- we've made from wood gathered around the camp. But yet, we always had the feeling of being always guarded and watched by the Germans. 

It's sort of like-- have the feeling of being in prison, as a child. And yet-- and yet, I guess we were not quite aware of what was going on, except aware of the presence of Germans in the periphery of the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was-- what was around the camp? 

SUBJECT: In some of them, there were barbed wires-- fences and barbed wires. The first one, where I remember when-- when we were children, sledding on the hill, that was an open camp. It was not-- no barbed wires around it. But I'm not sure whether we had the freedom to leave and go in and out of it without being stopped. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The other children, were they Russian too? Were they German? 

SUBJECT: They were Russian, Polish, Lithuanians, Latvians. So there was a mixture of-- of-- of children. But each group tended to stay within its own group. The Russians would stay with-- with their people. And I think, probably, because that was our only means of getting any kind of an education. The parents would teach us-- teach their children to read, write, arithmetic in the evening, by the candlelight. And so that was our-- my formal kind of an education, was through my mother. So we did that. 

Again, there was a lot of traveling in trains. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And in camp, there was German children? 

SUBJECT: No, not that I can recall. We-- we did not have any interface with-- with any of German children at all. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Any way of communicating with these other children? The Lithuanian children? The Polish children? 

SUBJECT: Only-- only if we were playing on the outside. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What language did you use? 

SUBJECT: Well, there was sign language and you-- you start to pick up a few words. Like, I could understand a little bit of Polish. There were some Ukrainians there. And that was no problem communicating with them. But as you are in the group, such as that, with different kinds of nationalities, it was-- being a child, it was easy to pick up the language and somewhat communicated with children. 

So we traveled on trains back and forth, from one camp to another. And in one particular instance, I remember this-- this camp that we were in was located by the side of the river. And as children, we-- we were playing on the side of the-- of a street, a dirt road that led to the river. And this particular day, we were playing, just, stickball or just running back and forth on the side of the street and noticed a German soldiers herding people down to the river with-- the Germans had guns, machine guns, and so forth. 

And we watched them walk by us towards the river. And a few minutes later, we heard gunshots. And you know, we were all, just-- you know-- wondering what was going on. And then a few minutes later, the Germans walk back with-- without any people. And you know, I guess we were sort of curious, what happened? Why were all the gunshots? And what happened to the people? 

And when the Germans finally left, several of the kids, myself included, went down to the river, looking for bodies. Like, you know, we heard gunshots. What happened to them? And that was a-- quite an experience that always stands up in-- stands out in my mind. You know, wondering whether maybe we would be next or my parents would be next and-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you find bodies? 

SUBJECT: No, we didn't. But, through stories of others that were there before us, they said, well, we always heard gunshots by the river. So it appeared that that was their execution ground, so to speak, for-- for people. 

In one of the camps that I remember, there was a railroad station, railroad tracks running by the camp. And as children, we were always curious about trains going by and wondering what was on them. And sometimes, we saw military equipment and tanks and trucks and so forth. 

And this particular day, I was by myself and I heard the train coming. And I ran over a mound towards the railroad tracks. And I sat down. And I watched the train go by. And as it left, I got up. And as I turned to walk back to the-- up the hill and to the camp, I was confronted by a German soldier, yelling and screaming, with a rifle pointing at me. I was-- I-- I was totally frightened. 

As I recall, I screamed and ran home to my mother-- and crying and shaking. And she was quite upset that that incident took place. And I-- I couldn't sleep at nights after that. You know, it was such an experience. I thought I was going to be shot. And I think, to this day, I have nightmares about-- well, not nightmares. But I have dreams about being shot. And I don't know if that's part of-- because of that incident or not. But I still dream about being shot. 

So as-- as a child, it-- we-- there wasn't a normal upbringing. It was a very, very difficult time for us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Aside from those nightmares, anything else that colors your life now? 

SUBJECT: The-- I'm sorry? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Any other thing that influences your life that you might-- 

SUBJECT: That influences my life now? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, from that. 

SUBJECT: Um, I think it-- as I reflect on my life and my children, I-- I hope that they would never have to see or go through the circumstances that I experienced as a child and-- and during that time-- the camps, the hunger, not knowing where are you going to be. I think I was always afraid of being separated from my parents and not seeing them again. Those kind of things-- I still-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: A-- any fears that you currently have? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I-- I think I would never want to be involved in another war or go through another war myself. And I'm not sure I would even let my children be involved with another war. It would be a very, very difficult decision for me to make to allow my kids to be in-- involved in a war. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You talked about hunger. Did they not feed you in these camps? I mean-- 

SUBJECT: Well, we-- we generally had one, quote, unquote, "meal," as it were. It could have been-- it consistent, at times, of maybe potato soup, a loaf of dark bread, things like eggs and milk were unheard of. I don't remember ever having them when I was a child. 

It's just-- you know-- are we going to be fed? Are we going to be separated? Where are we going next? What are they going to do with us? Those kind of anxieties went through my mind. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is-- is this today? Any fears about your family or what's hap-- what's going to happen? 

SUBJECT: No, I don't-- I don't think so. I think it's always present in my mind that-- the-- the things that I've experienced and went through are always there. I will never forget that. But I think I'm-- I'm comfortable with myself right now. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The food-- the anxiety of whether you'd get fed-- where were you fed? Do you remember eating and the circumstances of eating? 

SUBJECT: It was-- it was was sort of a-- mess halls, where everybody would-- would be-- at a certain time, we'd have to go there. And they would have a big pot of soup and would dish it out as we go through a line-- that kind of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have your own utensils? Or did they give them to you? 

SUBJECT: Um-- I recall having utensils that had swastikas on it. I don't remember whether they were given to us. I would think so. You know, a lot of us had to-- to make do as we could-- you know-- steal or whatever we can, in order to survive. My-- my father would come up with a chicken once in a while. I don't know how or where. I'm sure he stole it someplace. So we would have that. And we cooked it ourselves. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How long were you in these-- in the camps? And how did you-- how were you released? 

SUBJECT: We-- we were in camps, as I recall, probably from '42 through '44, '45-- in that time. We were-- when-- when the war ended, we were in Czechoslovakia. And the Russians were heading west. And of course, the Allies were squeezing the Germans in the middle. And the-- when the war ended, we were in Czechoslovakia at the time. 

Again, we were not going back to Russia. So the motivating force, again, was to continue on to Germany and-- not realizing or dreaming that we'll ever end up in America. But I think my parents would have been content just to live in Europe, but never going back to Russia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm. Did you make friends in the camp? In the camps you were in? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we-- the children that we played-- yes. Some of them, I've never saw again, because they were shipped to other towns, cities, and countries. Some-- we were reunited after the war. My parents communicated with some of them after the war. In fact, when we got to the-- to this country, they were still communicating. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Tell me, what was it-- and maybe this will be the-- be the one question. As a child, seeing people executed, having a gun pointed at you, what kind of explanations did you give to yourself? What question did you ask your parents about it? 

SUBJECT: I think, the questions that I recall that went through my mind-- that-- I-- I don't-- it's very difficult to-- you know, recall. I think fears would be the best description-- the fear of-- of seeing-- seeing soldiers-- the-- the fear of, will it happen again? Will I-- you know-- maybe, I will be shot or separated from parents. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe a nightmare? 

SUBJECT: Um-- the nightmares-- I dreamed of being shot. And I still do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where? 

SUBJECT: Oh. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How? Does it have a story to it? 

SUBJECT: Um-- I cannot remember the nightmares that far back. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, no-- 

SUBJECT: But-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: --right now 

SUBJECT: --presently yes. I'm persecuted, chased-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: By whom? Where? 

SUBJECT: Um-- sometimes by a soldier in uniform. Sometimes, it would be a-- a gangster or somebody robbing me and up to a point where I'm about to be shot. And then I would wake up-- you know-- thinking, oh my god! You know-- was I really shot or not? Tho-- that still goes on very often. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How often? 

SUBJECT: Not unusual-- at least once a month to have that kind of a dream now. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And after you wake up-- 

SUBJECT: Uh-- I-- after I wake up, the first thing I think of, I think, is going back to that particular incident. It must be that's where that st-- stood in my mind so vivid that I reflect back on it after the dream. And I could-- to this day, I could see it very clearly. It was a clear day-- summer day-- gr-- green grass on-- on the side of the hill, the soldier in uniform with a-- a helmet, a rifle. I'm looking at the rifle, very, very frightened-- him screaming at me. 

I'm crying and screaming and-- and running, wondering if-- if I'm going to be shot while I'm running. It-- I'd never forget that. That was an experience that is in my mind always. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have you ever gone back to Europe? 

SUBJECT: No, no. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah. It's-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: OK? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes, Wait. You're hooked. 