CREW: This one? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Should we try out the mics? 

INTERVIEWER: John, do you need a level? 

CREW: Can we have a level please on-- let's have all three. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

KRYSTYNA S: Shall I say something? OK. My name is Krystyna Sikorski. I was born in Warsaw in 1928. My parents were very well-to-do, comfortable family. My father was a physician. My mother was also a college-educated woman. 

Until 1939, the life was very pleasant, very comfortable in a very nice family. And all of a sudden in 1939, in the summertime, things started happening. All of a sudden, we were talking-- somebody was talking about the war. Something strange will be coming, something that would interrupt the daily life, the pleasant school-- grammar school or friendships or something like this. 

All of a sudden, in 1939-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were 11 years old? 

KRYSTYNA S: I was born in July, so just-- I was just turned 11. When my father decided even to move our very pleasant surroundings and apartment in Warsaw to a less comfortable one, just so that we will be closer to our family, to the rest of the family. I really resented it, because it was very nice where I lived. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the nice apartment like? 

KRYSTYNA S: It was like a villa in the garden, whereabouts we moved into a 24-apartment building just so that we would be closer to other members of the family. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the villa? 

KRYSTYNA S: Well, it was like in the suburban area of something that we know here in the United States. And it was very, very comfortable. And all of a sudden, I was deprived of my room. I was deprived of a nice garden. Which, as a child, I thought was strange. 

But I wondered many times afterwards if my father didn't really have, like, some kind of knowledge that something will happen to him. And he wanted my mother and his two young daughters-- my sister was two at the time-- in a little bit closer family surroundings. 

Strange things would happen also among friends of ours. All of a sudden, I heard so much more about religion, nationalities. We better be careful about Mr. So-and-so, because he is of German descent. And he is-- he might be even an undercover agent. We better be-- don't tell him too much. Or his behavior is strange. 

As a child, this was rather strange to me, because they were friends of my parents. And all of a sudden, there was a barrier between somebody. All of a sudden, my mother's brother would come to the house. And he would say, well, just in case a war will start, we'd better do this or that. 

Some strange plans, something that I wasn't accustomed to as a child. We would make plans where to go to either vacation or how to meet, again, other members of the family or something. And this was sort of like a strange preparation probably June, July, and August of 1939. 

And then all of a sudden, September came. And, well, if I may say so, the hell broke loose. All of a sudden, my father came home with-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the day? 

KRYSTYNA S: The day? Yes, it was September 1. 

INTERVIEWER: How'd the day begin? 

KRYSTYNA S: Except for-- except for some commotion in the air, I also a terrible commotion about a family. All of a sudden, my uncles were drafted into active duty. My father came with papers that he was being drafted. And he's supposed to be in a certain city of Poland named Lodz, on the 6th of September. 

And all of a sudden, there were fireworks in the sky. They were explained to me as some signs where the so-called Volksdeutsche, which were people that were really sympathizing with Hitler were described as. The Volksdeutsche were-- were giving some signs where, to the airplanes flying above, that this is the airport. Or this is something. 

I know probably many things were explained to me later what they really meant. But at that time, it was rather frightening experience, even for 11-year-old girl who has never come across anything like that. We were still spending time near Warsaw, at our family home at the time. 

And a very strange and also scary thing happened. Because all of a sudden, I was told to wake up and dress one day during the night. Because a coach from a nearby farm or estate came and we were being transported during the night. We were going from our house near Warsaw, about 18 miles from Warsaw, to our apartment in Warsaw. Because the family decided that this was the better place to spend the war at. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why did they decide that? 

KRYSTYNA S: Well, there was-- later on, I found out that they were hoping that Warsaw, as such, will be spared any kind of a bombing. Whereas 12, 18 miles out of the city, the front might come. And as is it was at that time, I don't recall the exact day, but already the Nazi army was deep into-- into Poland. On the Western side of Poland, at that time when we decided-- our family decided to make the move into the city. 

Also, it became rather obvious that on the sixth day of September, my father would never make it to his original post where he was supposed to register for active duty. So he registered in one of the military hospitals in Warsaw itself. And he was evacuated with that hospital into the eastern part of Poland, somewhere near Lublin. 

Well, as it was, probably on the 4th or 5th-- no, probably on the 6th or 7th day of September, during the night again, somebody woke me up and said, say goodbye to your father. Because he's going. As it was, this was really the last time I saw him. 

As far as our life in Warsaw itself, my mother and two children, where we were-- where our apartment was, it was not safe enough. They were constantly bombing this part of Warsaw. And we went into a little bit probably sturdier built apartment building. And we were hiding there with friends in their cellar. 

This was going on through most of September. Many times in-- there were many times I was left alone in the cellar with mu two-year-old sister. And my mother would go during the lull of bombings to find some kind of food. I remember a big celebration almost when my mother came with a box of cookies. So my sister will have at least something to eat. 

Many times we would try to sleep in the upstairs apartment, but it was rather dangerous. The Warsaw-- during that time, the bombs and the cannons were flying. And it was rather unpleasant and dangerous to be upstairs. 

As a matter of fact, a very shocking thing to me happened. Because a friend, who was only a few days older or younger than I, with whom I played in the last few years before the war. All of a sudden, one night she was with us and the next night she went to her uncle's house, where she was killed. 

And I couldn't imagine why things like this are happening. We're not soldiers. We're not fighting the front. We didn't do anything. Why? 

INTERVIEWER 2: How was she killed? How was she killed? What happened? 

KRYSTYNA S: Some kind of a shrapnel. Some kind of a cannon exploded and she was hit over here by falling debris. And this was, more or less, this was September. After the probably about 30, 30-something days of fighting-- between 1939 in Warsaw-- the Germans took over. 

And, well, then we went back to our own apartment, where other members of the family all of a sudden-- themselves without shelter-- came to live with us. Like a few weeks after we moved back to our apartment, all of a sudden my two cousins had appeared. 

INTERVIEWER: Anything-- any news from your father? 

KRYSTYNA S: No, nothing. In 1939, at Christmas time, we received a letter from my father from a Russian prisoner of war camp by the name of Kozelsk. And he wrote to us that if he doesn't see us, he will write soon again. Very optimistic letter. 

He will write to us soon again, but in the meantime, my mother should go and ask a friend-- a lawyer of ours for help. He didn't know that he was killed already in September, this lawyer. And this was the one and only letter that we have ever received from him. 

The news was absolutely no news for the next few years. Until, well, let me jump to 1943. In the summertime, all of a sudden, we were given news in the newspapers-- and also through loudspeakers on the street-- that mass graves of Polish soldiers, Polish officers were discovered somewhere in Russia in mass graves. 

And they were being identified by International Red Cross and some other commission. And unfortunately, my father is on that list. The mass graves are in the forest, I suppose. Because that's how they refer to it, as Katyn massacre. Small village of Katyn must be some place. 

Going back, my mother had two sisters and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Executed by? 

KRYSTYNA S: Well, at that time, the Russian-- the Germans said that the Russians did it. And even though the Russians and the Nuremberg trials tried to evade the issue, I think that time and place would put really the Russians as the ones who did it. They tried to blame Hitler for it, but who is there to judge? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could I ask, what was it like for you all those years not knowing where your father was or what condition he was in? Did you talk about it at home or-- 

KRYSTYNA S: Definitely. That's why I'm going back. Because my mother's two sisters who came to live with us during the war-- and her children-- their two husbands, their husbands were officers in the Polish army. One was working for the Geographical Institute. And one was working for the Army Depot or something like that. 

And they were unfortunately also taken by the Russians. But they happened to be in a different prisoner of war camp by the name of Starobelsk. No letter ever came from them. One of my aunts was notified that her husband is there, but never a personal letter or something or communication. 

And to this day, nobody knows really what has happened to those two. So needless to say, my cousins and I, many times we would talk about it. As a matter of fact, I've-- well, life couldn't be gruesome every single moment. 

I remember we were making jokes. When your father comes in through the door, what will be the most likely thing he will say? Or what will be the most likely thing your father will say when he ever-- when he comes back. Not when he ever comes back, when he comes back. You had to believe it. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the most likely thing your father would have said? 

KRYSTYNA S: Excuse me, I have to wash my hands first. Him being a physician so definitely, we were talking about it. Now as far as our life, in September, had to come to some kind of normal daily routines. My mother didn't have a job. We lived without many things. 

She occupied herself a little bit with selling some of family belongings, maybe some jewelry or something that would help us to live through the war. The older cousins went to work, helped out the rest of us. And I went to school. This was grammar school at that time, which was rather peaceful and not very eventful. For this was the sixth grade of grammar school. 

All of a sudden, at the end of sixth grade a year later, we discovered that we were not allowed to continue our education. That high schools, as such, were absolutely forbidden. Well-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why? 

KRYSTYNA S: Well, Nazis didn't need anybody that was educated, just maybe a working force. Everybody over 16 had to work someplace. And education, higher education-- I mean, the universities were closed. But even high schools were not allowed. 

So I had a double diploma. One certificate that I finished my sixth grade with very good marks. And another one, I was giving officially that I failed in sixth grade. I have to repeat that. So the first year of junior high in my case, in that school, was under that assumption that you failed and you have to repeat it. 

Well, you couldn't repeat the sixth grade too many times. So continuing about education, the following year, we were-- we changed schools. We were in a private apartment. And it was called officially an auxiliary of a trade school. Each of us were assigned-- each group of us was assigned. You were in a special hat sewing class or course. 

I was in some kind of a underwear-making course for a year, I remember, or something. And we were-- we had double teachers. We had to have a teacher that really knew the trade. We had actual sewing machines in the rooms, but also, we had a second teacher who would come and teach us history, literature, math. However, absolutely no books, no written assignments, everything had to be memorized. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why was that? That there was nothing written and no books? 

KRYSTYNA S: Because it was forbidden. And there were, well, German patrols roaming the streets or on the streets. And if they saw a school child-- school-age child with a book-- well, book case. What do you call those? 

INTERVIEWER: Briefcase? 

KRYSTYNA S: Like a briefcase, yes, which is much more common over-- in the United States, everybody carries the books loose in front of you. In Europe, you had briefcase-- bookcases, briefcases-- for books. They would go through it. 

And if you had something that was not-- that was forbidden, not only you were in trouble-- you as a child were beaten up-- but the school, maybe some authorities, maybe some grownups. So our school was wired. 

And just in case an inspection would come, somebody was on the lookout. And if they rang the little buzzer, we were immediately ready to change to whatever we were supposed to do as far as our trade is concerned. 

CREW: So the teacher that taught you the math and the literature and history was doing that illegally. 

KRYSTYNA S: Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And if caught, would've gotten in trouble? 

KRYSTYNA S: Absolutely. Officially, this teacher was just a helping teacher or something. Or two teachers per class, which would be OK if somebody came. But this constant suspension-- suspense. This constant suspense. You're on the street, you're not safe. You're in school, you're not safe. You go home again and some good or bad news will await you at home. 

And at home, even the life during the war-- during the war in Warsaw was hard. Like all of a sudden, we were given electricity from 6 to 8 o'clock at night. All day long, the electricity would be shut off. 

INTERVIEWER: By the way, were there really inspections of the school? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes, I do. I was rather frightened. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe it? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes. It was-- I was in my underwear-making class at that time. And I remember I was making-- we were making slips and aprons. Needless to say, we were all drilled, just in case the buzzer rings, what you are supposed to do. 

You know how to sew on a sewing machine. You knew how to operate that, you go and sit near the sewing machine. Because you never knew how long they will be in your class and, more or less, suspiciously looking at what you're doing. I was at the sewing machine at the time they came. 

I had time to go around and sit down. And my-- like, a little portfolio was ready with some scraps, with some untidiness, if I may say so. That it looked like I was really working at it for a little bit longer. And you didn't want to look around and look at who came into the door, what are they doing. But you certainly wanted to. You certainly wanted to. 

And well, you're children. You don't know what's going to happen. And what a big relief it is when you hear the steps back and forth, back and forth. And all of a sudden, the footsteps leave the room. However, you couldn't go back to your normal classroom. You had to wait till they really left the school where we were. 

For a change, if I may say, my husband, who was-- I didn't know him at the time. But his experiences were a little bit different. Instead of having a big school, he would meet in private homes with teachers. Being over 16, he had to perform some kind of a manual work or work someplace during the day. And after work, they would meet with teachers. And that's how he would get an education. 

On the lighter side, I wonder sometimes-- when I look at some children going to schools around here-- whether just because it was forbidden, that's why we wanted it so badly. I wasn't going to give up. I was going to read the book. I was going to learn the math, because they said I couldn't. Sometimes this is an incentive to do something-- to do something more. 

Many things were oral. It wasn't easy to prepare. You didn't-- you couldn't-- the libraries were open. You could go to a library, but you couldn't take notes. So everything had to be at extra concentration on the school children's part, if they really wanted to do well. There wasn't opportunity to do nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this part of a resistance, really? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes, I would think so. This was part of the struggle, was the daily life or was the-- was the survival, really, in a sense. We were given very little officially. In the stores, you could buy very little food. We were given coupons for just that much of this or this much of that. 

However, the farmers got around that very nicely. They would deliver a certain amount of food that they were supposed to. But somewhere, even the farmers had to hide extra cows or extra pigs or extra lambs or something that they were raising. Because inspections were there constantly. 

How they got around it? Each and every animal had in his ear a little metal clip, because they were counted. The Nazis wanted as much food as possible for their soldiers. They needed it. However, somehow or another-- pigs somehow or another didn't grow. 

They would change the metal clips from the larger one that went into slaughter and put it on a little smaller one that wasn't ready for slaughter yet. And this meat was then sold on a black market, if I may say. In an unofficial market, it would be smuggled into the cities. People did help each other very much. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your contact with the resistance? 

KRYSTYNA S: My contract was rather active. Both my cousins and my one uncle that was living during the war, they were both in some kind of underground movements. Many friends and relatives, distant relatives were also in it. And even though you didn't ask specific questions, you knew that something was going on. Some strange meeting, some strange person coming into the house. 

I was told to go and ring the doorbell and tell something to somebody. I was sometimes asked to bring a letter or a slip of paper to somebody whom I never knew. Children were many times used to bring some news. You have to realize that at the beginning of the war, already in 1939, the Nazis told everybody to bring their radios in. 

And how silly were you to stand in line to bring your own radio to get a receipt? Why didn't we just simply throw it out? There was a hope at that time that once you will be given back your own radio. And radios were absolutely forbidden. If some kind of a search in your home was going on and they found the radio, you did not stay at home anymore after that. 

However, there were some hidden radios. Some news from the West, as we would refer to. Some news that we would like to share with each other. So this was, in a way, our part of the underground. Probably the older people were trained a little bit more militarily, to prepare some kind of a help to some kind of a military action, if it ever came. 

As far as we children, we were supposed to help in some auxiliary movements. To help to prepare some extra food and have the food set aside just in case it was needed for somebody. However, even young teenagers were rather active in some respect in, I would say, some-- or rather, even executions. 

INTERVIEWER: Of? 

KRYSTYNA S: Of the Germans. If a very bloodthirsty official would really over-- would really be too bloodthirsty, many times the Polish underground would just set up a certain-- well, I would say, set up a good moment to execute him. There were retaliation, unfortunately. On the bulletin boards and over the loudspeakers after an execution like this-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember one? 

KRYSTYNA S: Oh, I remember many. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell about one in particular? 

KRYSTYNA S: I remember one I can tell you very, very vividly. Because a friend of mine who was about four years older, she was killed. She was standing watch and was supposed to probably bring some news. She was standing watch in some kind of a doorway on a certain city-- on a certain street where she was. 

And unfortunately, after the Nazi official was killed, some Nazi soldiers appeared from somewhere where they were not supposed to be with machine guns. And they cut down, they killed quite a few of innocent bystanders. And unfortunately, this friend of-- this friend of mine-- which was a terrible shock. Why should a 16, 17-year-old girl all of a sudden die? 

However, as I recall the retaliations, they were printed sort of like newsletters posted on different walls. That just because captain or mayor or somebody so-and-so has been killed in Warsaw, 300 or 200 or 100 people-- sometimes nameless, sometimes with names-- were executed. And the executions were quite open. They were right on the street. 

And if I may jump to 1979, I have been in Warsaw right now in December of '79. To this day, on some streets where the executions were held-- where so many people have died-- to this day, there are fresh flowers in those spots. Somehow or another, everybody knows to walk around. And nobody-- because of the nameless few hundred that have died on this spot and at this time. 

As far as my sort of daily life, when I mentioned to you that when you came home there was some good news or bad news waiting for you, some good news was usually probably a false hope of something. Some bad news was-- 

INTERVIEWER: Like what false hope? 

KRYSTYNA S: Oh. Oh, the Germans lost here and there. So many of the Americans will come very soon. The end of the war is imminent and pretty soon, everything will be just like it used to be. I mean, in that respect. However, the bad news were rather more specific. 

Very good friends of ours, like higher priest-- the Monsignor-- was taken to a concentration camp. And no news from him or about him. A few also priests in our parish near the town where we had our summer home, our family home have vanished into concentration camps. 

But then I thought of them as, well, older. And just because like, if you were of Jewish religion, you were marked, maybe because you were a priest you were marked, also. Then all of a sudden, a friend of ours who lived in the same house, with whom I played volleyball many times, he was taken to a concentration camp. Had something to do with his underground activity, but he was taken. 

And I never, never will forget his mother who came with a telegram in her hand that he has died natural death in Auschwitz or Oswiecim. This was a terrible shock. Terrible. 

INTERVIEWER: What did children talk to each other at that time that camps began to be mentioned? Girls, when they got together? 

KRYSTYNA S: Well, definitely the school situation, learning situation was definitely discussed. But then, more or less, a question. Why? Why is it that things like this are happening? Why things that are so gruesome are allowed to exist? 

Why all of a sudden on that street-- all of a sudden, some cars, big cars, big trucks would come and gather everybody who was there. Why were you stopped on the street for that? The safety, the survival, I think this was-- and then, more or less, false hopes. Or let's say stories about hopes. 

INTERVIEWER: What were these-- 

KRYSTYNA S: Hope. Oh, come on. This cannot go on like this forever. It has to come back to a normal life. OK, we're 12. We're 13. We haven't seen movies in so many years. We haven't seen-- there was no theater, no music. I remember, I had a little hand-cranked record player, which was a hit among our friends. 

But our friendships had to be also right after school only, because there was a curfew. After a certain hour of the day, you were not allowed on the street. As a matter of fact, Warsaw had to be dark. No light could shine through your windows. And if the patrol would come and see light, they would shoot. 

And this is a scary thing, when you all of a sudden sit near some kind of artificial light and try to read or try to discuss something, learn about something. And all of a sudden, there are shots in your own home, in your own house. It is scary. 

It is also very scary when all of a sudden, whispered news from one house to the next. There were very few telephones allowed during the-- during the war. There are patrols on the street and they're searching the homes. Why are they searching? Who is coming? 

And all of a sudden, we discover that my cousin-- who was a few years older, he was probably about 15 or 16 at the time-- he might also be taken. Because the news came that all single men, single and able men are being dragged out of their homes. Which was true, because my girlfriend's uncle was taken. And he died afterwards. He was killed. 

Why? Nobody would know why. Nobody would ask. So we hid our cousin. He was next to a little table, behind a curtain, trying to play blocks with my sister. She being a young girl, we put her and told her to stay and play with those blocks. And no matter who comes in, no matter what happens, she should play with those blocks. In a way hiding him, hiding the size of him. And that's how he, at the time, had survived. 

Not only my own recollections, but my sister's. Whenever during the night, all of a sudden, there were bombings. Because the Anglo-American forces would come and bomb the so-called-- I don't know-- Nazi places where they were staying or something. 

Sometimes they would unfortunately miss and it would go right into the section of Warsaw where just innocent people would live. It was not any kind of anything militarily connected. And every time during the night you heard those bombs falling, my little sister-- who was 3, 4 at the time-- would get dressed. 

And you can-- I wondered many times how almost programmed she was. When she heard those shots, she knew what she was doing. And she was-- she would grab her teddy bear and was running the first thing down to the cellar, where it was safe. 

INTERVIEWER: When and what were the rumors about camps? You mentioned it several times. 

KRYSTYNA S: Camps. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know of them? And what did you know? And what did you imagine about those things? 

KRYSTYNA S: Probably the first rumors-- well, not rumors. The first news we had about the camps was that people were taken not only to the regular prisons. That they were gathered someplace else. And I cannot tell you-- this is probably the first thought, that there were other places where people would be gathered except for the regular established prisons. 

And It became rather open knowledge that there are so-called concentration camps. And they were established right on Polish soil, like Auschwitz or Oswiecim, like Treblinka. People that were close to those places by word of mouth were spreading the news about it. And it was rather obvious that things are coming-- that things are happening there, terrible things are happening there. 

Because hundreds and thousands of people would come. And there was simply no place that all those hundreds could live there. They had to be killed somehow. And it wasn't really somehow. The news about gas chambers during the war for us was a known fact. 

INTERVIEWER: As early as? 

KRYSTYNA S: I would say '41, '42, probably. Oh, '42, definitely. Probably '41, at least to me. 

INTERVIEWER: You remember who mentioned it to you first? 

KRYSTYNA S: It was probably after we had friends of ours came and mentioned about all the-- quite a few-- we used to-- my parents lived for a few years in-- in Tomaszow, which was a textile sort of center of Poland. Where many of the owners of textiles-- owners of the textile industry were either Jewish or German. 

And probably when we had friends come over, they came to visit my mother. And they mentioned about the terrible emptiness in that city. Because all of a sudden, either the Jewish people were hiding or were taken to some prisons. And the Germans naturally did not want to-- quite a few of them left. 

I wonder that maybe they simply didn't want to be too much pro-Nazi, and yet they couldn't deny their being of-- being German. They left. There were some of them went into hiding someplace. Some of them I know that went into Germany and stayed there. 

And probably the discussion about that time, where and how could all those people have gone? What are they doing to them? And that's probably the first time of the news of concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Camps weren't connected with Jews at first? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes, it was Jews, but also was priests. And this was probably the first. After that, it didn't make any kind of a difference what religion you were. Yes, I was very aware of the fact that all the Jewish people had to go into hiding or they were taken into concentration camps. But then, on the other hand-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother had specific people, acquaintances? 

KRYSTYNA S: Yes, I remember. I remember it very vividly. Because my uncle would come once in a while. And he would describe how his best friend's mother was somewhere in the city of Warsaw, behind-- living behind a double wall. I don't know how they would get food. 

And apparently he was-- he promised his friend that he will help his mother. And he was one of the fellows who supplied food for her. Somewhere, it was like an extra room. But to a certain degree, it was-- there were no doors behind it. 

And to me, I remember listening to his story, how he tries to do that. And I asked him where his friend is, and he says, I don't know. He simply disappeared. Apparently, at that time, he was still safe. But his mother being so old, couldn't hide any place. Couldn't do anything. 

And that's why a few friends of his promised to keep her alive. And I know that she was alive until 1944. I don't think she is alive now, that's impossible. As a matter of fact, you asked me about the underground involvement. 

We were told by our uncle-- and by everybody, by a few other relatives of ours-- that officially, in our apartment, lives also an Uncle So-and-so by that and that name. And he was described to us as a very-- well, person that is very much alive. Apparently, his passport was used for somebody. For whom, I shall never know. 

But just in case somebody would come to ask about this uncle, we knew, all of us-- younger generation and my mother and my aunts, too-- what the color of his hair is, what the color of his eyes is, or something to make him very, very real. But his passport, his identification cards or whatever were used for somebody somewhere. 

INTERVIEWER: And he was dead? 

KRYSTYNA S: What, this uncle? This was a fictitious character. As a matter of fact, I remember his first name to this day. It was rather unusual, Uncle [? Yranaus. ?] It was absolutely an unusual name. But we would many times, like at night, well, where is Uncle [? Yranaus ?] tonight? Why didn't he come home? 

So we all would, more or less, make up a story. Oh, he's there or he is there. But probably things like this were happening in other families in Warsaw, where fictitious characters would appear and their papers were used for somebody who was in hiding. 

As matter of fact, going back into-- I don't exactly know what year it was. But my aunt had a very good friend. She was very good friends with jewelers that had on the main street of Warsaw, they had a jewelry store. And one day, my aunt came home very, very shook up. 

Because this friend knew what was happening to people of Jewish religion. That they were told to move, to close their businesses. This was rather early in the year during the war. And she mentioned that probably something like what Hitler has done in Berlin and in Germany will be happening also here. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the something? 

KRYSTYNA S: What was the something? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

KRYSTYNA S: That people were told to move, told to close their businesses. And so, she asked my aunt about a favor. Please take this grandfather's clock into your house. Well, needless to say, my aunt didn't want to be responsible. Today a bomb will fall or tomorrow on this or that house. And the house will burn and we won't have nothing to return. 

So she begged and asked my aunt to take it. And after consultation with all of us in the house, this grandfather's clock-- it was a hanging clock-- was placed in our dining room. And many times during the war, we were wondering, why was it so important to this couple that none of the other belongings would be safe but this grandfather's clock? 

Many times us children, my cousins and I, we would be almost asking our aunts, oh, let us open it up. Let's see what's inside. But we didn't do it. And this grandfather's clock was like a constant reminder of something that was something very important to a family. We shall respect it. We shall hold it as long as we can for them. 

Maybe a family tree was there. Maybe even gold or diamonds. I don't-- we don't know. But his grandfather's clock was like a constant reminder of something. And probably at the time that we were being told to leave our house ourselves, we were wondering, should we really grab the grandfather's clock under our arm and take it with us? 

But that's later on. First of all, I want to go back to the jeweler. Needless to say, one day my aunt went there to the jewelry store and found a big sign, closed. And after contacting the family, she was told that they had to-- they were told to go to the Warsaw ghetto. After that, we never heard from them. 

I still see the grandfather's clock hanging there. It didn't-- with the modern furniture in our dining room, it really didn't fit as far as the decor. But it was like a constant reminder, daily reminder that somebody's-- something precious is in there, in that clock. 

And as a matter of fact, as I was right now in Warsaw, we were still talking about the grandfather's clock. And my cousin said, we should have opened it. At least maybe there was some use, something. Who knows what it is. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened to the clock? 

KRYSTYNA S: What happened to the clock? The clock went into flames together with the house in 1944. This was towards the end of the war. 

INTERVIEWER: When? 

KRYSTYNA S: When? More or less, I was told with quite a few of our neighbors to leave the house. And this was towards the end of the war, when the Russians were fighting the Germans and going east to the Eastern Front. All of a sudden, they were very close to Warsaw. 

And they mentioned that they will-- through some underground sources, I suppose-- that they will help us to push the Germans out of Warsaw, out of Poland. We should not fight them. They will help us to push the Nazis out. And they will leave Poland as a free country. 

Well, point being more or less having two enemies on both sides, on eastern and western front, had to do. There was no Polish army at the time, so the Russians were coming. But they stopped a few miles from Warsaw. And at that point, whatever did historians say-- whether it was good or bad-- probably the people simply couldn't take it anymore. 

And the Polish underground army went into open and started fighting the German itself, hoping for help from the Russians. Hoping for help from the Western-- from their Western allies. And that's what I am referring to as Warsaw Uprising that started the 1st of August, 1944. 

1944, immediately there were shots all over the city of Warsaw. And unfortunately, already on the 12th day of August, the German soldiers came to the section of the city where I lived in and to our house and told everybody to leave. And as we left the house, they threw grenades into the entrances of the house. And the house was burning. 

My house probably was an exception of one or two others that I have seen between my house and the railroad station still in one piece. Everything was absolute ruin. And between our house and the railroad station, the sites were absolutely gruesome. 

There were people dead. And the most gruesome site was a mattress burning with an old lady on it. As they told us to leave and guided us towards the railroad station, they were absolutely unpleasant. 

They were pushing and pulling. And whoever couldn't walk fast enough or couldn't walk at all was just thrown in the side of the street or somewhere dragged into an alley or thrown or beaten up. It was terrible, absolutely terrible. We walked many miles to the-- 

INTERVIEWER: And that was after days of fighting in the streets? Or what? 

KRYSTYNA S: This was on a-- this was-- this was after-- I was told to leave the house after 12 days of the Warsaw Uprising. Where I was on that street, we had to feed-- more or less, we took quite a few people in that left the streetcars in front of the house. Because they couldn't-- the street cars were simply stopped. 

And the people took shelter in our homes. So we were trying to feed them and shelter them and they lived in-- in the cellars or wherever. This was 12 days of fighting in-- in that section. The Warsaw Uprising has gone on much longer, but I haven't been there. I've been there only the first 12 days. 

The sites of the Warsaw Uprising, the section of city through which we were told to walk to a railroad station, looked just as terrible and smelt just as terrible as the section of Warsaw when the ghetto uprising was. I'm going back right now in my thoughts to 1943. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember of the way it was formed? How did you know that it was a ghetto? 

Well Well, don't ask me for dates when they started. But they were-- they were relocations in the city of Warsaw. In certain streets, people who have been of Polish descent have to-- or were not Jewish-- had to move out. And people that were Jewish were told to move in. And there was an actual high wall built around it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you see it? 

KRYSTYNA S: I saw it just once. You have to remember that during the war, if it wasn't necessary, you just simply didn't roam the streets. I saw it once when they were building it. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? 

KRYSTYNA S: I saw people. I saw German uniformed soldiers standing guard, more or less and shouting. And people who were actually building a wall. I don't recall who it was. Because many times on the streets of Warsaw, you could see groups of Jewish people with the yellow band, with the Star of David on it. 

They would be brought into-- in little trucks or something to perform some duties, usually for the German soldiers. Like, one of their high schools was taken over by German soldiers. And they used to live there and have, I don't know, an army barracks there. 

I remember the groups of even youngsters, even young fellows would be brought there to clean, to whatever. To do something. However, the wall, I don't really remember who it was. Unless by that time, they even ran out of the little signs of David, the little crosses of David for them to identify them, who they were. But they were building. 

I remember it once, as I said. I went as close as to see it. Because I couldn't believe it, that anything like this is happening. An actual wall? Actually separation of people? But it was more than vivid in my mind. 

And after that, needless to say, my uncle lived not too far from the ghetto. And he would bring news. And all the news traveled. Not in the newspapers. The newspapers were always full of, well, official news that you didn't really pay too much attention to. 

But the news that people have told you, what is happening. That the amount-- that the number of people who are supposed to live in this section of town is simply impossible. It has to be more than one or two families per room. It's not per apartment. It's-- the conditions are terrible. You could see the gates would be open. I mean, I was told. I did not see it myself. 

