CREW: You should have gone right off the pot-- off the deck to begin with. It makes this complicated. 

CREW: OK, that's 15. 

CREW: OK, fine. 

INTERVIEWER: Rolling? 

CREW: Yes. Tape rolling-- 

CREW: Speed-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Mrs. Shaver, after much delay, please give your name and where you were born and how this interest in what happened in Europe in the 1930s and '40s became something so involved with you 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I'll try to do it. Ah-- my name, of course, Emma Lazaroff Schaver. Born in Ukraine, Russia. Emigrated to the United States with my parents, in my infancy. Lived in a few cities but finally settled in Detroit, Michigan, where I've lived the greater part of my life. And, for the last 10 years, I live half the year in Jerusalem, Israel. 

Now, I believe you wanted to know how I became aware of what was happening in Germany at the time. Well, much can be explained by the home that I came from. It was always a-- it was a Zionist home. It was a Jewish home. The Jewish newspaper was a daily event, for all of us. In fact, I read Yiddish before I read English. 

And so we-- when the years, when the Second World War broke out, we were very much aware of what was happening in Europe, not fully aware until certain people that came to the United States-- I remember a Dr. [? Schuskas ?] who came to the United States. We had a-- there was a meeting, rather closed meeting. Rabbi Stephen Wise was there. 

And that was the first time we had seen the, um, the, um, Magen David, with "Jude," in the middle, that he brought us, to show us that that was worn by Jews in the ghettos. And it was the first time that it sort of-- the-- it seeped through what the intentions, Hitler's intentions, were. 

INTERVIEWER: Not to dwell on this, but really to get to your personal life. You were trained as a singer. I wanted you to talk about your involvement with music and how you developed an interest in Jewish music. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I sang as early as I know and wanted to study and did study the best that I could get, at that time. You must remember, this was the days before Juilliard Schools and Curtis Institutes and things of that sort. And so I studied voice with some-- with local teachers. 

But it was a policy-- not that I felt-- it was a policy, deep-felt, that I, in all the concerts that I've given, whether they were for Jewish audiences or non-Jewish audience, I had to include either a Jewish or a Hebrew song. Because I felt that that was what I should do. If I don't, if I wouldn't do it, who would? 

And so, that is my involvement with the, with the Jewish, with our Jewish, um, um, culture, with our legacy. And perhaps one of the first songs that I ever sang, before I studied, what will be a song like "Kol Nidre." And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you sing in concerts? Were you a concert singer? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yes, I-- I sang first in-- in little auditoriums in Detroit. And then, from Detroit, I also was engaged to sing with a-- there was a traveling opera company, the San Carlo Opera Company. And I sang with them, various roles, like Faust and, uh, and Mimi and La Boheme and, uh, and, um, and the opera Carmen, Micaela. 

And, even before that, but the first, the first civic opera company in Detroit, I was about 16 or 17 years old, and they-- I was chosen from a group, anyway, to do the leading part in Cavalleria Rusticana, which was the inaugural, the inaugural opera of the Detroit Civic Opera Company. And, of course, it was quite a big fanfare. The governor, the, um, the mayor, all the city council people, et cetera, et cetera. And I sang-- that was really my first, uh, my first-- sort of went backwards-- my first appearance. 

And then I continued to sing in opera, with the the Mexico City Opera, with the St. Louis Opera Company. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have a family? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I was married, but I had no children. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: And, uh, and then, and then, of course, with the opera singing, I gave concerts. And then my concerts really could express what I wanted to do, that would be sort of half classic, what the regular repertoire that a, uh, that a singer of my, of my education, plus Jewish and Hebrew songs. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, after the war, you were somehow inspired to go to Europe. Why? How? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, following all what-- all that was happening in, in, in Germany, when we became more and more aware, really, what the-- what was-- what was happening there. And it was a desire of mine to-- I felt that, to bring-- I knew I couldn't go there as-- delegated by the United States, as a Jewish singers for Jews. 

And when the, um-- after the war, I, uh, spoke with the World Jewish Congress about the idea of sending a cultural delegation to, to the Jewish people, to the survivors, the displaced persons, in their camps, and to bring them the, uh-- our-- our culture. Because most of these people have been brought up in the woods. They were, uh-- they had no education. And they were told, day in, day out, you are the scum of the earth, you're, like, you know, uh, something to be trod upon. 

And they did not know that we had something to offer. And, um, and I felt that, when they received their first help of shelter, food, the idea that they don't have to flee, a little bit of security, that food for the soul was equally-- equally important. And so the World Jewish Congress, they decided that with-- a few people that I knew and spoke with, that it would be a good idea. And that's how the first cultural delegation was formed, to be sent to the displaced persons in Germany. 

And that was consisted of the greatest poet of our-- of our time living then, H. Leivick, the Jewish poet, and Professor Ephros who was a Hebrew writer and poet. And I represented the, uh, the part-- the, uh, musical aspect, you know, of singing Jewish and Hebrew songs. 

INTERVIEWER: You went in a uniform. Can you explain that, and-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yes, because you could not-- there was no way of getting into the-- to any of the zones that were occupied by the Allied armies. And there was-- of course, a request was-- or inquiry-- was made to Judge Rivkin, who was, at that time, Eisenhower's-- he was his advisor on Jewish affairs-- whether such a thing-- such a commission would be advisable. And, of course, the answer was a positive one. That doesn't mean it was very simple, because you had to pass all the, all the occupied countries at the time. They had. 

And finally, you see, the idea was-- the germ of the idea was in December of 1945. But there was so much red tape and approval of all the groups. And we did not reach Germany until March of 1946. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, there's very little documentation about what happened to people after liberation. But you saw what happened to people after liberation. Were they indeed liberated? Or was it really just a liberation on paper? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, they were-- they were put into what was then called-- before the, you know, when they had the camps, like Dachau or Aschau or, uh, or um-- you mentioned it. 

INTERVIEWER: Auschwitz? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Auschwitz. And Bergen-Belsen. Those were camps. Those were, you know, extermination camps. After that close to these camps, the Jews sort of would-- with the help of UNRRA-- would take over some barrack. And, uh, and they would have their, their, their-- the camp there, or the displaced-person camp. 

Now, again, they were behind, you know, they were behind walls, behind gates. And it wasn't exactly a feeling of-- it was better than it was. Of course, they were under, under American supervision, army supervision, or UNRRA supervision. But they still were not free. And, you know, as-- as months would go by, the German that was there, the police who would-- who would-- who would be in charge of certain areas, was armed, had an automobile to-- to go around. And the Jew, again, was-- was left unprotected, in these camps. 

So, naturally, as-- as months would go by, they became very restless. Because their first, their first desire was to leave immediately this soil, you know, that had brought all this, this agony and, and suffering to the people, to leave it! To go-- to go to, to-- at that time, and these are mostly people really wanted to go to Israel. But the longer they stayed there, then relatives would come in from Australia, from America, Canada, you know, and say, well, come to us, and-- And that's how they were-uh But, even then, to, to, to get out of the zone, there was a lot of red tape to go through, to have the proper papers and proper places to go. 

So, to answer your question directly, there was still a, um, a feeling of growing, growing resentment of being behind, behind walls and such 

INTERVIEWER: When you landed in Germany, when you came, you went by ship? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: No, we went by plane. We were supposed to go by ship, but the accommodations were so impossible, we went on what was called in those days the Liberty Ships, where the boys that would come back, and they would have to sleep in hammocks, you know. But that was impossible. 

So it was changed immediately. And we went by plane from New York to London. And in London we had to see the UNRRA people again, to get further papers to allow us to go into Germany. And we flew, I mean, after many things-- we flew from London to, to Frankfurt, directly. 

INTERVIEWER: How long was the plane trip from New York to London and from London to Frankfurt? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, from New York to London, in those days, I can't remember exactly. You know, that, I think, is a technical thing. It was in 1946. I don't know what-- I don't remember exactly how long. But it-- it-- it took about well, it took about 15 hours, maybe, something of that. We had to stop, you know. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were you thinking, on the way there? What did you expect to find? What was-- what was your motivation? What were you feeling? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, what I was thinking then was, actually I was, I was, like, flying, in-- [LAUGH] I was flying in seventh heaven. It's what I thought, before. You know, to be able-- my, my dream was, how can I get across? How can I go to Germany? What can I do, in, in some way, to, to, to-- not-- to relieve the tension? 

And I have a feeling that, you know, music is-- ay-- uh-- uh-- music, poetry, such things are very important. And all I could do was sing. And how could I get to it? And that was-- 

It was the feelings before, hoping that-- that somehow I could be of some-- some-- not only service; it's more than service. To be of some healing, or some giving to the-- to, to to my, my people. And, uh, and the only thing I could give was song. I had no other-- you know, other, other gifts. So, uh-- 

And when it was finally decided that I was chosen to be [INAUDIBLE], as I say, the World Jewish Congress did that, then my-- I couldn't be any-- I was floating in the air. It was something great. 

INTERVIEWER: When you first arrived in Germany, where did you go? What did you see? Your first impressions. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, after-- of course, it took-- it took a few hours, only from-- not-- I mean, I don't mean two hours, maybe four or five hours, to fly from London to, uh, to, uh, to Frankfurt. In the meantime, we were flying over the so-called Siegfried Line. We could see all the-- the country that was-- that I had read so much about, you know, in the papers. And the myth that that that Siegfried Line was impenetrable, you know? But-- 

And, of course, the countryside of Germany, I need not tell you, is absolutely one the most beautiful countries in the world. And, uh, and then, when we finally landed in Frankfurt, and that was actually our first contact of, of, of seeing the havoc. Because we, we saw the, uh, the devastation that was there, all the buildings that were demolished. 

You saw, you saw, you know, a wall of a building, the facade of a-- or the outline of a-- that was, at one time, a window. A-- you could see a, uh, fixtures, you know? Like, even such thing as a, as a bathtub or, or a sink, or something hanging on a sort of one string. And, uh, and that was our, that our first physical contact, you know, with seeing the, the, the aftermath of the war. 

We did not see-- we, we saw people, but not-- we didn't know who was Jewish and who was, you know, who the Germans or other people. But we, from, from Frankfurt, we were sent to Munich, which was suppo-- which was to become our headquarters. And all this was done through UNRRA, you see. 

And when we came, when we arrived in Munich, which was also, like, 2 o'clock in the morning, well, there was no one in the bombed-out station at Munich. Well, we, in the dark, we found the-- the Red Cross, one of these, um, places where they serve coffee. 

INTERVIEWER: Canteen? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: A canteen, where they saw-- served coffee and donuts to, to the soldiers. 

And, of course, we had to be in uniform. In the Uni-- in American uniform. I had a regular uniform of a, uh-- an officer's uniform. And that was our, that was our passport, so to speak. Because that gave us entree to any place, anywheres we wanted to go. 

INTERVIEWER: Your first encounter with those people who had survived this horror, what was it like? Where were you? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, when we finally settled in, in, the UNRRA, in the UNRRA barracks, you know, that they had right outside-- it was called Pasing. It's a little town, right outside of Munich. --we tried to make contact, which-- things were very chaotic, at the time. Even the people that sent for us, the World Jewish Congress, were not at the station to meet us. 

So, it, it's-- it's hard to believe, but that's how it was. Because the one that was responsible was away taking children, I think the first legal boat that left from Germany at that time, legally, with the-- with children. And she was on that. And she was our-- she was supposed to be our representative there. So we had to-- and, of course, telephone lines were not, you know-- so, did not work so perfectly at the time. 

But speaking, seeing somebody in this, in this canteen, a doctor who was connected-- he was with the UNRRA and connected also with, uh, with one of the agencies-- he directed us to, to, to the UNRRA, to the UNRRA camp or, uh-- and we-- we checked in there. And then we went out to look for-- for our people. It was really very un-- it was-- at the beginning, it was all unorganized, all-- you just had to use initiative and and just go and do it. And that's what we did. 

I mean, I found where the, the, chairman to say of the displaced persons' committee was located. I tried to call him where he was. He wasn't there. I was told he was somewheres else. I called them there. And we-- 

I mean, we didn't come to, to tour Germany, to see the sights. We were all eager to do what we-- what we were-- what we came there, you know, to, to, to, to meet with the people, to give them the, what we, what we, what we possessed. And we found out that they were in a little town-- 

It happened to be just between Purim and Pesach, you see? So most of the Jews were either-- somewhere let's say, on a little holiday. This is an amazing-- I don't want to step away from this, but it's an important fact to know, how pliable Jews are. It wasn't a year after liberation, and they were already vital, living, creating. 

You, you felt that the desire to, to, to, to become, to become a person again, to, to, uh, to live a normal life, even though one has lost a wife and children. The other one probably lost a husband and children. But they were already-- the, the, the spark, that's, I think, is definitely Jewish. I don't know of any other people that ha-- that possesses that spark. To, to, to go on living. And-- 

And you saw, in this short period, they were marrying again. Children were being born again. You would think, you know, after going through such-- such a, an experience, if you can call-- "experience" is too-- is too mild a word. 

And so, if there was an opportunity, like Purim and Pesach, to leave their camp and go to Bad-- to go to, uh, where was it that-- in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, a very famous ski resort that was-- the world knows of it. They were there for, for, for, for Pesach. And there I found the president, Dr. Ginsburg the president of the, of the, um, of the liberated Jews of, uh, in the United-- in the American zone. And, uh, 

And immediately, when-- they-- they knew we were coming, but they didn't know exactly when, because, you know, we-- we lingered in in London a little too long. We had-- we had to get final papers there. It's too long a story to tell the entire, you know, sequence of things. 

CREW: Speed-- rolling. Tape is rolling. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I meant to tell you how did we get to Garmisch-Partenkirchen. 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 

CREW: OK. Is the audio down on the-- 

CREW: All right, audio's down. 

CREW: OK. 

CREW: All right. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I meant to tell you how did we finally get to Partenkirchen, where we learned that Dr. Ginsburg was there and a few of the members of the, of the Committee of Liberated Jews. Well, we, we fort of scrounged around and found a jeep, an open jeep, from some-- let's say, from another agency, like the Joint had an agency there, too. The, uh, the, J-- the Palestine agency for-- the Jewish Agency for Palestine were there already. They had-- they were the, the first organizations that came into the area. 

So we scrounged around, and we got a jeep from one of them. I don't remember which one gave it to us. And we went from Munich to Garmisch-Partenkirchen. And there, sure enough, we, we found Dr. Ginsburg and some more members of this-- of the group. And the rabbi who was of that, in that area, was there. 

And, you know, Garmisch is a small little town, and the news spread very quickly-- the Americans, some-- the Americans. Well, some, uh-- like Dr. Ginsburg he knew that the-- a cultural committee was coming. Others just said, some Americans have come. 

And so we met, in-- in the-- I-- I believe it was in the rabbi's house. And it was decided immediately, that night, to have, to have a, a, a meeting with-- with all the Jews that were in Garmisch-Part-- Garmisch-Partenkirchen. And there was no preparation on-- we were not prepared for it, but, and in my case, particularly, there had to be at least a piano somewhere. Someone should-- 

But that didn't stop us either, and that didn't stop the Jews. And that evening, when we came into this hall, it was just packed! People were, you know, actually-- [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: How did they get word that you were coming? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: It's-- by word of mouth. It's a small-- [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Were there posters? Were there announcements? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, we had posters, but we had no opportunity of putting out any of these posters. We came with these things, but we found with many-- with many of the things that we thought should-- would be that day it would be done here just didn't work there. 

INTERVIEWER: Is that one of the posters? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: This is one of the posters, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: That was to announce that [INAUDIBLE] that was [INAUDIBLE] announce, the-- it's written, of course, in Yiddish, because most people spoke only-- that the cultural delegation of the Jewish World Congress is coming to you in a-- in a-- an important cultural event. And then that's our pictures, our names underneath the pictures. 

And then it says, the well-known author and the well-known singer are special delegates from the World Jewish Congress in New York to the sheerit hapleitah which it means the displaced persons-- for, for appearances of cultural-- of cultural-- appearances of cultural events, in all-- in all gathering places in Germany and in-- and in Austria. And then it says, again, come to this evening for Jewish and Hebrew-- to listen to the Jewish and Hebrew word in, in, like, in poetry and in song. 

INTERVIEWER: But you're saying you had no opportunity to-- to-- to put those posters up. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: No, not at all! It was still in our bags, in the UNRRA place. But they-- the word spread from just word of mouth. You know, the Jews were not occupied, at that time, they were being in camps. So they had no work. They were not occup-- occupied in an official capacity working for everybody. So they were free! Is there anything you want to-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, so they just came. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: So they just came to this evening! It was just an announcement, made by word of mouth, that this evening there will be a gathering with a Jewish-- with the Jewish, people, or the Jewish poet, Leivick, Afros, and Schaver will be there in this-and-this hall, at this-and-this time. And so we came. 

I can tell you, this is-- [LAUGH] the, the, the depth of feeling we all, in our own minds, and I know in my mind, what will be my reaction when I actually will see or face a displaced person who has gone through this hell, you know, and has come out alive? And I think each one of us felt the same thing, in his-- in his way. I felt it in my way. Could I-- could I face up to them? What-- what can I do? 

And not even being prepared! I had no accompanist or anything. In my mind, I thought, well, I'll give concerts, as I have been accustomed to give concerts. 

So, fortunately, there was a little piano. You know, a little upright piano. And, fortunately, there are-- there are quite a few numbers that I can sing, Jewish and Hebrew things, and accompany myself. You see. 

And so, Leivick spoke. And I must say, and it is truth-- that is-- that is the fact. Of all the three, of the three of us, Leivick was the best known, because Leivick was a writer of Jewish poetry and plays. He wrote, for instance, The Golem, which was very well-- was played by Habima other-- all the great Jewish companies. And he was the best known of the three of us. 

Ephros] was a Hebrew poet. Where did they have an opportunity to know anything about Hebrew poetry? And I, Emma Schaver, well, a singer! They had no-- there was [LAUGH]-- there was no advance publicity, in, in the sense of, you know, when you come to-- to give evenings of that sort. 

So I was Emma Schaver. And they-- they didn't even pronounce my name correctly. I was called everything [LAUGH]. They mispronounced my name all the time, but it really didn't matter to me. Because I didn't come to-- to Germany-- the purpose was not to make a career. I came to do this that I wanted to do. 

And so, we had our first evening. And it was very, very, very-- it was one of those terrible, you know, emotional things-- on both sides, you know. For us, first contact with-- with actual-- and for me, of course, I sang a few things that I thought which made-- made a very deep impression. 

I'm not speaking of myself as a singer. I want-- at no time will I talk to you-- say anything to you about-- as a singer-- how well I sang, or whether I'm a great singer or not. But what I gave from here went directly to there. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe the scene, when you walked into this enclosure with the little stand-up piano and the faces of those [INAUDIBLE] probably-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, it was-- it was the most-- you know, I mean, it was the, it was the moment-- it was like-- to say "the" moment of, of realization, that we are actually facing people who have gone through the Holocaust, things that we have read about, things we knew. And we knew what had happened. You know, at-- by that time, you know, it was known, to those that wanted to know, what happened there. And it was a very, very-- it was almost like choking, you know? [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: What did they look like? Can you describe-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yeah. Hard to-- I mean to say, [INAUDIBLE] if I will describe what they look like, I will describe a composite what they looked like. Because I've seen them in-- in an evening, the first evening, you know, and I've seen them under other circumstances, too. 

But what they looked like is were people that came, sort of huddled, and sat close together. A bit I would say [INAUDIBLE] they didn't come with this air of going to a evening of culture or they're going to enjoy something. It was going more [INAUDIBLE] with, probably with their own, you know, with their own baggage of what they carried along with them. 

And just the fact that-- that three Jews from America came to them, not only to, say, for giving them shelter or clothes or food, but to give them something that was for the soul. And I can't say that they were, you know, very-- the applause was thundering at the beginning. You know, they sort of sat back and wanted to hear. 

Not that they were testing us. They were testing-- it-- it was a new experience for them. Although, again I may-- I'll go back. The Jews, again, a specific Jewish straight-- in the ghettos, where-ev- even after-- immediately after, they were already organized. In the ghettos, they had concerts. In the ghettos, they had drama. In the ghettos, they had schools. So, well, that's-- that's part of our Jewish tradition. And, uh, so-- 

INTERVIEWER: Describe the enclosure. What were you in? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: What clothes I-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, no, not-- what kind of building were you in? What kind of-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: It was a small-- that first building would be like a little hall, like, they would call a meeting place, where-- you wee, Garmisch was not-- was not destroyed that much. You know, the-- the Americans had their-- they knew where-- what places they wanted-- and even in one city like Frankfurt, which I-- I told you, when I saw, that I first saw. 

But yet there was an enclave, where the-- maybe someone, I can't remember the name-- where they, where they built various technical things. I knew the name. I-- it just escapes me, for the moment. That enclave wasn't even touched-- wasn't touched! Not a bomb fell on it. Because the Americans wanted to say-- I know if I would tell you the name you would know it. You would recognize it, maybe. 

They wanted to save that for headquarters, for themselves, when they come into the place. So, in the periphery, all around it, it was all demolished. Garmisch was no-- was just a ski resort. There was no reason to-- to-- to destroy it. 

So they had a little-- like a little hall, maybe, where some Singverein you know, like, choral group. You know, the Germans always love the, you know, choral music. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were the people there, rather than in a camp? Why were they in this place? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, I told you. Partly, you know, partly some came there because it was Purim-Pesach-- vacation time. So they came there. 

Some Jews were not all-- Jews were very, very creative, in the sense of, of, of finding-- finding what is-- where it is good for them to be, what is good for them to be. So a few Jews got together and decided [INAUDIBLE] 

You know, they would also take places, homes, blocks of places, and live there and make a little commune, you know. And that's-- that's why in Garmisch [INAUDIBLE]. 

INTERVIEWER: After the concert, after the program-- you speak Yiddish, of course-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --did you interact, did you converse with any-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Of course. Of course. They, they, they would come up, they came up to us, and, uh, and-- you see, I couldn't sing too much, because I-- my-- I had to play for myself. So there was just two-- I think it was three songs that I could sing that, you know, that I would feel that I could do the best. Because I, I don't take these things lightly. It may be the poorest piano, but I felt that was maybe the greatest Steinway that I've-- that I've ever played upon-- played on. 

And-- and the audience, to me I have a philosophy about audiences. I never think of an audience as individual people. I don't-they think, well, are they-- do they understand what I'm going to do? It may be a c-- a whole audience that that are-- are not at all on, on the-- the standard, let's say, of knowing what is right or what is wrong. 

But I, my feeling is that audience has to be respected. An audience will feel whether you are sincere, whether you are honest, whether you are not singing down to them or playing down to them, talking down to them. But, on the contrary, that you're giving them the best that you have within you. 

That, they will sense, you see. And that has been my approach all the time, you see. So it-had-was-the-the the fact that it was a little hall and a poor piano made little difference to me. I mean, it would be nicer, but I gave the best that I had. 

And, of course, they came back. They thanked me. They thought it was wonderful. They talked to Leivick [INAUDIBLE] very much. 

And then I spent a day there, and we-- we visited with the rabbi. It was Pesach, we could-- you know, we had our Passover meals. And then, of course, we had to think, we didn't come there to, to, to enjoy Garmisch-Partenkirchen-- which was a very beautiful place. But we came there to do something. 

So, since the chairman was there, we started to plan immediately, where do we go next? Arrange this. Arrange the program. 

And so we met again in Munich. And we, we planned our programs to go to the various camps that we were-- that, that we could visit. And it was-- it was difficult, because-- because transportation was not, you know, available to us. So all these things had to be created. 

And-- and we went [INAUDIBLE] I think our very first concert we went to was to Landsberg, a camp. And Landsberg is not far from the Landsberg Prison that-- where Hitler wrote his Mein Kampf, there. And that was a-- that was in-- in the displaced persons' camp. 

And I made it a rule, for myself, wherever it was possible-- because if you lived in-- if they lived in barracks, and they had little, thin curtains between one little, one cot and another, well, I couldn't stay there very well, you know, because that would be-- that would be quite impossible, to say But if there were-- there were places in the camp-- not in the UNRRA's quarters, because UNRRA or other would confiscate the nicest places and make it their headquarters. But if there was any place, even if I had to sleep, let's say, in somebody's living room, but there will be a little bit of a sort of a privacy, in the sense that I always stayed in the camp with the camp. 

And so, in Landsberg, we, we had some very interesting, very interesting meetings. And we had the first, our first glimpse of how Jews organized themselves, so short-- you know, so short a time after after their liberation, which was, you know, it was in May, and they-- they had already groups, you know, Zionist groups that went from the extreme, extreme right to the extreme [LAUGH] left. They were already organized. 

They had children's school. Children that came back, you know, orphaned. They had these children's schools. They had-- They had even an art school, already. I visited it, and I have some even mementos and letters from them [INAUDIBLE]. 

They had-- they had a drama-- a drama group. It was a, it was a, it was a vibrant, a living place, you know? People were-- were-- were doing things! 

And, apropos to this, I also asked to visit, let's say, other displaced-persons' camps, not Jewish. For instance, Polish. A Polish-- where the Poles you know there there were Poles that were also displaced persons. There were Hungarians. There were many. 

And I don't think I'm saying this because I am so Jewish and I see, you know, maybe that I see Jewish things through different-- you know, different eyes, but I think I'm quite sure what I saw. When I visited a Polish displaced-persons' camp, and you came into their, into their, let's say, main rooms, where people-- it was dark. It was-- you saw people walking around as-- as though they were like spectres, you know, ghosts. 

They did not-- they were-- they were really displaced. They-- they could not-- they could not do anything, because they were not on their soil. Jews have the-- that ability of ma-- of living, creating, wherever they are. 

And the difference of a Jewish displaced-person camp and any other one was [INAUDIBLE], it was-- it was day to night. Impossible 

INTERVIEWER: You went to 50 camps. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Some of them we've never heard of. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Such as-- and what were they like? And who were the people in those camps? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, you see, I have a list here, because otherwise I couldn't remember them all. But when I look at my list, here, and I see I said Garmisch-Partenkirchen, 700 people arrived that night, without a single word said by anyone. In Landsberg, the second camp that I told you, there were 4,000 people, standing in a barrack that was absolutely-- you know, probably they used it for stables or what, I don't know. 

There were no seats. People just stood and waited and-- and, uh, Leivick spoke, in Yiddish. Afros spoke in Hebrew. And I sang Jewish and Hebrew songs. 

And these people stood there and-- and listened to us. In fact, well, you will be the best judge of this. An incident. The first song that I heard that was-- that came out of the, uh, of the, um, out of this-- out of the Holocaust-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you hear it? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, the first song that I heard somehow arrived with somebody. There-- there were a few people-- like this Dr. Ginsburg that I spoke came to America to speak for UJA, you know, to some-- for a fundraising. And also there was, from Bergen-Belson, Rosensaft-- his name was. 

I happened to meet them. I was already-- our-- the committee was already formed. And I was sitting in New York, waiting to get our last papers to go, and it wasn't so easy. It's a long-- it's a story in itself. 

But anyway, to get our last permit to leave for to-- to go to abroad. So I was staying at the Commodore Hotel, at the time. And I walk into the elevator. And there I see Rosensaft. I-- I knew him by face. And, again, it was almost like seeing-- I don't know even how to put it in words, you know. Actually standing next to a person who had-- who had gone through-- him- he-- he had gone through that and survived that, that, that period. 

So-- so, as I say, some of these songs-- one, particular, the Partisan song, you know, that says zog nit keyn mol, az du geyst dem letstn veg, "Don't-- don't ever say that you are walking on your last road," you know. [INAUDIBLE] Somewheres, I have a translation of it, I think, to tell you what it is. You see, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you first hear it? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I didn't hear it, but I got the music. I got the-- just the vocal line, you know, the, the singing line, that was the song, and all the words. 

INTERVIEWER: From? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Of the song! 

INTERVIEWER: From whom? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: From one of-- from one of these people, like Rosensaft or, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: This is before you went, you mean? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: That was before I went. So I say that was the only song that was created in the ghetto that I saw in America, before I left for Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: But when you got there-- 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: So, when I got that song and I read the words-- which were just enough to tear your heart out-- I went to Lazar Weiner. As you know, he's a friend of mine. And I asked him. I said, Lazar, please make a piano setting for this song, you know, for me, too. Which he did. 

So, I had that song. And the first time I sang it was in this camp in Landsberg. It was-- it was really our first official appearance. It was announced, with our posters but word of mouth. The posters really didn't mean anything. 

It was announced that the-- the cultural committee will be coming at this and this day. Day was April the 25th. Will be coming to-- to Landsberg. And I sang my songs. And they were received very well. And then they wanted more. And I thought, well, this is a good opportunity. 

I said something like-- and, of course, in Yiddish-- I said something, well, you've been-- you've listened to some of the songs that maybe you've heard from your parents that we sang-- that you sang in better days. And now I-- I would like to sing for you a song that is your song, that you have given to us, to the rest [INAUDIBLE]. 

And I started to sing this, this song that is called, you know, uh-- "Zog Nit Keyn Mol." [INAUDIBLE] it's called the Partisan Song, you know. 

Here we have "Never say that you have reached your journey's end. That laden clouds over heavens blue above extend. Upon us yet will dawn the day we hold so dear. Our tramping feet will proclaim that we are here." "Mir zaynen do!" 

And, of course, the other words, too, from this land and grew from that. And I sang it, I think, with blood in my heart-- blood and tears I'm not exaggerating, believe me. I think every tone was-- was a cry. You know? 

And, after that, you know, the evening was over. A few people came backstage to say something to-- to-- to Leivick, to say something to Ephros And some-- the same people would say something to me. They said something, well, how much-- [INAUDIBLE] you know, not-- they-- you know, there wasn't sort of feeling of laughter or joy. But, you know, with very serious face. 

But one especially actually came up to me-- very, very expressionless face, I can almost say. And said to me, it was very nice. It was a very nice concert. But I will make-- 

I-- I could tell it to you in Yiddish better, but I'll do the best I can in-- in English. He says, but I would advise you not to sing the Partisan Song. 

INTERVIEWER: Say that to me in Yiddish how he said it to you. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: He says to me "ich vill ach beten az den partisanenlied sollt ihr nit zingen" And that, if he would gone and taken a knife and hit me here, it couldn't be sharper or more-- 

I was stunned, for a moment, you know? I don't know And all I could say-- why? for vas? You know? He says "weil azoy zingt man es nisht," "Because that is not the way it should be sung." 

I couldn't say-- I couldn't ask him how, what, or when, but I left that-- that evening absolutely-- I didn't sleep that night, I assure you. 

The next day, we walked around in the camp. And they had-- you know, as I told you, they were all organized. So, the camp leaders took us to this group, to this group, and that group-- little ones, you know, that were saved to older groups of this persuasion, of that persuasion. All, of course, Jewish, but different persuasion. 

And we came into a, a little room where there were young boys and girls who had lived through, let's say, the Warsaw ghetto and escaped. In fact, the leader, her name was Lubetkin, was present at that affair. She just recently died in-- in-- in Israel. And they have a ca-- they have a kibbutz in Israel on the name of the fighters of the Warsaw ghetto. And she was a member of that. 

And they-- when we walked in, they not particularly paid attention to us. We sat down on one side, and they went on with their program, singing, singing, reciting, talking, et cetera, et cetera, hardly even throwing a glance here and there. And then they sort of looked at Leivick-- without asking. And Leivick said something. And they did the same thing to me, you see? Again, you know, not asking, please, would you-- just-- 

So there was a little piano, again, on the-- on the platform, and I went up up to the platform and played for myself, you know, a few songs. Which was-- and after that, after that, they went into such a wild-- you know, about the horah, the horah dance is They went into such a-- 

First, they were-- they were crying, because I sang-- I sang "Kol Nidre." And it reminded them, I'm sure, of their homes, their parents, their-- their, you know, their-- how-- how they spent that time. But, from that, immediately the sort of transition right over, and a few of them start to dance, and they danced a wild horah. And I was drawn into it, too. I was dancing right there, with them. 

And, to close the evening-- it was also the first time I heard another song, which I think is the greatest song that came out of-- out of the ghetto. But we'll talk of that another time, if we have time. But they closed the evening by singing the Partisan Song. 

And when I heard them sing the Partisan Song, I knew exactly what that man meant. "azoy zingt man es nit," "That is not the way it should be sung." Because I sang it, you know, I didn't live through this. I didn't live through the Holocaust. I sang it as a dirge! Something that I-- I cried at every note, you know, it was, it was so bad? 

But the way they sang it, it was like every word was like they spat out their mouth. zog nit keyn mol, az du geyst dem letstn veg, khotsh himlen blayene farshteln bloye teg. kumen vet nokh undzer oysgebenkte sho, s'vet a poyk ton undzer trot: mir zaynen do! 

You see, it was a, a challenge, a fight, you know? That way, they could survive, you see. And I understood it. And from then on, that's the way I sang it. You see. 

So, that's Landsberg. And other places have very interesting, you know, little things that happened. Not-- of course, I came there to sing. But what happened-- 

You know, one place, I was part of a-- I asked to be-- if they would allow me to go on one of what they call the Aliyah Bet, their underground transports that went through Munich to the-- to the-- to the granitsa the, um, you know, the, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Railroad station? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER: Railroad station? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: No, no, the part that separates, let's say, Munich from Alsace-Romaine. 

INTERVIEWER: The border? 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: The border! And then, from Alsace-Lorraine, we went into-- to France. 

INTERVIEWER: You traveled with them. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: I traveled with a transport. They gave me special permission, you know. Because, after all, I-- I wanted to be on one. But I told the leader, you know, I knew who was in charge of the illegal transport. 

I said to him, look, I wa-- I would love-- I want to go on one of these transports. But you have to decide-- if I will be a liability, then I will understand I don't belong. But if I can go and [INAUDIBLE] some [INAUDIBLE] give me anything to do, any menial little job to do on this transport, I will deem it a privilege of the first-- of the first order. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you wear? I mean, you couldn't have had a uniform. 

EMMA LAZAROFF SCHAVER: Well, it was important that I wore a uniform. And-- and important that I wore an American uniform. Because, you see, when we met-- we met people on the road, you see. We met, you know, like, military-- you know, the-- like the military police, on the road. And they see these-- like-uh there were, like, 10-- 10 convoy-- 

A convoy consisted of 10 lorries, you know, filled with-- with women, men, children. And [INAUDIBLE] they told them, no luggage allowed. But, know, you tell a Jew "no luggage allowed," he took as much luggage as he could. [LAUGH] 

So, it was-- you know, how they were traveling, I can't tell you. You know, they were hanging on, whatever, outside, inside on these lorries. And every time a military-- 

And it was arranged so that we started from one odd place. We had a meeting point, somewheres-- on the map I could show you-- where another transport would come. Then we join up as two. And then, further down, a third one would come. 

So, by the end, we were about, you know, about 25 lorries. And we travel-- we would travel at night, and come to some given place, and stay there during the day. And so, in d what was the purpose of my telling you about this trans-- 

You asked me why my uniform, whether that would be, you know, in any way detrimental. It wasn't. It was, in fact, helpful, because when we were stopped they would say, well, who are these people? And most of our people-- you know, this was done through the Jewish Agency for Palestine, you know. They carried on mostly with the illegal transportation. 

Well, most of them were from-- either from Israel or from other countries, and they spoke-- yeah-- they knew English, but speak with an accent or so. And I would come forward, you know, as an American, and say, well, of course, they prompted me and told me what to tell them that we-- we were sent by-- 

The, the, the, the harvest in this area. They need hands there. And this is a group who are coming there to help them out in the harvest, to, to, to do some, to do some [LAUGH] harvesting! 

And, and they saw that I was-- I'm an American, I wore, like, a uniform, officer's uniform. So they, they, they accepted us. They accept my words, and so we went through. 

So my uniform, in that case was very, very, very helpful. But in the meantime, I was able to see what it meant-- what-- 