SUBJECT: Almost maybe 20 years ago, by Marisha by-- in-- from Poland. She said she found that after-- after he died, after Surovietz, who was the uncle, died, they found this in the breast pocket. And she also sent me a little picture of him. So he kept this, and this is way too small. She sent this to me. I didn't have it for a long time. 

INTERVIEWER: So he kept it-- kept it-- 

SUBJECT: In the breast pocket. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh his body? 

SUBJECT: Yes, in his breast pocket. We-- my father, till the day he died, wrote letters, sent money, sent packages. I always sent packages too. So we always kept in touch. When the children were born, we had pictures. There is-- we never stopped having a relationship with them. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to know from-- you have a family now. How many children? 

SUBJECT: Two. 

INTERVIEWER: Two children. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And you went back with your family to Poland. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: In what way-- what did it do to you-- 

SUBJECT: I would tell you-- 

INTERVIEWER: --and how is your family part of it now, these haunting years 

SUBJECT: I would think that this was one of the most important trips of our lives. And it was one of the most important things we did as a family. Because both David and I, my husband, didn't decide to have a certain way of life. It just happened. 

We're very positive. We remember what we remember. He has many more things to remember. Many more painful things, I think, as far as harm. Not only in mental stress, but-- 

INTERVIEWER: He's a survivor. 

SUBJECT: He's a survivor. But we were always-- our kids know about my life. They know about David's life. But we never sat down with them and told them, look. This-- we would like to tell you the story of our lives. We never did it in that way. 

We always told them as things happened, and when there were tragic moments for us, we just came out with it. And if there weren't tragic moments, we told them good things. So there was never-- we didn't sit down and tell them chronologically what happened to us. 

They knew about the Holocaust from school, from Hebrew school, from regular-- you know, in high school, they both had some programs. And they knew about our personal experiences, but they had difficulties because we had a lot of positiveness from Poland. I brought with me a lot of good things. 

I, for instance, love Polish pottery. I love Polish rugs. I love Polish food. My husband remembers wonderful vacations in Poland. So we would begin to tell them these great things, and then we would say to them, another time, and these miserable Poles, what they did to us. 

And the kids were very mixed up. They said, now tell me, do you hate them, do you love them? What is it with you? Here you-- you say it was the most miserable time of your life. The Poles helped the Germans. They were shooting and killing the Jews very ardently, like the Germans. 

And yet you have these wonderful memories. And one time the Poles are horrible, and on the other time-- on other times, the Poles are marvelous. What is it with you? And we realized that our children were getting confused. 

To us, it was a reality. Two simultaneous lives. The love for certain things that were Polish and certain things that were wonderful in our childhood, and the horror of it. So we decided to go to Poland and maybe show the children what we mean. What it is. 

So we took them to certain places where I went as a child, to the Tatra Mountains, and show them beautiful Polish fields and the Jagiellonian University in Krakow. I mean, beautiful, cultural aspects, but we also went to Auschwitz and to Plaszow, to the concentration camps. 

To the Warsaw ghetto. And we showed them monuments commemorating thousands and thousands of Jews, every place you go. And the cemeteries that are no longer cemeteries. The Jewish houses of worship there are no longer there. 

So we showed them what we carry in our hearts. And without much talking, unless there was some question asked, the kids came away with, I think, a very similar outlook. They realize that pain is pain, but it can coexist with some good feelings as well. 

And there was a time in our lives where both David and I were ashamed of some of the good feelings that we had towards some Polish people. Towards the Polish landscape. Toward some of the Polish habits or cultural things. 

We kept that. We didn't say that. We only said the things if we were in a conversation, and they began to talk about the horrors. We were part of that, because of course we knew that. But we never said anything positive about it because we felt that we were being disloyal. 

After that trip, we realized that we must talk positively, because we feel positively about certain aspects of our lives as children in Poland. And our children, I think, understood that ambivalence that we had felt before. And that's why I think it was one of the most important things. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: You're welcome. Thank you. You have to watch it. Bye-bye. 

CREW: Could we just get pictures of-- 