SUBJECT: Population of about 35,000 people, of which 22,000 were Jewish. The nickname in Europe of Munkacs was [das klein Yerushalayim]. When it came to any Jewish holiday, you really felt it that it is a holiday. And as a family, we used to enjoy these holidays with everybody being home. 

My father was in an export-import business where he did a lot of traveling. But from what I recall, on the Sabbath or any holidays, he was home with his family. We knew that Friday afternoon, wherever he was, he will be home. 

And we used to go to daven in a very small synagogue. It was a family synagogue where the men sat separately, and the women sat in a separate room with just an opening in the back wall. And when I used to go with my father to the synagogue, mainly on Saturday morning when I used to carry his tallis, you really felt it that it is a different world and for those-- day, or that day, that it is a holiday. 

At home we were orthodox, where we used two different design tablecloths. One was blue for dairy, and one was red. We had two tables in our kitchen. One was for fleischetig and one was for milchig. 

From what I recall, even where we kept the daily silverware on one side in a drawer, and the meat silverware on another side. They shouldn't mix. The dishes had two different designs, so the mate could not be able to mix them. 

And we had a Jewish maid who used to do the cooking. And we had a Christian girl who used to do the heavy work. But one of her main objects was that on the Saturday to put on the lights, or put out the lights, or wintertime to put wood on the fire so the house is, eh, warm. 

The school that I went to was a Hebrew gymnasiavery-- Hebrew gymnasium. But I went there only at the first gym, uh, gymnasia. In the beginning, I went to Czech elementary school. 

And when my father found out that when I went to Czech school I might have to go on the Saturday to school, though we weren't required to write, he resented it and he sent me to Hebrew school. And when I started Hebrew school, my knowledge of Hebrew was very, very little because I was-- those kids who went for four years already to Hebrew school. 

Now, all subjects in the Hebrew school are taught Hebrew. And we translated Latin. We translated Latin to Hebrew. And we took up all of the different languages. 

They-- we took up English. We took up-- in the beginning it was Czech. Then in 1938 when we became Hungary, they said, well, the Czech language, we took up Hungarian. We took up Latin. We took up German. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Something about your mother that, uh, touches you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, it was my mother. And that is a question that still bothers me. And it's why I sometimes I feel that, uh, good deeds should be rewarded. 

And my mother was always involved in charities. That was her goal. And I heard it more than once in my home where my-- at home we only spoke Yiddish. And my father used to say to my mother, [SPEAKING YIDDISH]. I want half of your good-- the rewards for your good deeds. 

Well, we had an export-import business, and she was doing most of the correspondence. I would say ALL of the correspondence, because in those days the correspondence was done in the international language, was German. And she did all the writing-- to Italy, to Norway, to England, wherever, uh, to Britain. 

But she has been neglected for her bad charities. And I remember when she was involved for the poor students, for those kids who couldn't have, uh, breakfast, she was involved of arranging this other woman that she was involved with, at 10 o'clock they used to get a roll and a class of milk. She was involved in, where the joint used to send clothing. 

And as a kid I remember winter times, because there was no middle class-- or you were rich, or you were poor. And I used to go with my mother deliver clothing and packages, because they knew, the grown ups knew, that the families, what their needs were, and put it by the door and knock at the door. And she walked ahead of me, and then I used to run like a thief they shouldn't see me. We didn't want to embarrass the people they knew where this stuff came from-- that anybody knows. 

And in our home, there was a plate left in the kitchen, this change, for any poor man that came in who needed any donation, or any money. When, when my parents were away, the maid was instructed to give him. And then I also recall that, uh, we had students eating in our house because-- and Munkacs when you looked at railroad in the morning, you would see approximately a good 8,000 to 10,000 students from all the surrounding communities coming in to school, and a lot of them were Jewish boys, and they came from very poor families. 

Well, arrangements were made between the wealthier Jews, that one, the Monday he ate at this family. Tuesday he ate at this family. Wednesday at another family. 

And then quite often I recall that when my father saw any strangers at the synagogue where we used to daven, he used to go over and ask him, do you have enough to eat? You have somewhere to sleep on Shabbos? And the man said, no. He just brought him home and we whipped up another plate and there was, uh, room for one more. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And how did this all change-- begin to change? 

SUBJECT: The, the change we, the change as I recall came, we were sitting once at home and we were listening to the radios. And they were telling the-- what was decided by, was the conference where Chamberlain gave, uh, Czechoslovakia to Hungary. And I was a kid at that time did not understand that fully. 

So he said, well, so, it's Hungary. But I saw my father turn white, white as the wall. And my father and my mother started crying, because I guess they knew much better what was going on. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How old were you at this time, Rudy? 

SUBJECT: This was in 1936. I was in the 6th grade. 6th, uh, gymnasia in the autumn. 

INTERVIEWER 2: 12th, 13th. 

SUBJECT: No, 16. I was 16 years old at the time when this thing, uh, uh, happened. And it was very sad, because in the beginning, the border, the way they cut it off, they didn't give the whole Carpathians, they just gave it to certain cities alongside the border. And the border was from us, like about 200 yards from our house, where the river, the Latorica was going on. 

And you could see the border guards from one side to the other, because the other side of it was still part of Czechoslovakia. But later that part became Hungary, too. And later when the other part became Hungary, too, and they brought in Hungarian teachers because a lot of our teachers left. 

Now, the Hungarian teachers actually were Jewish, you know. But all subjects all of a sudden changed. Like, previously we used to take up in the school that I went to, history was Hebrew, and, and mathematics was in Hebrew, and, uh, geography was in Hebrew. And all of a sudden they sprung on us Hungarian where we had to learn, uh-- well, for some of them it wasn't as hard, because occasionally in the city where we lived there was a lot of minorities. You had Hungarians, you had Horvaths, you had Lithuanians, you had Germans, you had Jews. 

So if you passed on the street, there was, uh-- if you listened to it, you can hear six, seven, eight languages, uh, being spoken. But all of a sudden we have to learn everything in Hungarian. And we gradually saw the change, because one of the first things that they brought up that every Thursday afternoon [COUGHS] you had to go, what they called, Levente. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What does that mean? 

SUBJECT: Well, you had to go to do some work for what it is, the Hungarian government, or what it was. And you had to wear a yellow band and march with it. And some of the things that they used to do with us those Thursday afternoon, I felt was nothing but, but breaking our spirit, or breaking your pride that you are a Jew, and make you feel like a, you know, degrading you. 

Like, on one occasion they took us in, it was a big gym that the Czechs loved there that were the soccer used to be, and the Hungarians took it over. And they gave us toothbrushes, and made us go down on our knees to, to polish it up, you know? Everybody had to do a little with inlays, and everybody had to polish one little slot as you, you're, you know, backing up. You know, they lined up 50 kids and going back. 

Or on other occasions they took us out, uh, that used to be their, um, farmer school. Now, these kids who were, these Christian kids, you know, to them, to degrade a Jew, I guess, was the biggest pleasure. So they made us move manure from here to here from back there, you know, just to, to do something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Useless tasks? 

SUBJECT: It, it was useless, I would say. But it was degrading. It was something to degrade and break your spirit looking back at it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did they have guns trained on you? 

SUBJECT: No. No, not, not, not, not on these days. The first time that I encountered where we were with guards with guns when in 1942 I got into labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But were there signs before something happening? 

SUBJECT: There were signs because they took away licenses from the Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But did you see peo-- Jews being transported? 

SUBJECT: We-- I saw it in the beginning, for a fact, the first time, and I saw a transport go by. I was by the river and I saw that it, it was in Podhering where the, uh, railroad was going through. And I saw people going by. I had the-- the first, my first impression, I didn't even know that they were Jewish because they were transporting some Hungarian Jews, and they only spoke Hungarian. But you could see there are people. 

Later I find out that they were Jews, because the railroads, they couldn't get out because there were barbed wires on the windows. You couldn't even put out a hand. Was a very similar, uh, thing that they transported me when they put me in a railroad car and, and Szombathely by the Hungarian border. And I do not recall how many days we were locked in til they opened up. And next thing, we were up by the Carpathian mountains in Uzhhorod. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you saw what as a kid? 

SUBJECT: I saw people being transported. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Trains? 

SUBJECT: Yes, trains going up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think when you saw this? 

SUBJECT: The first time I didn't know what it is. But later I realized that these are fellow, that these were Jews that they were transporting-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you knew they were people. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they, were they, did they look uncomfortable to you? 

SUBJECT: Very uncomfortable. They were hollering. Some of them hollering for water, and for help. But, uh, nothing I can do for them, or anybody could do for them, because on the rail, there were guards. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do, did you have any thoughts where they were going? 

SUBJECT: Thoughts where they were going? Not really, at that time. I would-- no. I just saw that they were being taken out because where some people was shipped out to Poland, and we figured, well, they're going to go into a labor camp. And we didn't know the exact time, because those days we did not know yet about concentration camps-- it was only later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But how did you feel about, about being told what to do, where to go, going to a labor camp, disrupting your life? What did you feel? What did-- what did you, what were you doing? 

SUBJECT: What was I doing? I felt very, very disoriented. Because all of a sudden people were telling me what to do, where before I went to school. 

And I wasn't told that I have to go to school. I went to school because I wanted to school. I wanted to be a doctor. I wanted to study. 

And all of a sudden, it's the same thing when I got out of camp. I felt very disorientated because I felt that somebody should tell me what to do. For days, or weeks, I don't know for how long, I was waiting. 

Somebody should tell me what to do. I didn't know what to do. I was lost. The same thing, I resented it, being told, because some of the guards that we had in labor camp were the misfits of the Hungarian Army. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK, what-- how were you sent to labor camp? 

SUBJECT: I was sent to Szombathely where we were a big group. And even there in the beginning, they kept us there-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the notice you received, and-- 

SUBJECT: We received a notice that on October-- I don't remember. It was 6th, or 8th-- you have to go to this and this place. And they sent so many people to this one place. I don't recall the first place. 

But from this place, they took 250 and sent them here, and 250, they sent them there. And I was in a group of 250 that was sent up to Szombathely And there, again, they examined us. You know, because a couple of them, even from there were sent home because they were sick. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sick with what? 

SUBJECT: Well, some had trachoma. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Some of your friends? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they get the trachoma? 

SUBJECT: How did they get it, I don't know. But they, they diagnosed us as trachoma. They didn't have trachoma. 

People tried any which way to get out. I saw in the labor camp a fellow, he was helping out in the kitchen. I was that time on kitchen duty where he put down his hand and cut off his finger to get into a hospital. This was in Uzhhorod. He took a, a, an axe and there it went. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean they let you out if you were-- had a defect or a sickness? 

SUBJECT: In the beginning. In the beginning. Now, this is in 1942. 

About from this group of 250, and one of them was a classmate of mine who he went home, he got killed in camp. Fellow by the name of Blick. He was sent home. He did not have trachoma, but that what they diagnosed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember any of the people that were in charge of you? Do you remember their names? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I remember one. There was a fellow by the name of Winkler who was a Sergeant, who became a Sergeant because I taught him. I taught him history and I taught him geography and I taught him to take the exam. 

And this man was an absolute sadist. His idea of entertainment, to give you an id-- just a couple of things that he did with us, we were in around Uzhhorod by the Carpathian mountains. And on one occasion he comes in, he says, within 20 minutes, everybody report to me backwards. 

Now, backwards meant that you had to take your pants, turn them inside out, put the front on the back. Take your jacket, put it on first, and then your shirt, inside out. Put your belongings, instead of carrying it on your back, on your front. And then you had to come marching backwards. And if you carried your-- because each one of us had a pick, or a shovel or a saw, depending with which work we used to do. And that was his-- you had to report to him, marching backwards, singing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Backwards, too? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Not, not the singing. But when you reported, and you had to, you know, go this way. 

Or to give you another thing, he says, this-- on one occasion he says, you are all birds, and within two minutes, you better be up in a tree and start whistling. Because he used to walk around with a stick, what was like a bamboo thing, and that thing stung. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean he hit you with it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He flicked it at you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, all this time your family was still-- 

SUBJECT: They were still at home 'til I think they went in about 19-- I wasn't home when they went in. And when the ghetto was-- I saw them one day before the ghetto opened. It was a sheer coincidence. I bribed this sergeant that I'm speaking to. I gave him a watch that was hidden in my lining, and he gave me a 48-hour pass to go home. And I came home and I saw my mother and my father and my grandmother and my sister. 

And then when I got back to Uzhhorod what was on the border from home already, there were no more Hungarian soldiers. They were German soldiers from the border, and we knew something happened. We still didn't know what. 

And then we heard that they herded all the Jews into a, a factory that was a brick, a brick factory. And from there, they slowly took them out into transports and shipped them to concentration camps. But some of the experiences of things going on in the camp, my biggest shock, as far as personal shock, when I first I found on me a louse. I didn't know what it is. I never saw it in my life one. 

And then gradually you learn that they are head lice, and they are skin lice, and they are gray lice, and they are black, black lice. In fact, on one occasion we were so full of lice the Hungarian Army came down with a, this infection unit, where they took all our clothing-- all of it, we had to stand naked-- and they put it in like a pressurized steam sink where they figured they are going to kill them. But the sink didn't work right, and didn't produce enough heat. 

And what happened that all the eggs that were laid by these lice, they hatched. We ended up with twice as many as before. This is up in, in, in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What kind of discomfort do you have when you have lice? 

SUBJECT: What kind of a discomfort? Well, you feel very low. You don't even feel like a human being, especially if you never saw it in your life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Besides the psychological, what physical? 

SUBJECT: Well, they bite. And what-- you have a constant fear that maybe because the, the carrier, we learned already in camp from some of the doctor that the main carrier of typhus is one lice bites one who has it and bites the next one, you will get it. But you could, uh, go up at night, and, and, and go over your head and you have lice in your hand because they were crawling all over. 

In fact, when the American Army came in and disinfected me, they-- was the DDT. Opened up your pants and they were spraying. And we were laughing, said, you're not going to kill them. But they did kill them. 

Uh, there were nights that I used to lay there, and I was missing them. It's nothing is crawling because you were so used to it. As far as in labor camp, I find at times bigger hardships than in concentration camp, because the, the Hungarians, they wanted to show the Germans that they can do more and be more vicious. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you give an example of that? 

SUBJECT: Of that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the labor camp? 

SUBJECT: In the labor camp? Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the last time of the labor camp. 

SUBJECT: Well, we'll start off in Uzhhorod, where they took us out. They were-- this, this was in the winter. And the German Army had to go through certain roads, and the roads were snowed in. Where we used to walk 12 hours to get to the place. And then we used to stay out 12 hours to dig the snow. 

And the snow was so big that one guy threw it. It was so high on the roads from these snow drifts that one guy threw it to the next guy, and the next guy threw the third guy, and the fourth guys threw it over the road. It's like actually you were cutting a tunnel in there. 

And the, then you have to walk back 12 hours, and you were off 12 hours. That actually had a 12-hour sleep and a 36-hour walk or work, any which way you want to look at it. People just collapsed, and they left them there. Some managed to come back. Some were frozen. 

My leg is frozen. I have a scar on my leg that I will carry the rest of my life that's completely ulcerated. And I have to put twice a day on it a salve, otherwise it just opens up. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You're still putting a salve on it? 

SUBJECT: That's right. Twice a day I have to put it on my left leg because it's, uh, completely, uh, open. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah, I-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, sir? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Let's go back. You left your parents for the last time? 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know it was? 

SUBJECT: No, I did not. I thought that they were going to be left at home. I didn't. We had no inkling, we just saw that, well, we are a labor camp and things will be status quo. They will be at home when I get home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the goodbye to mother, father? What you said to each other? 

SUBJECT: What we said to each other? Very little. We just looked at each other, just stared in each eyes. What, what, what was-- there was very little to say. 

Somehow when I left that time, I just felt that I, I have a very sad feeling. I, I had a feeling that I will never see them again. And I never did, because my mother and sister were killed in Auschwitz. 

And my father died of starvation with about four weeks before the end of the war. And I found out from somebody who was with him that his kidneys just gave up and he just, you know, blew up. Because like a balloon, they thought, full of water. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where was he? 

SUBJECT: He was in Dernau. And, uh, [COUGHS] that's the last that, that, you know, I saw of him. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you traveled back then to that labor camp? 

SUBJECT: I went back to the labor camp. And we were a labor camp from there. As the battlefield came closer, they kept on pulling us back. So we went from, from Uzhhorod we went to Uzhhorod, from Uzhhorod to Kosice, from Kosice further down. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Then what happened when the, uh, Hungarians were, uh, uh-- the Germans were taking over from the Hungarians? 

SUBJECT: Very little. The Hungarians, uh, just gave in. They had no choice in the matter, you know? That the Hungarians didn't resist them. And, uh, the Hungarians, uh, you, you have to understand their mentality. And their mentality was that, uh, they were going to get the best of the Jew, and that, that was their aim. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But the prisoners in the camp, how did they take it when the Hungarians were being beaten? 

SUBJECT: Well, we were in labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Uh-huh. 

SUBJECT: We had the Hungarians. When, when we pulled back from Uzhhorod, we still had Hungarian guards though the Germans were on the border. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I see. 

SUBJECT: The main keys. I was in with Hungarian guards 'til we got back to Austria. And before we went over to Austria, the Hungarians, before they gave us over back to the Germans, and they gave us over to the Todt organization, our group, I received one of my worst beatings that I will ever remember. 

They made us put down a blanket. And they made us throw on the blanket from the things that we had-- you know, shirts, or underwear, or whatever you had on there. And if you have two shirts, they took away one shirt. If you have two pair of socks, they took away one pair of socks. And one of the soldiers found the tefillin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Found the what? 

SUBJECT: Tefillin. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The tefillin, yes. 

SUBJECT: Tefillin. [COUGHS] And he turns to this other fellow, he says, what is this? And the fellow says, you see this fellow, pointing at me, he says, on this he prays for our downfall. He says, really? Put it on. And they made me put on the tefillin, and they started twisting on the bottom, you know, by the two straps. 

And I got a beating from these two guys with a belt, with the buckle. I don't even know what they hit me with, that on the inside my gums were cut from my own teeth, they hit me so hard. When I got out, I was like in a daze. And they gave us over to the, the whole group to work. And that was already we went into Austria. Now, we were living even in Austria, and not in a camp. We were living in a mill, or in a school. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What about-- 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER 2: --eh, that tefillin later on? 

SUBJECT: They took them away. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Took them away and-- 

SUBJECT: They took them away and they said they're going to make good shoelaces. That's the last time I wore tefillin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The last time-- 

SUBJECT: That I wear tefillin. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why? 

SUBJECT: Why? That's a good question. I keep on asking myself why. Why did my sister die? Why did my mother die who lived only for charities? 

Why did I survive? My mother was a thousand time much better person than I ever will be, or ever will achieve. Why me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were close to death, too, weren't you? 

SUBJECT: More than once. More than once. One occasion, I had the rope to be hanged. I got though that. 

And then one occasion where they shot at me point-blank with a machine gun. We were going from one camp to another. We were going from Mauthausen to another camp. And as we were getting closer, I was listening and I hear the voice of, of, of a machine gun rattling away. 

And I was with my uncle and another fellow and two other men. They were march-- we were marching lines of five. We didn't know what it is 'til you got closer. And I was on a mountain, very winding road. 

And one of the corners, there were a couple of-- I don't think these, these boys could have been more than maybe 18-19, maybe less. And, and, uh, they were just shooting point blank at us. And we made out that, uh, somebody gets hit, he gets hit, he will remain there. 

And one of us caught a bullet, and one of my classmates. I buried him the next day. He got killed, a fellow by the name of Stern. I met his mother and I, I-- she knew why he was with me and for a while I was dodging her. I, I just didn't have the heart to tell her that I buried her son. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said that you had a-- 