[TONE] INTERVIEWER: That's human nature. That's-- people do-- they want to hear themselves speak. 

MR. BORK: And how that [AUDIO OUT] who put you there? 

MRS. BORK: It was [INAUDIBLE]. 

MR. BORK: You-- you hear things like this, so you don't know what to say. 

INTERVIEWER: We're rolling. We're rolling? 

MRS. BORK: Oh, thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Excuse me. Mrs. Bork, would you begin by talking to Teddy and telling him about his grandparents and your life? 

MRS. BORK: Well, Teddy, this is the picture of my family. There's my grandmother, my mother, my father, your grandfather. 

This is my sister that you know is in Israel. This is my oldest brother, Harry. This is my second brother, who was the first of them-- well, let me go back to my father first. 

My father was the first victim of the Holocaust in our family. Should I tell him how it-- how it happened and what? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

MRS. BORK: Well, I'll introduce you first to the family. This is my oldest brother, Harry. This is my second brother, Jacob. This is Judah. The one from this picture that was taken during the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you hold that picture up once more? 

MRS. BORK: OK. This-- this one first, where-- this is where in the film, the slip of film-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who took the film? 

MRS. BORK: The American allies have liberated Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER: And you recognized your-- 

MRS. BORK: During-- during the liberation-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother? 

MRS. BORK: Yeah. During the liberation, this film has been taken while they were liberating the camps, Dachau and Buchenwald. And these young fellows are staying at the fence of the camp-- 

MR. BORK: Waiting for the allies to come. 

MRS. BORK: Waving, waving with the berets, waving. You can see it here well, the waving. I had the little strip of film, which shows how they-- my brother waves his beret during the liberation. 

INTERVIEWER: And you saw the film? Where? 

MRS. BORK: This film was shown after the liberation. I believe it must-- in '47, or what? 

MR. BORK: Yeah. 

MRS. BORK: '47. 

MR. BORK: '47 or-- between '47 and '48. 

MRS. BORK: The film is called Todesmuhlen. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

MRS. BORK: That was after the war-- the war. 

MR. BORK: Germany. 

MRS. BORK: In Germany, in Kraiburg, Germany, near Munich. 

INTERVIEWER: And you went to see the film and you-- 

MRS. BORK: We went to see the film. Everyone went to see this film. And I recognized my brother. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know he was alive at that point? 

MRS. BORK: He is not alive. We don't know whether he is alive. But I've been searching for many years. There is no trace of him. 

INTERVIEWER: He was alive at liberation. 

MRS. BORK: At the liberation. Yes. At the liberation, where he was here, waving his beret. And he cannot be found. I have sent-- this is what I made myself, this picture to send it to different-- 

MR. BORK: Countries. 

MRS. BORK: -- countries' search bureaus. And this picture has been all over. And there is no trace of him. 

Now, I believe-- I'm not sure which one, whether this one or this one. This-- Ruth can state which one it is that is a blow-up in Dachau, the whole wall, one of the walls. Which one is it, Ruth? Is it this one-- 

SUBJECT: It's-- 

MRS. BORK: --or this one? 

SUBJECT: It's that one. 

MR. BORK: Which one? This one? 

MRS. BORK: Or this one? Is a blow-up in Dachau on the wall. 

INTERVIEWER: And you recognized him. 

MRS. BORK: Yes. Well, it wasn't-- 

INTERVIEWER: And you can't find him. 

MRS. BORK: I have only-- I have only been separated from him-- in August, I believe, we were separated in 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you living? Where-- where was your family? 

MRS. BORK: Oh, well, I was born in Lodz and lived in Lodz until the war broke out, until I came into the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you march to the ghetto? 

MRS. BORK: Well, the people from Lodz were driven into the ghetto. We had lived in the part where the ghetto was, so when-- so we didn't have to move too far. And we were got-- when we got into the ghetto, you lived in one room with the family. 

And then when the rest of the people other from Lodz were driven into the ghetto and friends of ours had no place where to go until they got a place, my father took them in, took four more people in and we lived in one room with these four people. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Bork, where were you from? 

MR. BORK: I from Lodz also. I was born there. I was going to school there. And I went in the Polish army there. 

INTERVIEWER: When were you born, sir? 

MR. BORK: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: When were you born? 

MR. BORK: When. In 1914. 

INTERVIEWER: And so you served in the Polish-- 

MR. BORK: The Polish army. I went-- I was in the war during the war against the Germans. And I was a Russian prisoner. You know, the Russians was one side and the Germans other side. I was captured by the Russian as a prisoner. 

And so I didn't stay long with them, maybe a couple hours. And I saw we were outside. It was no good. So I took my chances and I ran away and I got shot in my leg. See? Still got the wounds here? 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you when you were shot? 

MR. BORK: I was running away from-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

MR. BORK: This was in Poland. It was on the other side Bug, the River Bug called. And I took my shirt off and I tore in pieces and I make a bandage until I found shelter by somebody. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you in the Lodz ghetto? 

MR. BORK: I was very short in Lodz ghetto. When I came home to Lodz, back home, the-- the parents thought-- my parent I was dead, because when-- when we-- the army was marching during the war, the Germans start to bomb us. And I was walking with a fellow, friend, and-- when they start to bomb, the airplanes, so we were hidden near a little house. And the house was bombed and our building-- 

MRS. BORK: 

MR. BORK: During the walk fell on my back. And the friend of mine thought I was there. And so I thought he is dead. When he went-- came home, he said that I am dead. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know-- did you know your wife in the Lodz ghetto? 

MR. BORK: No. We never know each other. Never know. We-- we-- 

MRS. BORK: Met after the war. 

MR. BORK: We met after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Teddy, have you ever tried to help your mother find her brother? 

TEDDY: Well, the only help that I could do was when I took a trip to Eastern Europe. And we tried to research the records that we could find there to see what happened to the family. But there aren't very many records and we couldn't get any information. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Bork, perhaps we can just start, you can tell us what happened from the ghetto and then what happened to you from that point on. 

MRS. BORK: OK. I think-- I think it is important to know what happened to my brothers and father. In Lodz, before the war-- before the ghetto was closed and all the time people were caught in the street and brought to a-- to a certain place called Radogoszcz behind the city. I don't know whether you've heard about this place that they had to dig their own graves. And these people were shot into the graves. 

So in order that my father wouldn't be caught-- and these little fellows were-- were ranging from age 10 to 14 or 15. So we went out for a loaf-- to-- into the lines for bread so my father and my brothers wouldn't have to go out and be caught in the street. And the gentiles were still living in the ghetto before closing. 

And one of the Polish women had pointed out-- when the German soldier came in, pointed out that upstairs a man-- we lived on the second floor. And so the-- they took my father and the four-- my four little brothers out-- out through the window. They brought a ladder and brought them-- took them out through the window because the door was locked since we weren't home. My mother and I wasn't home. 

And they took them down to this place behind the city, Radogoszcz And sadistically they beat my-- my brothers over the head with their-- with rifles in front of my father. Of course, he could not see his children being beaten and gushing bloods, the blood from-- from their heads. So he-- we don't know whether he lost his sanity then or he lost his sanity after he was beaten. 

So he attacked to resist his-- his children being beaten. He attacked the-- the German soldiers. And so they left the children alone. And all of them had attacked my father and had beaten them so severely that when the children brought him home-- they let him go. And the children brought him home. And he lost his sanity. 

It was very dangerous for men or women, doesn't-- didn't make any different, who was mentally sick to be in the ghetto, because if-- there was-- there were episodes of violence in my father when he talked, when he was conscious, when he became conscious. He had periods of time that he was conscious and knew what he was saying. 

And at this point, he told us things what that we should know. And at this moment, when he thought about-- came back to him what had happened, how the children were beaten, so he became violent. And we had to have people 24 hours a day, young fellows like my son, who was then with us 24 hours a day to keep my father back, to hold him down, that he wouldn't get out of bed to attack the Germans, which were living on the border from the ghetto. And in case my father would get out and would attack a German, then the whole neighborhood, who knows how many thousands of Jews, would-- would-- would have been lost-- lost-- would have lost their lives because of my father's trying to fight-- fight the Germans, the German soldiers. 

So unfortunately, the doctor had to give him an injection to put him to death, after I believe 6 or 10 days of being home after this incident. 

INTERVIEWER: The doctor killed him? 

MRS. BORK: The doctor had to give him an injection. We didn't know. My aunt told us after my father had gone. My aunt told us that she-- the doctor had discussed it with her, that we all-- that the whole neighborhood is in jeopardy. We know many people would have lost their lives if my father wouldn't be put to death, so my father was put to death to save others. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to your family? 

MRS. BORK: What happened to my family? From then on, when the ghetto was closed, my father was three days-- his body was three days in-- in the house, laying with us, because the people have been dying very-- people have been dying as if flies sprayed with insecticide. And there were so many corpses that they didn't have time to bury so many people, so the bodies were kept in the house until it was time to remove them. 

So my father was-- body was three days in the house. And after they closed the ghetto, my-- my mother was sick. She had dysentery. And since thousands of people daily were deported from ghetto into the concentration camps and there was no food, no heating system like we have here, we had to have heat-- 

MR. BORK: I want to explain-- I would like to explain how a ghetto looked. People think the ghetto is like here. The ghetto was like-- there was no transportation, no telephone, no stoves, was around with barbed wires, watchtowers and machine guns. Between one watchtower and the other, there was foot patrols. 

There was a curfew. Every day, 5 o'clock, nobody should try to be on the street. And portions was rationed. Everything food was rationed. 

Some people kept their-- if somebody died, let's say, and was shot before a food rationing, they kept the body a couple, three or four days in the house in order to collect the ration food. Some people was three or four bodies in the house. How do you find out, because they start to smell. 

MRS. BORK: During in the summertime-- 

MR. BORK: Summertime. 

MRS. BORK: --if you had to keep-- for example, the ration was distributed on the-- in the beginning of the month. And for two weeks-- 

MR. BORK: Don't do this. 

MRS. BORK: --and we had to wait for the next-- for the next ration. In the meantime, if somebody died in between-- 

INTERVIEWER: What about burying the dead? 

MRS. BORK: The burying-- 

MR. BORK: The burying the dead was put in-- on a wagon with a horse. And the hands and the head was hanging out. They put on maybe 10, 15, 20, on one-- one wagon. Some bodies fall out during, you know. You had to pick them up and throw them again on the-- on the top of the wagon. 

INTERVIEWER: Was-- 

MR. BORK: You can't even explain. People can't-- can't even understand how that looked. 

INTERVIEWER: When so many people were dying? 

MR. BORK: Were-- hundreds of people daily. 

INTERVIEWER: From-- 

MRS. BORK: [INAUDIBLE] 

MR. BORK: There was no water. There was nowhere to bathe. There was no lavatories in the house, was outhouses. And people-- say 10 people living in 1 room. There was no food. 

MRS. BORK: And sickness, you know. 

MR. BORK: And sickness. 

MRS. BORK: Dysentery especially. 

MR. BORK: There was no medication, no doctors. 

MRS. BORK: Especially where people-- we had corpses in the house. And that isn't the healthiest thing for people to have corpses for-- for 10 days, to keep them to collect the ration to save the living. So of course, sicknesses, you had all kind of sicknesses in the homes. And from sicknesses, people-- not only from starvation they died, from sicknesses too. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in the ghetto situation? 

MR. BORK: I was in the ghetto situation-- when I came back from the Russian-- when I ran away, I came in, I was only 'til after Passover, 1940. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you get into the ghetto if it was closed? 

MR. BORK: The ghetto, everybody has to go in the ghetto. This was the settlement. They called it a settlement. 

They took out all the Gentiles, they took the slummiest part of Lodz and they made it for a ghetto. All the gentiles, they move out. And all Jews had to come in. 

INTERVIEWER: But how did you get in once the ghetto was formed and closed? 

MR. BORK: I went with my family. When I came back-- 

INTERVIEWER: I see. 

MR. BORK: I came in. My parents were surprised. They thought I came, you know, from-- from-- I was re-carnated. I come from other world. 

They were surprised. They told me, when-- your friend of you told me you are dead. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you march to the ghetto with your family? 

MR. BORK: Oh, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You had to walk, march. 

MR. BORK: We had to-- it was no transportation-- everybody was-- took anything we could take it. Push cars. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you tell me about that march to the Lodz ghetto? 

MR. BORK: Yes, I-- we can. Sure. Well, every-- there was a given time, was a certain time given to us. There was no transportation whatsoever. Anybody took a baby carriage, a bicycle, a-- 

MRS. BORK: A little wagon. 

MR. BORK: A little push car, anything a little, you know, toy wagon, put on whatever he could, a little clothes, you couldn't take everything. You had to leave everything behind. 

MRS. BORK: Some people were given only just the chance to get themselves out-- 

MR. BORK: Out. 

MRS. BORK: --without. Otherwise they would have been shot. 

MR. BORK: They give a few hours-- few hours' notice, just came in, raus. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there-- 

MR. BORK: Schnell, schnell, raus. 

INTERVIEWER: I've heard there was abuse of the people on the walk to the ghetto. Was there abuse? Were you bothered on the walk to the ghetto? 

MRS. BORK: Yes. 

MR. BORK: Oh, yes. Sure we were beaten. The-- the minute they saw, then obviously we had to wear, you know, the Star of David in the front and the back. And they saw. 

Whenever they had fun-- they took our children and, you know, mothers were carrying the children, you know, on their arms. They took out the children for fun and they throw it on the air and they took out the-- you know, the-- the pistol and they shoot him, you know? They just see how they can aim. It was fun for them. 

INTERVIEWER: You saw this? 

MR. BORK: Yes, I saw this. 

INTERVIEWER: On-- this was on the-- on the way? 

MR. BORK: On the way. Wherever they could. 

MRS. BORK: They shot people for no reason at all. 

MR. BORK: It was fun. We were-- we were for them more than-- less than a animal, like-- like the end. TThey treated- There-- there is no-- no way how-- how to explain this. 

MRS. BORK: I would like to bring out an incident that, well, I believe that everyone who was in Lodz and was in the ghetto will remember this. It's that a rabbi was asked to tear a Torah, to spit on it, and to step on it. And he wouldn't. 

So what they did, they ask him to put on his prayer shawl, his tallis and his tefillin. And they put him on a wagon. And they-- to humiliate the rabbi, they-- they carried him all over the main major streets and into the ghetto. That was before the ghetto was closed. And into the ghetto and-- so that everyone would go and-- and see what-- how-- how a person can be-- be brought down that low as to-- to bring a rabbi to put him-- to humiliate this way. 

And afterwards, after they've shown him around or shown him off, what they-- shown off what they have done with the rabbi, they took him back to the-- to the Torah and made him burn the Torah, so in order to save his life and to-- to save other people from-- from being killed for not destroying the Torah, so he felt according to the Jewish law burning, it's better that he would burn it than the Germans would. And these things went on quite often. 

INTERVIEWER: You were describing the march to the ghetto, or the walk-- 

MR. BORK: The ghetto wasn't-- for me, the ghetto wasn't so horrible as in the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you? 

MR. BORK: I was taken out with-- first transport from the ghetto was 1940-- December 1940, with 800 people taken out, young fellows. 

INTERVIEWER: You? 

MR. BORK: In mine age. They took it out to Germany. And we're supposed to build autobahn from Warsaw to Berlin. And so-- so we came to that camp. Nothing was prepared for us. We had to build our own-- everything, start out make the barb wires around everything. 

So we didn't get-- we get only one soup a day. The soup contained of-- what you call it? Big turnips and water. 

So finally, when we finished the living quarters where I was, no water. There was nothing, nowhere to bathe. And I suppose from the 800 people they left only maybe 10. 

Then, when they liquidated those-- this was an arbeitslager. When they liquidated the arbeitslager we went to another arbeitslager, because they needed those tools and whatever to send over to the Russian front. So they took-- we went-- they took us on the transport to Buna. 

In Buna, we were working, there's supposed to be a big factory producing rubber, methanol-- you know, this is like gasoline-- and paint. And I worked there for two years. And I-- I, luckily, because of my profession, I was working in like an Edison Company, building power station. 

And from then, probably about two years, was in 1945, in I think in January, 18, 19, put us on the trains. No, excuse me. We had to march on a march. All the camps around Auschwitz, all those neighboring camps were liquidated, because the Russian troops, allies started coming in here. 

So we were marching. All night long it was a big blizzard. We were walking deep in the snow to as far as our knees. 

And we were wearing the wooden shoes, so you start accumulating in the snow. We had to throw off the shoes and walk bare feet-- bare feet. If somebody walked behind, we couldn't help them, because they were shotting us. We had to leave all-- couldn't make it after us, we had to leave them behind. 

So we came to a place in Gleiwitz. We came there. All the barracks were occupied already, so we couldn't get in inside. A few of us, we broke the windows. We went in. 

But the rest of them, all of them was laying around outside. You know, it was in-- it was in-- in-- in January. And when the morning, we woke up, all of them, thousands of people froze to death because it was-- it was in January. Snow. 

And the people were inside in the barrack, they survived. They were outside, was not surviving for them. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know what happened to your parents? 

MR. BORK: I didn't know what's happened to my parents. There was no contact whatsoever with home. 

So when they-- then later, they put us-- next day, they put us on the train. We went-- and look for a place for us where to put us up. So we came to Nordhausen, Dora. This was the worst camp ever I was 'til-- 'til then. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you get your number? 

MR. BORK: My number I got in-- in Buna. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you know your number? 

MR. BORK: Yes, I know. God forbid if I would know my number, I was dead, because everything was known by number. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have to know it in German? 

MR. BORK: In German. 

INTERVIEWER: Not in Polish? 

MR. BORK: Not in Polish. There was no other language spoken, only Polish. 

INTERVIEWER: What is it in German? 

MR. BORK: 140-- Ein hundert und zweiundvierzig, zwei dreiundachzig, 142283. 

So you were called, you had to go for dinner. The dinner-- let's say for breakfast. The breakfast was coffee. Coffee was made out of barley, you know, grounded barley. It looks like coffee. 

Even the shell wasn't taken off. And it was cooked with water. And it was given out. 

I came to coffee, everybody wanted to be the last, because everybody, the reason, the last, they had, you know, that thick-- at least something in their stomach. And so you were eating this. 

You feel-- you felt as you were-- were eating pine needles. It was sticking your throat all over. But it's the only thing. Otherwise we'll have nothing to eat. 

We came to Dora and there I was three months. Yeah. And over there we were working on the V-1, the V-2, those big rockets. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know that's what you're working on? 

MR. BORK: Yes, we knew. We knew. Especially I knew, was very well aware of this. 

INTERVIEWER: Why were you aware? How were you aware? 

MR. BORK: Because I was in that kind, in electronics already. I knew what's going on. The death camp at the factories was everything inside, underneath the ground, in the mountains. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did they trust you to work on this? 

MR. BORK: They-- it was not-- everything was watched. Directly, I was directly working on the separate project. 'til-- 'til-- 'til January, 1945 no Jews were there in that camp. The only were there French, Italian, and Ukrainian. 

But they had nowhere to put us. Was no-- we stopped over in all kind of camps during the-- during the transport in the cattle cars. We were-- everywhere was filled up because of-- on account of the evacuation. 

So brought us in there. They brought us into Dora. In Dora, they start to ask, you know, the occupations for everyone. So I told them my occupation. So I became a-- 

MRS. BORK: Why don't you tell about what your occupation is? 

MR. BORK: Yeah. And my occupation was-- I mentioned it before, electrician. I was also working in electronics too. I know the blueprint-- I know blueprints and everything. 

So I was assigned to be a telephone repairman. Doesn't mean I had that truck to drive around like here. I had a little box and tools. And I was sent whatever needed to be fixed a telephone. 

Also, when they needed to launch, you know, to try out a missile, I had to be there in case you need-- need something to be done. So I was present, seeing it how it was going on. 

INTERVIEWER: I have a feeling we've just stopped tape, John? 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

[TONE] 

INTERVIEWER: We're going to talk about that right now. I mean, we're going to just stay on you 'til you finish that story. 

CREW: I'm ready and rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

MR. BORK: OK. This is my daughter, Ruth. She is the president of One Generation After. And she's the founder of that particular group. And I'm very proud of her. At least the memory from the six million will never be forgotten. And I hope will never-- will never repeat itself the same thing what's happened to us. 

INTERVIEWER: Would you continue your story, Mr. Bork, about Dora? 

MR. BORK: Yes, I will. So we-- we came to Dora. And I was actually assigned to a job to be a repairman. I was sent in all kind of office, wherever it is needed to be fixed a telephone. 

Sometime I looked for excuse to go in an office, because in the office, I went in, the first-- the first thing was me to go into the wastebasket, and to look something, maybe a core from an apple I found there, or a piece of crust from the-- from the sandwich, somebody throwed away a few-- a few cigarettes butts. And there was, you know-- 

And so I walking around everywhere, and I saw how those big missiles are constructed. And I thought to myself, wouldn't be able to do something here, to-- to sabotage it. And I looked there at the relays and everything. And I thought to myself, but how can I start this? 

So I got a friendly with [INAUDIBLE], Ukraine. Ukraine commando was working on the tail. In the tail was all those relays and transformers, everything was there. And I had to take a chance. And I told him, listen. Would you-- would you like to do something and I-- and I acted like this. 

He said, well, I would like to do it. But what's happen if they caught us? Well, this is the only chance. Oh, you want to take a chance? You want it to be, you know, the German with success, well, they're going to be sending to England and then so, what's going to be then? We got to do something. 

Finally, I said OK. He said OK. And I gave him the instructions what to do, how to switch the wires around, because everything was remote-controlled. 

And it was going on for a while. And one day, we marched in from the camp to work. And we-- they-- we didn't go right to the assigned commandos. They lined us up in this side, in the-- in the tunnels. 

And I see the whole commando was working on that particular project what I told them what to do. They had a little-- how you call it?-- sticks put it in the mouth and a wire in the-- steel wire in the back and their hands behind them with wires. 

MRS. BORK: Tied up. 

MR. BORK: Tied up. And lined them all on the front. They said, those people commit sabotage and this and this thing. And they are going to be hanged now in the front of you. 

Listen. If something going to happen again like this, you are going to go the same as they go with. Can you imagine that time my feeling? Only one word from that guy, I could be with them. 

But luckily enough, I told him, listen. If I'll go, you go, everything will stop. If you go, I'll be still here. And I'm going to advise the other commandos what to do. And that's what was going on for a long time. 

Then I found a different thing. They knew now what-- how the relays was-- you know, why it was switched. The way it was, they were fabricated very hermetically, because there's a lot of over there fuel, shouldn't be in those parts, otherwise we would think it will blow up. 

And I told him, the guy-- the guy, the next one, the same thing. I tried to do the same thing. I told him, just if you want to go to the bathroom, just open up the relay, urinate in there. And this will do the trick. 

So was going on 'til another time. So the same commander was hanged again. Then I said to him, I said, OK, Max, that's enough. You survived so long, let's put a stop on it, because I didn't want to take any more chances. 

Now, in April, they start to bombard those. They found out-- you know, the intelligence found out where comes every day. In that particular place were fabricated V-1, V-2, engines for the Messerschmitts, for airplanes. And they-- we came home from work, and the only food was for us that time one potato a day. If the-- the rotten potato was given to us Jews. 

But the Polacks, were they-- they were the whole majestaet, the whole administration. When in April, they saw-- they said the-- the Russian and they started come near, start the bombardment. One-- at-- one evening, he came to the loudspeakers, all the Jews, "Alle Juden Raus." Means all the Jews out on the appellplatz. See, if they say all the Jews, must be something not-- not good. 

So I went out of my block, because I was afraid to stay in that block. And I went in another block. I went under the bed-- under the bed, under the bunk. I was waiting 'til the morning. 

In the morning, the whole camp was evacuated. Put us in cattle cars, open. Was in-- this was-- excuse me. It wasn't in-- January, February, March. 

It was in January, February, March-- no, February. In April we'll be liberated. Yeah. It was in April. 15 days we were on transport. It was in April, excuse me. 

They put us in-- 300 people in a boxcar. And they start the-- you know, the train started. We didn't know where we are-- we are going to be brought. 

After a few hours, we were standing like the-- like the herring, you know, like the sardines. We couldn't stay. We had no even-- even strength to breathe. 

So we start, you know, fall down on our knees. And so we started fight each other. We start to choke each other, to bite each other. Who-- whoever was strong was on the top. Whoever was underneath was dead, was choking to death. So approximately half of us was dead. 

And so we went through the first night. Second night-- second day in the morning-- yeah, the next day in the morning, we hear a noise. They slide off the door and the SS man ask, how many of you are dead here? 

So one of us said, well, almost everybody. So we had to pull them-- pull out all those dead bodies. So who was alive was smiling to each other. Oh, at least we will have more room with the-- with the rest next-- next night. You know, we don't have to fight each other. We don't have to kill each other. 

So soon we pull out all those dead bodies. They emptied out from the back and they filled in again the same amount, 300 people. And this was going on for 12 days. 

So we had-- had not water. We had no food. Nothing whatsoever. We got so dehydrated our lips was cracking. It was no roof, was open, in the boxcar, open. 

So we-- we-- we thought maybe we'll-- we had those tin cups. So we took off our shirt, we made long stripes-- strips and we tied up the thing. We thought we would-- while the train is moving, maybe we'll scoop up a little snow. The snow was still on the ground that time. 

And we couldn't do it, because every car had an SS. They start to shoot on us. We couldn't do it. We tried just to put the hand down, not our heads. 

Well, we grabbed the snow. We brought it up. You know, the hole was-- could move. You know, they start to attack. Everybody wants a little bit. We couldn't do anything. 

And we thought still some people, you know, had something-- the mind were working. But the minute the mind start to working, you-- this was all were gone. And I said to a friend-- no. 

So some of us, we took the cup-- who still could urinate, urinated in the cups we were wiping our lips. 

MRS. BORK: Where we were washing 

MR. BORK: Washing the-- yeah. Wetting our lips. Wetting our lips. Used to stay, you know-- some people, they can't imagine this. When-- when you in a situation like this, you are desperate. You do anything. 

And then I said to my friend, you know what. Animals that live in the wilderness, they live on meat. Maybe we-- they have-- we have so many bodies around here. 

But there was no meat. Was no flesh on the bone, was only skin and bones. This is the way they looked, all of them. So we had to cut off the bodies. We took out, we ate the liver from them. 

MRS. BORK: Cut off the-- 

MR. BORK: We cut off the body. We ate the-- 

MRS. BORK: Open. 

MR. BORK: Huh? 

MRS. BORK: Open, not off. 

MR. BORK: You open the-- and we ate the liver to survive. But this was going on for 12 days. 

Finally, we came to Bergen-Belsen. They opened up the trains. We couldn't walk out. We walk out on our knees and our hands. 

MRS. BORK: You were crawling. 

MR. BORK: We were crawling, because we had no-- any more strength. Anybody tried to stand up were dizzy. They fell down. 

And this was the end of the transport. I just want to-- I don't want to make too long things. 

INTERVIEWER: Ruth, did you ever ask your father why he's willing to speak of this. This is the very first time that these kinds of gory details have come to my ears. Do you know-- would you ask him why he was willing to tell us. 

RUTH BORK: Sure. Why-- why do you go through all these-- all the telling of these painful experiences? 

MR. BORK: Why? Was always-- this was my point to survive. How to say? If I wouldn't thought of to do this, I wouldn't care to survive, because this was horrible to survive. 

So this was my aim, to-- to come and tell people the story. 

RUTH BORK: Did you try to tell people before? 

MR. BORK: Before-- 

RUTH BORK: Early-- before today? Before now? 

MR. BORK: Many times I tried. And I was always shut up. Oh, we are not interested. We don't want to hear. It's too hard to listen. 

Oh, we had here hard time too, I've been told from a lot of people. During the war, they said, we had here hard. We couldn't eat meat, because everything was on stamps. We had to eat chicken. 

I said, this was a hard time for you people? You had to eat chicken instead of-- of meat? So were no use to talk. 

INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Bork? 

MRS. BORK: We have been waiting for so many years for people to wake up, to want to learn about the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you in the ghetto? You didn't finish your story. 

MRS. BORK: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And I worry about time. 

MRS. BORK: Well, in the ghetto, after my father was buried, it was-- we were not supposed to congregate in the ghetto, because they somehow didn't want people to-- to be in groups, to not organize anything, any resistance or anything. So it was impossible to get together. And the curfew was at 5 o'clock and people had to be in their own place. 

But the Jews resisted in any way they could. Although it's the-- the impression is that the ghetto, the people from Lodz ghetto did not resist and went like sheep to the slaughter-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did they resist? 

MRS. BORK: Which is not true. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they resist? 

MRS. BORK: I-- how did they resist? For-- for example, knowing that you cannot congregate any place, and Jews without praying, without their daily prayer, especially Orthodox Jews or any-- anyone who was religious would try to get together a minyan, which you know it. A minyan is 10 people to be able to pray. 

So it-- the congregation was in our house for a whole-- whole month. And we-- it was people were coming and praying every day, twice a day. And we had to stay and watch outside so if the German soldiers would pass by, we would give a signal and people would throw off their shawls and their tefillin and would disperse. 

After my father's death, there when the ghetto was closed and daily transports to-- to the unknown-- we did not know where these transport were going. They were transport daily of 10,000 people and families. 

But first it was for Verbrechers which-- which-- which means criminals. Criminals were for some-- someone who had stolen a piece of board to-- to heat the fire, to make a fire in the house to be able to cook something for the family. 

INTERVIEWER: Did Rumkowski pick out all the people-- 

MRS. BORK: Rumkowski? Well, Rumkowski, if he would let the-- the people-- if he would close the ghetto and would let the people do what-- what the people would want to do, many more would survive, because people would get out of the ghetto into-- to-- trying to get to small places. Maybe more gentile people would help some people survive. But he felt that he had the power in his hand. And I believe that-- it's much of his-- his doing-- was doing that so many people have died in the ghetto from starvation, sickness, and that so many had been deported. 

INTERVIEWER: When-- you lived in the ghetto four years? 

MRS. BORK: Yes. From 1940 'til '44. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the condition in the ghetto toward the end? Was it much worse than the beginning? Was it about the same? 

MRS. BORK: Oh, yes. Not about the same. The beginning, people had hoped that things will change. But hopelessly, it got worse from day to day. From-- people died from starvation, from illness. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you do? What were you doing? Physically, spiritually, what were you doing? 

MRS. BORK: Oh, we were put to work. We had-- we worked in-- in factories. There were all kind of factories, metal factories, anything that they-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did they take you out of the ghetto to go to the factories? 

MRS. BORK: No. Oh, no. It was in the ghetto. These-- these factories were formed in the ghetto. When they-- when they deported the sick from the hospitals and elderly and have taken all the children out of the-- of the ghetto, they made from all of these buildings factories. And people have-- have-- have been working. 

I was working with my oldest brother in the tailoring factory, which we made uniforms for the German army, and was working until the dissolving of the ghetto when they have told us that they are going to resettle us because the Russian army is coming closer to the-- to Lodz and there would be fighting and bombarding and many lives would-- would be lost. So they was going to save our lives by sending us out this-- to place us in different places. 

INTERVIEWER: I have heard that life in the ghetto was very difficult because they-- they tossed the babies. Do you know about that? 

MRS. BORK: About what? 

INTERVIEWER: About the babies in the ghetto. Do you know anything about that? 

MRS. BORK: Babies in the ghetto? Well, until-- I don't remember exactly the year. I believe it must have been '43, when there was a curfew of two weeks. And that was the most tragic time in the ghetto. 

This is one when they grabbed out all the babies and took all the babies and all the-- the elderly and the sick, as I said, out of the ghetto. It was the worst time, because there was no food, no water. You could not be in the house. We had to get out. They-- they told us if we-- if anyone would stay back in the-- in the house, they would shoot anyone, plus the rest of the family. 

So everybody had to get out. We-- street by street, they have selected the people to throw in-- onto the-- these open trucks and delivered them into the hospital. And from there, they congregated all the people in the-- in the hospital. And from there on, they were sent to their destination, to Auschwitz or any other-- 

MR. BORK: Treblinka 

MRS. BORK: --any other death camp that have never been heard of or seen any more. 

There was an incident, which is-- this is a incident that cannot be forgotten. There was a child, which the parents of this little, little two-year-old little girl, or even less, was deported for some reason or other. And the grandparents had this baby. 

And when the children were taken out of the ghetto, these grandparents wanted to save the baby. So they did put her-- in Europe, laundry was boiled in order to for-- for sanitary reasons. The laundry was boiled. So there were these big kettles to boil the laundry. 

They-- so the grand parents put the baby with a little tiny stool into this kettle with water and put it on the stove with a little low fire so that the water would be lukewarm and told the baby not-- if they were here, open the door. Anyone a knock on the door or any voices, strange voices-- voices, so the baby would stop breathing in order not to be heard that there was a baby in this kettle. 

And this is how it was. The Germans came knocking. They looked and searched in everywhere. They knew there was a baby, somewhere was a baby. And they search, but found no baby. This baby was sitting in this kettle with warm water. 

And can you-- it's beyond imagination. When this baby came out of this tea-- of this kettle after the Germans had left the street and had selected their victims to send out, and the envy of the parents whose children have been taken away, that there was-- this child has been saved, it's beyond imagination. Just the feeling of these parents, these parents who have been-- who have lost their children, the-- the joy that there was a baby left alive, plus the envy that this one was the lucky one to be saved and their own have been taken away, it's not easy to describe. It's awful hard to describe this-- this kind of-- 

INTERVIEWER: The baby never said-- never-- 

MRS. BORK: Never. 

INTERVIEWER: The baby somehow knew not to make a sound. 

MRS. BORK: That's right. Even a newborn child if it would be in the ghetto had the feeling, had sensed that-- that there is danger. So-- so this-- this child heard and knew that this is how she had to survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Did that child survive? 

MRS. BORK: It survived until the-- the deportation on into Auschwitz. So this was one of very few babies, unless there was some baby born after-- after this deportation. People bore children which were pregnant at the time and was unknown. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to you? What was the rest of your experience? 

MRS. BORK: What happened to me, one-- my oldest brother and I were deported to Auschwitz. [INAUDIBLE] When we came into Auschwitz, we were separated, like all other, male were separated from female. And I came into Auschwitz. 

And somehow, I don't know to this day, I will never be able to figure out how it was that I wound up in every camp in Auschwitz there was an existence, I believe, because I never stayed more than two or three days in a-- in a block until the end, before I was sent to Bergen-Belsen. And so I wound up in the-- in the French camp. And I wound up in Birkenau. And then a few days in-- in-- in a different camp with the Gypsies. And I don't know how it happened, but I was shifted from one place to another. 

INTERVIEWER: They moved you? 

MRS. BORK: Right. Right. And when I came in to the block level where I was in-- was to stay until I was selected to be sent to Bergen-Belsen. Transports kept coming in from the ghetto, because daily-- they-- transport kept coming in. So I was in the second bunk, since I was small with-- with the girls my age. And we saw a transport and one of the girls left the barrack. 

When-- when-- when these transport were going-- passing by, we-- we-- we saw them coming into the camp. The doors were open, but we was-- we were not allowed to get out from the-- from these barracks. So one little girl ran out. She thought she saw one of her family, either a brother or whoever. And she ran out to let them know that she is alive. 

So she was grabbed and was severely beaten. And I could not understand the reason why they have beaten her. And there were these big signs on the-- on-- in the barracks every so-- so many meters. So this sign said, "Reden ist Silbern, Schweigen ist Gold," which means in English "silence is gold." 

No one really-- I don't know whether anyone really understood the-- the meaning of it until you had your own experience. I ask someone, why is this little girl beaten? Was she not-- only wanted to run out and let them know-- let her family know that she is alive. And for this, asking this question, I was severely beaten. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

MRS. BORK: I was beaten with a rubber hose-- not a hose, but it was, you know, filled. I don't know what you call it? What do you-- 

INTERVIEWER: Truncheon 

MRS. BORK: A club, these black clubs. And I was beaten over the head so-- so long until I collapsed. And after I collapsed, I-- when I woke up, I found myself in a pool of water, which they had poured water over me. 

And I was beaten again and asked to kneel and-- with two large bricks as big-- as big as this picture, to have your hands up high. So how long after a beating like that can you stay on your knees and-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were on your knees holding the bricks? 

MRS. BORK: No. On your knees and the bricks are all the way up. So I-- as long as I could. And then I collapsed again. 

And when I got up, I had my two teeth, upper two teeth hanging out with the-- with the flesh of the gum. And I have an injury, a permanent injury in my left ear that can not be corrected. My left eye-- the half of the head is injured. I have a fracture on my cheek. 

My left eye has been operated twice on, and need a-- need another one. And I don't know whether this-- this will help. And this was one experience in Auschwitz. 

Then when I was selected out from Auschwitz and sent to Bergen-Belsen, at this time when I came to Bergen-Belsen, there were no blocks yet. There was these tents, the large tents, which housed about 1,500. These barracks in Auschwitz also housed 1,500 women, more or less. 

And in these cells, we're lying head to head and feet to feet, laid out like-- you know, how should I say? Like-- 

MR. BORK: Sardines? 

MRS. BORK: Not like sardines, but in a different way, a few rows on as big as the block was on straw, without any food. We got once a day a soup. And the soup we got was-- we didn't get any-- any pots or any dishes to-- where to put the soup in. But there was a big pile of empty cans, which probably the German SS had lived there and have used cans and they just piled up this pile of empty cans. 

And everyone who-- with it-- that came in to Bergen-Belsen-- and there were, I believe, 500 or 600 women the first transport. So everybody grabbed a can, whichever you could grab. So-- and this is what we got the soup in that was once a day. 

There was no water to wash. There was nothing. They had pipes hanging on-- on stilts that you-- with dripping water all the way, so if we needed a drink, this is when you put your head down under the-- the drip to-- to-- to have-- to wet your mouth. 

There were no outhouses. There was no-- no toilets or anything of that kind. There was a big ditch with-- with-- what do you call it? The-- [INAUDIBLE] Oh. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

MRS. BORK: Help me out. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. Listen, John. We're going to-- we have exactly 10 minutes of tape-- 

