[BEEPING] SUBJECT: Again, um, what I was saying was that, um, which is-- reminded me of, of course, the-- you know, the great witness, Bonhoeffer. Um, my friend-- our friend, I could say really. We were good family friends. Karl Dietrich Bracher, which has written essentially the book on the Nazi or on Nazi Germany, which I still think is the best by far and has done some important specialized studies. Well it wasn't his field. Uh, he simply did this as a matter of conscience and he's a brilliant historian. 

Anyway, his wife is a Bonhoeffer, and we came to, uh, know them in 1963, '64, when we all spent a year out together at, uh, at Palo Alto at that famous west coast think tank. And for some reason which I will now forget, we took the Brachers and their two kids back to the airport by car. And while we had become very friendly and talked about many, many other things, we didn't talk very intimately for some reason until that trip. And it turned out that she had lost more members of her family to the Nazis than I had lost on my part. 

Of my entire family, two-- uh, of that older group, two of my father's two sisters were both killed. She lost her father and her uncle and it just went very far through. And um, I don't think that she or her in-laws, uh-- this goes beyond this, uh, are very proud of the church particularly at all. And I don't think it, uh, you know, played a heroic part by any means. It generated these few people, like Bonhoeffer, who simply did this as a-- on his personal-- personal hook. 

Um, no, I don't think any-- any group played a terribly heroic part, but I think that it is, at the same time, true, I will say, that, uh-- you know, it takes a great deal to be heroic. And the Nazis made it very hard to be heroic. And I think my own-- I-- when I speak of my own private guerrilla war against people like [? Berm ?] and so on, I don't mean that they should have been in the resistance. I mean that they should have left. And I think that's as far as I would be willing to see this kind of thing through. 

INTERVIEWER: But from the vantage point of a historian, again, the-- in Poland, in Czechoslovakia perhaps, I don't know, the church seemed to have played, uh-- he seemed to have been co-conspirators by the testimony of the survivors. Do you see it in that fashion? 

SUBJECT: Co-conspirators? 

INTERVIEWER: With the Nazis because they didn't-- 

SUBJECT: Oh. 

INTERVIEWER: --they didn't do enough, or they-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, well no, I really don't know enough to say this. Some-- some did, some didn't. Uh. And not conspirators. I think that many simply played ball or didn't have the guts to quit or retire or whatever else. Um, no, I don't think the record is, in that sense, you know, the record of heroism is terribly great or large or impressive by any means. Uh, but I think, uh, the most that essentially one can-- can talk about it in some numbers is the kind of, um, uh, quiet resistance that you got from people taking chances hiding-- hiding Jews. 

Um, there is a television sort of personality, of which Germany doesn't have very many. Rosenthal does a very, uh, popular quiz program who was hidden in the outskirts of Berlin in a kind of garden house. Berlin is a very, very large town and the outskirts have lots of, uh, little sort of-- I want to call them detached-- detached houses and-- and little places out where you keep the gardening tools. And there were air raid shelters in some places and so on. 

And he was sitting out there during the entire war. And, uh, again, we interviewed him and he said that he was treated by the people who hid him-- all the neighbors all around who had-- all had the same air raid shelter-- this kind of mascot. And they took this sort of rye line that as long as a Jew is in the shelter with us, the allies won't hit, you know, hit this bunker. Um, whatever, you know, however, poor the joke, the, uh, this was-- this was his environment. 

Now there was-- there was a certain amount of that. And it's very-- you know, the Israelis have done a certain amount of research into that, of course, but, uh, uh, that-- that tends to be, uh, very scattered, relatively private, unorganized stuff. And organized resistance-- you know, there's Hoffman's big book on the resistance. It's the-- but essentially, what you get out of that is the sense that-- that he mentions everybody, just about. Became famous. The Scholl, you know. Brother and sister at University of Munich. And the Bonhoeffers and-- and so on, you know? Uh, the Stauffenberg group, uh, and so forth, which, uh, which families say that they maybe did this much too late and so on. 

One doesn't get much sense of a lot of organization. You know, really organized resistance. I think that, um, it was probably not too easy, but in any event, there wasn't much. And what there was of admirable behavior, uh, it tends to be, for the most part, small stories of individuals trusting maybe one or two other individuals or something like that, uh, and doing their part, but there wasn't, you know, that-- that's really quite a different kind of thing. 

INTERVIEWER: And this leads to the big question, which is the formation of the state of Israel, which supposedly was the payment for-- in payment for the six million lives. And, uh, in your opinion, uh, what was the effect of the-- from a historical perspective, what was the effect of the Holocaust? 

SUBJECT: The effect? 

INTERVIEWER: In terms of the realization of the, uh, state. 

SUBJECT: Well, um, I don't know. The thing is, just being a historian doesn't mean you have an all-around, uh, you know, that you're a historian of everything. Uh, all I know is the sense of what I read in the papers about things of that sort. I mean, my impression is that it wasn't simply a matter of-- of, uh, uh, payment, since after all, there was a lot of resistance, even to the state, on the part of the British and there was a fair amount of violence before it could become de facto a state. 

Um, I don't know. I mean, uh, I, uh, um, I mean, it obviously has a whole variety of effects. I mean, I think one of them is the, uh, the kind of, um, sporting-- sporting attitude that a lot of people take towards individuals. Uh, you know, Six Day War, you know, in Tel Aviv. These things are, uh, I think a lot of people find very impressive. 

I was, uh-- on the day of the, uh, botched rescue mission in Iran, I was in the Austin airport and some very loud voice behind me was discussing it with a friend of his and he was saying something I was to hear and read in the next two or three days. Oh, should have turned it over to the Jews. They would have done it right. And we can't do anything right and they do and so on, you know? 

Now that kind of talk, uh, is, uh, obviously very practical. Tan-- you know, tangible result of Israel and of also, of course, of the kind of militancy that, uh, that is implied and, you know, willingness to use force and do it quickly and effectively and so on. I think that that's probably as important as almost anything in the, um, in the way in which people feel about, you know, Jews and Israel and so on. 

The, uh, the old picture of the Jew was totally urban and totally out of condition and totally incapable of agriculture and bearing arms and so on, uh, which is a myth in any event. Uh, is, uh, at least now been pretty effectively been destroyed, you know? And that probably has some sort of, um, I would say most likely, but in this, I'd say this is pretty much sitting outside. It's not a field in which I feel I have very much, um-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well, then-- then let's take-- 

SUBJECT: --much confidence. 

INTERVIEWER: --let's take another, uh, tack, then. Many people feel that the Holocaust and the activities that surround it have been exaggerated. Uh, having-- were a myth in the first place. Now this is a matter of, uh, historical record. Um, commentary-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. For the myth business, it's just-- that's just crazy. I mean, I-- I know. I have read this stuff and I know there are a couple of apologists who have written a couple of books about it. I once ran into a former colleague of mine in Columbia, a Hungarian Jew, by the way, although underground, that fact who, um, said there were only four. I said, well, you know, and so forth. I mean, there is that, I'm sure. Um. 

INTERVIEWER: Four million, you mean. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Uh, I think even four was pretty much only, even if there were only four, but, um, I don't-- I don't really think that that is-- I mean, it-- it may have some sort of appeal to some people. There's one German newspaper that keeps plugging this line, the so called "Soldatensheil" Uh, and there are others, you know? And there's a man in Hagen who has written a couple of books on the subject, which are totally worthless and, uh, I do not believe that, um, that this is any very serious, uh-- I mean, anybody who'd be taken seriously thinks that it was exaggerated or-- either myth or exaggerated, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: Can you say unequivocally, Professor Peter Gay, that the historical record proves that the events actually did take place? The atrocities actually did take place? 

SUBJECT: Well sure. I mean, there's just-- there's no-- no-- no doubt about it. I mean, the evidence for that is so, uh, overwhelming and so detailed. I mean, you can just go into detail about this any way you want to. You can, uh, take, uh, memoirs on all sides. You can take confessions of people. There are famous-- they're not maybe very many but one or two famous SS confessions of people who were there. 

And, uh, left-- uh, the famous one. What was his name? Who left his fortune to-- to the Jews. I mean, of course. I mean, you can do documentaries camp by camp and you can do it city by city and you can do it, uh-- I mean, obviously, you are never going to have what might be called the kind of final count the way you would if it was a large airplane disaster, where after, say, a couple of weeks, you have all the-- all the exact numbers. And room for error is going to be, uh, if it is 1/10 of 1% maybe. 

But, uh, of course. I mean, there's no-- I mean, I-- I think that's been documented so, you know, over the richly that I-- I don't think any-- any doubt makes any-- makes any sense at all. No. 

INTERVIEWER: How-- how do you, uh, um, evaluate, or how do you, uh, comment on, understand, the Hungarians, for example, who were under-- who were allies of the Germans until 1944? And then there was this and who were allowing Jews to be workers-- laborers-- but then there was this purge. How do you understand that? 

SUBJECT: I really don't-- I don't know. Uh, you know, much of this seems to me was the, um, the result of certain shifts within the-- the regime or, uh, pressure to go along. Insidiousness in this part or laxity in somewhere else. I mean, the, uh, um, um, the general rule was, I would think, that the kind of fascist law would prevail and the worst elements would eventually or immediately prevail, whether in the camps or in the policies about the camps and so on, you know? 

Um, but, uh, I-- I don't-- you know, beyond that, I don't-- I don't know. I mean I think that, for example, the Italians, you know, uh, had to be more as coerced into the first anti-Semitic laws in '38, '39. The Austrians adopted them with alacrity. I mean, I always thought that, uh, all this junk about, you know, beautiful Blue Danube Vienna and all that, that it took Austria about a week to reach a point that it took the Germans five years to reach. I mean, really. I don't, uh-- so I think that, you know, you're dealing with, um, uh-- again, I'm sure you can point to Austrians who were, you know, different and so on. I mean, again, I'm not going to talk about whole-- whole nations. 

But I mean, I think that, you know, the variations have to do with many things. Pressure from the Germans. Pressure from the inside. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, but, um I don't know whether you can comment on the-- what seems to be the vindictiveness-- vindictiveness of the various populations, particularly the German, uh, SS gestapo at the end. They knew they were losing when they knew, um, that many other things were at stake. Still killing off the Jews rather than-- and diverting the trains to-- from armament supply to death camps. 

SUBJECT: I-- I cannot give a rational explanation for them because it was irrational behavior. Even from their-- you know, from their point of view, by rational if you mean advantaged. Look, I will tell you a non-historian-- not about killing people but an example of this kind of mani-- the maniacal quality of it all, which I think has got to be kept in mind. 

Um, in the early 1930s, uh, the Dutch trade unions endowed a library in Amsterdam-- or the International Institute for Social History, which gathered together very valuable papers-- Marxists, revisionists, socialists all over the world-- in fact, in 1950, '51, I did my dissertation mostly there. I worked on a German Social Democrat named Eduard Bernstein. Who was one, incidently, one of those people who left the Jewish religion in this former wave, along with his friends leaving other religions. They had a kind of ceremony. 

Anyway, um, when the Nazis occupied Amsterdam in the middle of May, 1940, they threw out the director immediately and the staff and staffed the thing with their own people. It was one of those typical Dutch houses, you know? Three windows wide and five stories high. Very deep. Filled with thousands of books and wonderful documents. Remarkable. The only other good library like that is the Leningrad, and the Russians always try to trade. And in fact, they had-- sometimes I think I had fantasies of taking it over because they-- anyway, it was a great library. 

Uh, and Rosenberg-- Alfred Rosenberg-- got involved in this because this was to him a goldmine of studying international jewery, for which he had this great project that he was going to do. Right through the war, he and his people were working away trying to prove, you know, the tie between communism and Judaism and all. This nutty pseudoscience that this man was doing. 

Well Amsterdam was liberated. The director was alive and in Amsterdam. He called around very excitedly to his, uh, you know, colleagues. He said let's go and see what's happened. Well the first thing that he rushed over to Keizersgracht 266 to look at their beloved library and the building was empty. There wasn't-- there wasn't anything there. Nothing. Nothing. Not even-- they-- they told me the story. Not even the teapot and the spoons-- cheap spoons-- they used, you know, to make themselves tea when they would have their eleventsies. 

And they weren't totally spared. The thing-- there was no-- no trace, no clue. They advertised all over Europe. They wrote to book dealers everywhere. And you remember, Europe was after pretty well destroyed and, uh, it was a-- anyway, they tried their best. The thing was just gone without-- without any trace. One day, in 1946, a couple of comrades-- I mean social democratic workers in Berlin-- oh, I'm sorry. In Hamburg-- were taking a bike tour on one of those-- along one of those canals which were near the other ones, the other canals. 

And they decided to have lunch on one of those little kind of flat-bottom boats. Now they could-- they saw one that seemed to be deserted and they put a lot of boxes on it and they made themselves comfortable and they got curious. And a couple of the boxes were open. They looked. There were books in there. And they'd read about this. It was the library. 

The Nazis had in the middle-- after the invasion of Normandy, in the middle of presumably greater concern, spent lots and lots of labor, you know, and time and raw materials to pack up this entire five-story li-- huge library-- to bring back to Germany so they could study international jewelry. You know, they were los-- as you said, they were losing the war. And they were-- you know, it was-- the whole thing is totally insane. 

And I think that this is, you know, not as horrendous as rounding up people to kill them, but I mean, it's-- it's the same mentality. I think that-- that, uh, there was a kind of, uh-- these were the people in the end who-- who had the total upper hand and, uh, and when-- when things began to unravel, all the more. And I really think that one has to, uh-- you know, the people whom they employed in the camps after all were also the scum of the earth, whether they were Germans or Ukrainians or Lithuanians or Poles or whatever, and they were the criminal elements, to use that favorite phrase. And, um, their hand became freer and freer and said, in a strange way, his life became-- on the front-- became harder and harder. 

But you know, this little incident has-- has-- has always stayed with me as an example of how crazy these people really were. You know? And there are many other examples like that. So that, in the end, the pure, rational, cold-blooded calculation of staving off defeat or keeping the enemy or maybe even winning or throwing more into the Battle of the Bulge or whatever, was sidetracked for this insane, you know, mass murder. And I think that, uh-- that doesn't explain it but I do think one has to-- the categories of sanity are no longer, it seemed to me, no longer applicable because you can not in any way reconcile this with any reasonable if unpleasant aim, like winning the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Um, I promise, so last question. Very often, I hear from the survivors that when they returned to their homes, wherever those homes were, after the horrendous camp experience or hiding experience, whatever, they were confronted with hostility in their hometowns, their home, their streets, their houses. The populations turned on them and I don't know what that means or how it happens or perhaps there's a historical reason why this happened. I-- I-- I just-- 

SUBJECT: I don't know. Of course, um, most of them went to, uh, what? The DP camps and then left. Some did not. I mean, the German Jewish community now, which is something like-- or that is to say, the Jews living in Germany as Jews-- because there are some who are living there again under these laws differently-- must be now under 35,000. Maybe 32,000 I think is about right. I would venture to say that more than half of those are not German Jews. 

Uh, we have-- my wife and I-- have done some work on the Munich community and on the Berlin community and we know both of them have roughly 5,600-- very roughly-- close to 6,000 members. Of those, more than half in both places are Eastern Europeans. These are people who came, uh-- they were not from-- they did not go back home at all, if by home you mean Poland or whatever. 

Uh, I don't know whom you have in mind. If you include Germans in this, the number of Germans, of course, who went back was small. The number of Germans who survived, I told you-- between 1,100 and 1,400 in Berlin. There may have been 2,500 or so. An uncle of mine survived-- the husband of one my aunts who was killed-- by jumping off of a train that would have taken him east and breaking his leg and then being put in a hospital. I mean, this too was, you know, part of it. And then the war was over and he was liberated and he was free. And he lived in-- actually, what was to become East Germany until perhaps 10 years ago. He lived to be a ripe old age. 

I think with Germany-- I don't know too much about this. I suspect that, uh, there wasn't too much of that because there wasn't too much returning in any case. It was the people who survived, uh, who, uh, who stayed in the, uh, who stayed where they were. And then there came to be what German Jews came to call to us a period of what they called white anti-Semitism, which was when Jews were superior, perfect, and nothing could go wrong and so on. 

And I myself find the criticism of Israel that you now find in Germany very healthy. I mean, it's very, very-- whether I agree with every detail or not and every individual, it's a complex matter. I have very complicated feelings about that. But anyway, I think that the capacity is simply to say, all right, now we are looking at this as your friends, as they are, and suppliers, as they are, and cultural exchanges go on all the time. But we know if you're free enough, it is to say we don't agree with this or that. I think that's fine. Um, so I don't know where-- what you're talking about-- let's say what countries you're talking about. 

INTERVIEWER: Poland. 

SUBJECT: Look, in Poland, a friend of ours who's a-- a young-- young German Jew who's actually in the United States, now working for the Die Zeit this weekly-- liberal weekly paper in Hamburg-- wrote us a letter about a year ago. He was on a story in Poland, Warsaw. And the people around him-- or these couple of people began talking about Jewish influence. The various-- you know, the various influence of the Jews. He said he couldn't believe it. 

You know, there were practically no Jews left. I mean, the Jewish power in Poland, you know, to talk about that is a sign of, um, a sort of endemic, uh, nonsense. Um, if it happened in Germany, where it would have been rarer, I would think it would be an expression of, you know, simply unmanageable guilt, which was certainly very-- very prevalent and which did, then, eventuate in what I'd call this German anti-Semitism. 

Eastern Europe, I don't know. Um, it would be interesting to find out from people who now have recently gone, like [INAUDIBLE] or [INAUDIBLE] or something, who have a good sense of this, especially somewhere like [INAUDIBLE] which was there a lot, what things are like now. My impression from him is that they have not changed very much there. And in that sense, the killing of the Jews has done the anti-Semites no particular good, you know, although it does prove something that I've always believed about anti-Semitism, and that is you don't have to have-- don't need any Jews for anti-Semitism at all. You don't need any because you can make-- you can make things up as you go along. 

And, uh, it's after all very characteristic, you know, that, um, if you look at certain prevailing charges that used to be made about Jews, let's say 75 years ago where I know a little bit more, they would say, well, uh, Jews are all capitalists. That would be sort of the radical view. And Jews are untrustworthy because they were originally all capitalists. 

And there were others-- the liberals-- who would say, well Jews are all religious. They are very clannish. Unlike Catholics, they don't go out into the world and they won't talk to us. They wanted to marry with us and therefore we can't like them. You know? And then, of course, there was the right-wing view that Jews are all communists, you know? 

So the point was that it seems to me that it's, uh, you know, Hans von Bulow. The-- the-- the composer and pianist, you know, Cosima's first husband who was an anti-Semite for a while, once said he got over it. He described it as a disease that he had, you know? That he-- there was nothing rational about it and he was sort of sorry and he was glad he was over it. And I think that's really in a way what-- what one can say. Not clobber social conditions and political realities and all that, but ultimately, you know. 

Uh, and Kurt Lewin amongst psychologists has always said this-- the argument that Jews should not make any waves and keep a low profile and not make themselves unpopular and not wear jewelry and not talk loud in the streets and all that-- it's a lot of junk, you know? A person that's anti-Semite, he doesn't need a loud, rich, noisy, vulgar Jew to be an anti-Semitic. I think he's not, he won't mind that one. He will remind him of his uncle or something. 

So I myself have never believed in that low profile argument. Don't stay out of politics or whatever. I think that's-- has nothing to do with anti-Semitism, in my opinion. And the best example of Poland, a year ago, when a friend of ours said he couldn't believe his ears. So I could see that, uh, uh, killing Jews doesn't help in that sense at all. It's ironic but, uh, I think that is true. 

INTERVIEWER: Wow. Half an hour. You were terrific. 

SUBJECT: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER: You were wonderful. I really-- [INAUDIBLE] in what country and what year. 

MENDEL: My name is Mendel [INAUDIBLE]. I was born in Vienna. 