INTERVIEWER 1: Just continue, uh, Doctor 

SUBJECT: OK. We were five months underneath that floor of the grain shelter, or grain storage, uh, shed. The man who kept us there-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In those-- 

SUBJECT: --with-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In those five months, did you sleep, dream? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We slept almost continually. We lost complete element of time. We had no calendars. We had no watches. We had nothing. 

If at all possible, we very little communicated with-- with-- with the man, with the farmer, because he used to do this very quickly. He used to take out the two bricks from underneath the foundation, put in the pot of food, whatever it-- there was there, and just close it up and walk away. There were times when we haven't spoken to him for weeks, not a word, nothing at all. 

And the thing that we used to hear were firing, some of the firing, and we thought perhaps it was by some of the Nazis-- Nazi command that was stationed not far from the farm who were doing some exercises, practice shooting. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you talk to your mother? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. Uh, we spoke to my mother, and we just didn't know when the end will be, and we lived only for the sake of hope, nothing else. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did-- were there any dreams from that time that you recall? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I had-- I had-- [CLEARS THROAT] unbelievable almost nightmares where I used to wake up and scream, and my mother used to shake me just to quiet it down. And it-- somehow, apparently, it happened at night, or nobody hear-- heard us. It-- it was fortunate for us at that time. And the nightmares were because of that grave experience that-- the one I had escaped from. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You remember the content-- what was in the nightmare? 

SUBJECT: They were horror nightmares. There were, uh, hangings. They were, uh, butchering of-- of cattle. Uh, I remember, there was one thing-- a cat. We'd never had a cat, and I don't know what it-- what-- what it was like to have a pet cat. 

But I pictured a cat, somehow, and that cat kept on coming after me. And then somehow, someone had split the cat's, uh, belly open, and everything just fell right out. Things like that. [SIGHS] 

The war began going pretty well for the Nazis. And the farmer became scared with the outlook towards the future. He could not see. He was hoping that the war would end, and the Russian armies would, uh, come back, that the Nazis would retreat back again, and he would be able to pull us out from underneath the floor and say, well, here we are, thank god. 

But things went in reverse at that time, and he became very despondent. He did not know what to do with us, because if we were caught underneath his grain storage shed, he would have been executed just exactly like we were, same time, same moment. Matter of fact, his father would also have been, who had known nothing about it-- completely innocent. 

He began thinking as to how to dispose of us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you know this? And what was the smell like underneath that? I mean, you had no-- 

SUBJECT: Since it was exposed with cracks in the foundation to the outside air, and the air was very cold at that time, there was very little smell. Whatever excretions we-- the biologic, physiologic excretions, we just dug a little hole into-- into the foundation-- into the ground, actually, in the sand, and just buried it and covered it up. And this is the only way. 

And because of the fact that it was during wintertime, during wintertime, everything was frozen, so there was no smell. Everything used to freeze, because the weather there is very severe in terms of cold temperatures, always below 0. Yes, we had-- we had a few of our blankets that we had given him to prepare for us. We had a few of our, uh, uh-- there were-- there were lamb coats, made out of lamb, lamb wool coats, and those are the only things that kept us-- kept us warm. And of course, two bodies' heat together-- we were lying together very close, my mother and I. 

OK, um, how did we know he was trying to get rid of us? We began detecting pieces of glass in the food-- crushed glass. And the first piece of glass that I found in my food, I thought it was an accident-- something broke, and a piece of glass got in there. And then my mother found some more in her food, and I found some more in my food. 

And the following day, the same thing, and the same thing, and we stopped eating at all, entirely. We were accepting the food, and we were pouring it out underneath the floor without him knowing that we are not consuming it. And that is when my mother and I realized that something had gone drastically wrong, and that we must do everything we can to get out of there. 

And we have. On a Sunday, it was, and it was a blizzard outside-- actually a blizzard. And I got dressed in my mother's clothes-- a skirt, uh, boots, a very thick, heavy, large babushka over my head. And we broke through a few more bricks from underneath that wall, and I crawled out into the snowstorm. 

And when I stood up on my feet, my feet gave right from under me, not-- lack of use for five months. I just fell right-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You must have been weak from no food. 

SUBJECT: Extremely weak, and mostly weak because of my muscular inaction. My legs were-- they felt-- I did not feel that I had legs under me. So I kept on walking, and falling, and walking, and falling, continually. But the urge, the impact to survive, in those days, in those moments, in those trying moments, are so great that it meant either life or death. If I was caught, obviously, I would have been executed. 

And I walked-- we decided to go to another farmer two miles away from the one that we were at. And I made it. And I did not go into the farmer's house, but I got into his barn, waiting for him to come to feed his cattle so I could make my first contact with him. 

And I was hiding-- hiding underneath some bales of hay that he had to feed the cattle with. And when he came in in the evening to feed the cattle, I got out. He got deathly frightened. 

He recognized me, and he said, what are you doing here? I don't want you here. I want you to leave immediately. I have a family, and if they'll catch you here, they will execute all of us. Don't you know what's going on? 

I said, no. They're executing everyone who has any type of contact or any type of assistance, giving any type of assistance or help to any of the Jewish people. I said to him, well, I have no place to go, and you have no choice. The only thing you can do is, you can destroy me, you can kill me if you'd like, but I'm not leaving this place. 

And since they are executing people who are hiding some of the Jewish population, the members of the Jewish community, then it would be to your benefit to hide me for a while until I can get a little strength in me so I'll-- could go away. I will go away, I promise you. But I cannot leave today. And if you should fail to do so, and if they should catch me and torture me, I will tell them that you kept me here. 

And he became very disturbed, and he walked away, and I was left in the barn with the cattle. About an hour later, he came back and brought me some black bread and a-- a-- a large cup of hot water-- no tea, no coffee, no nothing. There was no such a thing in those days, not during the war. And he must have seen how I gobbled it up, because he stood there just watching me. 

And he said, all right, you can't sleep here tonight in the-- in the barn. Come into the house, and I'll put you behind the large-- they used to have a very large baking oven where they used to bake the bread, you know, and-- and-- and heat the house with wood only. It was exactly like-- we have here those pizza ovens, but it was three times the size in length and height. But behind that, there was a little area, like a little nook, and that's where he hid me. And he kept me there-- kept me there for about five days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother? 

SUBJECT: OK, my mother was left there. Thank you. Our agreement with my mother was like this. We began to hear rumors prior to my escape from underneath the floor that there is such a thing as a partisan movement in the area developing already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you hear? 

SUBJECT: He told us. Our farmer, our original farmer, told us at one time that the shooting that we heard, like a week ago or so, it came from a group of partisans who just tried to shake up the German Garrison. It was not the German Garrison doing practice shooting. And this is-- this was our first knowledge and first-- I shouldn't say contact, but mental contact, if there is such a thing, with the outside world, realizing that there is someone resisting the Nazis, because for a moment, we gave up hope. We thought that they are irresistible, and nobody could possibly stand up against it. 

I decided before I left, mother and I, that as soon as I get to the second farmhouse, that I will write a letter in Russian to the first farmer telling him that I am out from underneath the floor and that I have joined the partisan groups who are composed primarily of escaped, uh, Russian soldiers who escaped from the German, uh, POW camps. Also, from some of the local people who were in great disfavor of the Nazi occupation, who had also joined the partisans, it was a-- a growing underground movement. 

And I had written to him in this letter that if my mother is hurt or harmed in any way from here on, that I personally will come back with the partisans. I will destroy his farm and destroy him. And I signed it, and I had the second farmer deliver the letter to the post office. 

So another two or three days went by. Apparently, he had gotten the letter, and he got frightened, because he stopped poisoning mother. This is after I had got-- My mother was there for about another two weeks underneath the floor, and also escaped, got out from underneath there in the middle of the night, and walked to this second farmer that I was still at. And this is how Mother and I got reunited back again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was she-- was she fearful you might not still be there? Did she tell you she was worried after-- 

SUBJECT: No, no. She felt that I was still there because of the time element. If it was a little bit longer time elapsed between her getting out and my getting out, she perhaps would have been. But obviously, she was never certain whether I made it, whether I didn't make it, whether I was caught, whether I was intercepted. She never knew that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did she ever talk to you about her anxiety after all the two weeks? 

SUBJECT: No, my mother was an extremely strong individual. I don't know, obviously, how she felt inside, but she was always, always ahead of the family-- ahead of the family in-- in-- in the most horrifying moments. She was like the CEO. If it hadn't been for her, my father and I would not be alive today. There were several instances that-- where she gave the command, hide, there were no questions asked. 

Besides the fact, she was on the Jewish community of our town, simply because she spoke German very fluently. And if anyone had to go to negotiate with the Germans, they used to send her. And several times, one of the Nazis used to beat her up-- beat her up physically very badly, throw her out of the room. And she used to come back with nothing again. 

Mother and I were reunited at the second farmhouse. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did she get in to find you where you were? Can you describe it? 

SUBJECT: Yes. She came to the farmhouse, and she came exactly to the same farmer, and she came in to the barn. And she-- again, she waited for the farmer to come in. She told him she-- they knew each other from doing business in the past. Told him that she knows that her son is here, and can he please bring me to her? And this is how he came and he told me, my-- your mother is here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All this time, you are in that nook? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Never out? 

SUBJECT: Never out. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you-- 

SUBJECT: I used to go out at night, only at night-- used to hold it in, just go out at night, do-- and back into the nook again. Then mother and I were at the second farmhouse. Apparently, he had calmed down a little bit. And it was wintertime. 

And he realized that there were no searches. There were no Nazis, or any one else in this respect, to go to look for any survivors. So everything was quiet. And he had calmed down his initial impact from harboring fugitives like us-- so-called fugitives. 

He became quiet. He became quite pleasant. He used to tell us some news. He used to have, uh, a third farm or some place where he had a little radio. He used to bring us some news and tell us what's going on as far as the Russian front is concerned, to tell us that the-- the Nazis are freezing there. 

And then he came and gave us a big, huge news about Stalingrad. And he even brought us a leaflet that was dropped by the Russian-- by a Russian plane to tell. And the leaflet looked like, 330,000 in black, with a red cross over it. 

And underneath, it said, in Russian, Stalingrad, 330,000 German troops were surrounded and destroyed. The command belong to General Paulus-- Field Marshal Paulus, one of the high German commanders. And it also gave the name of the Russian general who commanded the forces of Stalingrad, who destroyed the Nazis. His name was General Chuikov-- the Russian General Chuikov. OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother and you are both behind-- in that nook now? 

SUBJECT: Yes, we are both together in the nook. And if there is someone-- now, his-- the farmer's family knew about it already. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you sit, stand? Describe the nook. 

SUBJECT: We could sit. We could get out of the nook and stand up at night only, when nobody was around, OK? Back into the nook again. We were fed about twice a day, in the morning and then late in the evening. And we stayed there. 

And then one time, he comes in, and he says to us, there is no end. I mean, I-- I can't keep you here all the time. I'm a poor farmer, and I don't have enough food for my own family. And that is when I decided to get out of there and go and look for the partisans. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You started to say something about the farmer's wife. I-- I-- 

SUBJECT: The farmer's family was told about the fact that we are there. He had no wife, but he had three daughters. And the daughters were very receptive to our being kept by their father for the time being. And they did everything in their power to help us, to make us as comfortable as we possibly can, and to be with us, and to speak with us-- it was like an entirely different world compared to the under-floor hiding place. 

I decided that I can't be there. I have to go. So I left the place with the thought of joining the underground, the partisan movement. And when I walked away from our town, the further I walked away from our town-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Alone? 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Alone? 

SUBJECT: Alone. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did know you'd find them? 

SUBJECT: I didn't. I just went to look for someone, something. I used to stop at farmhouses, and speak to them in Polish, and ask them if they have heard of anything, of the underground, of anything like that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a risk. 

SUBJECT: --of the partisan movement. I had no choice. And then I came to one farmer, whose son had joined the partisans for no other reason because he wanted a thrill. That's all. I was told later on. 

And that was my lucky moment. And he told me to be with him, to wait for him, to wait in his house for his son when his son comes in at night, sometimes, and his son will take me. And sure enough, his son came in with about another six guys, dressed in drabby clothes, shaggy clothes, but they had weapons. 

I told them what I wanted. I wanted to join them. And they said no. I said, why? Because you don't have a weapon. We don't need you. 

I told him, I have no place to go. I can only go back to the town and be executed. 

INTERVIEWER 2: As a Jew? 

SUBJECT: As a Jew. And then they all had a conference. They walked away from me, and they had a little quiet, secret talk. Came back, and they told me, they will take me to another group of people like me who live on an island. 

I asked them where, and they said, we cannot tell you that. It's a secret place. And I asked them how I can join the underground. And they said, you have to have a weapon. A weapon is the most precious thing. It's more precious than three or five lives-- one gun-- and you have to get one if you want to join with us. 

I came to the island, where there was another group of Jewish people from other towns who have also escaped. And they lived there from day to day. It was an island called Ostrov 

There was only one tiny little area of access to that island. It was surrounded by swampy waters, a lot of quicksand areas. Unless you knew where you were going, you would never return. 

However, this little road, which was built by the German World War I artillery brigade, who had to transfer some heavy artillery pieces to the island so they could fire strategically upon their enemy. So what they did, they had cut trees-- trees, and put them across, and made a little road, very narrow. Unless you knew where to put your foot on, you would sink right into it. 

We went to that island. And it was more-- more of a secure area. No-- no Nazis could possibly get to that place. It was an absolute physical impossibility, unless they had a guide to take them through that little hidden road or path. 

I lived with those people for about four days, and I decided, no, I have to go and get my own gun. So myself-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many of them were there? 

SUBJECT: There were about, maybe, 30 or 40 people on that island-- women, elderly, no children at that time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your mother? Were you-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. 

SUBJECT: My mother was-- I separated from my mother. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you worried about you mother? What were your plans? 

SUBJECT: I told the farmer when I left that I'll be back. I didn't tell him when. I didn't tell him how. I told him, I'll be back. [SIGHS] 

Myself and one of the other youngsters on that island, whom I have met, decided we have to get some guns if we want to join the participants. So we did. We went to an open area. We walked into a farmhouse at night. 

I made a artificial type of a muzzle by burning a branch in a fire-- in a bonfire to make it look black, just to darken it. I put it-- put it like this under my coat, so the farmer at night could not tell whether I do have a gun or I don't have a gun with me. And we walked into this farmhouse, and we asked the farmer if there are any Germans around here. He said no. 

And I asked him in Russian, do they come here often? He said no. He says, but there is one that comes in to see one of the girls, my neighbor's girl. He comes like every single night around 5 o'clock. He comes here on-- by bicycle, and he spends the night here with her. 

And this is all we needed, my friend and I. And we waited several days and several evenings for this guy to ride on his bicycle. And when the time was ripe, we jumped him. And this is how we got our two guns. I got myself a German automatic weapon, and my friend got his pistol. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened to the guy? What-- when you-- 

SUBJECT: I don't want to go into that. He did not go back on his bicycle. Now, I was 10-- 9, 10, approximately. My friend was about 12. And that's when I joined the underground-- full-fledged partisan. 

While being in the command of a group called-- the partisan group, my partisan group was called Cherkasov, Cherkasovci. They used to send us out on missions to blow up trains, railroad tracks, burn down bridges, whatever we could. And of course, I performed. I fulfilled my-- whatever my responsibility was. 

And then about two months later, a new person from our town, who had-- is dead, by the way, at this point-- had come to the forest, to our forest, where the partisans work. And when I saw him, my first reaction was, where's my father? And he tells me that he saw my father being executed at the grave site. He saw it with his own eyes. 

And that's when I blew my mind. The first thing I started was drinking the moonshine stuff, very heavy. Used to go to a farmhouse, and the farmer had to prepare the moonshine stuff for me. I was a full-fledged underground fighter. 

Nothing was frightening to me at that point-- nothing at all. I think it was the false security of having a automatic weapon, which there were not too many. The farmer used to supply me with the whiskey. I used to get drunk, get back on my horseback, and the horse knew its way already back into the camp. 

After I heard the story about my father being executed, I jumped on my horse at night, all alone, rode for about 3, 4 miles, walked into the same farm, woke up the farmer, and my first word was, whiskey. And he was not fast enough to hand me the jug. And I let go, and I shot the whole ceiling apart with my machine gun until I saw that whiskey jug in front of my eyes. 

I almost emptied it, got back on my horse, and back into the camp again. And from there on, I was drunk all the time, to a point where the command of our partisan group decided to get rid of me, one way or the other. First, they were going to execute me, because in the event I am captured drunk and tortured by the Nazis, I would probably reveal certain things, places, hiding places, et cetera. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, I'm sorry. Your mother, I want to know what happened to your mother. 

SUBJECT: I did contact the farmer where my mother was, and I told him-- this is by messenger-- told him in a code type of a phraseology, and I don't recall exactly what the phrase was, that I'm fine, everything is OK. I let him know that I am in the partisan movement, and one of these days, one of these evenings, I will be come-- coming to see him, and I'll bring him some things, which I have, by the way. 

They decided to get rid of me, the high command of the underground. And then they reversed the decision because I began volunteering for the most dangerous assignments available. I used to come in, get on my hands and knees in front-- in front of the-- the commander of our group, and beg him to send me someplace where nobody else was there. And he used to do that. 

And on the way back from one of those missions-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like what missions? 

SUBJECT: Missions? Oh, to blow up warehouses, to blow up railroad tracks, to wait until a munition train is on its way to the front, and-- and just set the-- the dynamite underneath the railroad tracks with a long-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you remember one such incident? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes, several. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you were drunk when you were doing this? 

SUBJECT: Halfway drunk. Obviously, alcohol is such a thing as it keeps wearing off, but I-- I really didn't care. It just didn't matter to me. It was a matter of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Does one incident stand out? 

SUBJECT: Yes. One incident, we were returning from a very successful mission one time, myself and another group of my colleagues. And, uh, we still had some explosive left with us. And one of the boys decided, well, why don't we have to-- why do we have to go this way back to the base? Why don't we go by way of another direction and see if we can maybe catch another train-- another ammunition train going to the front? 

And we did, and we found the railroad tracks, and we planted the dynamite with a long wire. We left our horses-- we were on horseback all the time. We left our horses in a distance in the little tiny forest area away from the track. 

And sure enough, and it was at night, the train was going by. We let it go through about halfway, in the middle. And we pull the fuse, and it was the most gorgeous spectacle I ever saw in my entire life. 

It was a spectacle that it was frightening, and at the same time, made me feel so good and so proud. Apparently, the train was not only an ammo train going to the front, but it also had an extension of live soldiers being shipped to the front. And everything just kept on blowing up like unbelievable-- like a 4th of July thing. It was an unreal thing. 

However, several of the cars had mounted heavy caliber machine guns-- .50 caliber machine guns on them. And they began firing just in any conceivable direction, just kept on firing. And then the firing stopped. 

But unbeknowingly to us, a group of their commandos who had accompanied the train had gotten off the train, somehow, in time, and had made a circle to surround the approximate area where they thought that the sabotage mission came from, meaning us. When we got finished, we got back on our horseback, and we were riding back in our direction towards our base, and that's when we ran into a trap that they had set for us. 

They opened fire. My horse fell, shot right under me. I fell, and I hit my head against something. I don't know what it was. 

This depression in my left cheek is not a naturally born dimple. This depression was created from that fall, because if I touch it right here, it's completely, totally numb. I can still take a pin or a needle and pierce it through, about a quarter of an inch deep, without having any type of sensation or feeling in it. 

Apparently, one of my cheekbones was traumatized from that fall, that knock. However, I blanked out. And I was pulled out by one of my-- my comrades-- pulled out of the battlefield. No one of our group got-- was hit or killed in the ambush, only my horse. 

And I cried. And I cried for that horse, because that horse saved my life many a times. It was a black stallion. I cried bitterly, came back to the base. 

This was one incident among many others. The second incident is that I didn't know that the farmer where my mother was hiding had passed away. And my mother couldn't stay there any longer. 

And somehow, miraculously, and I still don't know how, she had found out where my father was. My father had escaped on his own from the labor battalion that he worked in in the town Myadel. And he was-- he escaped with another group of people simply because he was liberated by another partisan group, who was commanded by a Jewish major. And this Jewish major came in with his boys, and they had freed all those forced labor people, the Jewish people among-- one of them was my father. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What major-- Jewish major? Where was he a major? 

SUBJECT: He was a Russian Jew who was a major in the Red Army, who was captured as a prisoner by the Nazis and escaped from a POW camp and joined the partisans. 

A second incident was how I met my parents. My mother united-- got united with my dad again, back again. We were returning-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Back then you were both living-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: They were both where? 

SUBJECT: They were both living, I would say, within the same area where-- approximately were our partisan base was, in the forest. But when she realized that my dad had escaped from Myadel from the labor battalion, she went, somehow, and she found him, and they-- they had gotten reunited, but they knew nothing about me. They didn't know where I was at that time. 

Someone told them that I was killed in action. On one of our returns from a mission, a very successful-- again, a very successful mission, we had intercepted a German convoy just at a specifically designated place that we had chosen to intercept them. And we demolished 16 trucks with-- with food, and gear, and ammo, and soldiers, and everything else. It-- it was a huge battle we had there, about four hours, four and a half hours. 

We were returning from this mission, and we came-- we were already in friendly territory. We knew where we were-- friendly territory, swamp area. That was most friendliest territory we've ever known. And we did not expect anyone, especially at dusk time, to ever be able to get to this place, unless you knew where you were going. 

And we made a little bonfire to bake some potatoes, because we were very hungry. And we were sitting and discussing the event, you know, and joking around, and talking a little bit. And suddenly, we hear, from the dark forest, crackling of twigs. When you step on a dry branch, it crackles. 

And we jumped, we extinguished the fire immediately, and we pulled into the dark bushes. And we were lying there, our guns cocked. And the steps were coming closer, and closer, and closer to the area where the fire was. Apparently, they had seen it from far away. 

When we felt they were close enough, I hollered out in Russian, hold it! Who is it? And they said, please don't shoot. Don't shoot. 

And we commanded them to walk into that little open area where the bonfire was. And there is my mother, my father, and another man, a neighbor. And I'm rubbing my eyes, because I thought my dad was-- was executed. They, the two of them, my mother and father, thought that I had died. And there we were standing, looking at one another, non-believing what we are seeing at all-- total mirage. And I thought it was a dream. And I kept on touching myself, is it me? And it was me. 

My mother was in shock. She lost her speech for about three weeks. She could not communicate. She must have had, maybe, a mild CVA, or I don't know what happened there, but she did lose her speech. 

She used to communicate with me by writing in the sand, you know, if she had to give me some kind of a message, or by way of, uh, showing, or by way of pointing things out. And that was the time when I stopped drinking-- not one single drop from there on, not until the war ended. And when the war ended, I got bombed-- bombed by way of whiskey. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You, at this time, when you were reunited with your parents, in a drunken state most of the time, were between 10 and 11 years old? Were-- were you small, were you tall? Describe yourself. 

SUBJECT: Tall, tall, I was tall. And this is why I was able to join the group of the underground, the partisans, as I have. They-- they thought I was 16 because of my height. I was very thin, and I was-- I commanded Russian very-- very fluently. 

And I was volunteering for the-- for the craziest missions there were. They needed me. But they were all under the impression that I was about 16 years old. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That reunion was what year? 

SUBJECT: The reunion? 1943. Then I had made a transfer to another partisan brigade-- different type of a brigade, where many of the people from the Vilna Ghetto had escaped and had come into the forest with us. 

They came with guns, because apparently the message was related to them somehow, from the forest into the ghetto, don't come to the forest without a gun. You're useless. So they did everything in their power to buy, steal, obtain weapons. Otherwise, they were not acceptable. 

Uh, mouths to feed, there were too many, and food was extremely scarce. And the partisan command was growing miraculously from practically nothing to thousands of people. We had our own cavalry. We had our own field kitchens. We have our-- we had our own hospital area. During the day, we even ventured to move into certain villages and certain towns without fear of being attacked by the Nazis, because the war machine-- the Nazi war machine had began to crumble. 

And then we began receiving supplies by air from Moscow, from Russia-- guns, cameras, food, medication, and messages. There was a message sent our contact in Moscow. Then the Germans had thrown what we call a blockade. And this is the blockade, apparently, that Mrs. Sasansky was talking to you about-- the German Blockade of 1943. 

The Germans, realizing that their position is becoming very vulnerable, in order for them to retreat in semi-peace, they decided to clear the rear of their retreat areas by eliminating the partisan groups. So what they did was, they had pulled away the third line from the eastern part of front-- the front line. There were three lines, 1, 2, and 3. They took the third line of the German army, and they made it march back to clear the way for everybody else, should they need to retreat-- should they be compelled to retreat, which they have. 

The message from Moscow came-- do not intercept-- this is to the-- all the partisan groups. Do not intercept the enemy-- forgive me. Do intercept the enemy on the small, little trails and small little roads of retreat. The large highways and the large transportation roads, they will be reluctant to take themselves. 

In other words, the Russian Air Force was plastering all those heavy, uh, and large highways, which were going from Russia back west towards Germany. So we had the assignment to intercept them in forests, in tiny little villages. And that's when everything had broken loose again-- all over again. But at that time, it was a large force of underground, of partisan movement. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your parents were with you? 

SUBJECT: My parents, I had taken to a special island called Podlazie, where there was only one farmer and one farm. And the farmer was very sympathetic to the partisan movement. And he was the one that fed them. He was the one that housed them there, in a little foxhole that I built for them in a mountain. The mountain, we just excavated the inside of the mountain and built a foxhole in there, and that's where they lived. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In the partisan battalion org, how many Jews, or what weight did Jews carry? 

SUBJECT: OK, uh, there were several battalions. There were battalions where there were-- there was a mixture of Russian, Polish, white Russian, and Jewish fighters. There was a group which was strictly Jewish-- totally Jewish-- a Jewish battalion of Jewish partisan fighters, uh, with a Jewish commander, but under the supervision of a Russian colonel. In other words, this was only a battalion, and in terms of division, he was in charge. 

There was also a group created in the Jewish battalion called, in Russian, proizvodstvonaya grupa. That is a group which was composed primarily of tailors, bakers, uh, barbers, uh, shoemakers, who were fixing and supplying their skilled labor to improve and facilitate the rest of the partisan brigades-- to make their shoes, to fix their shoes, to fix their boots, and their zippers, and everything else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were this way, in the woods, fighting with the partisans, until the war was over? 

SUBJECT: 1945. Then the Russian command decided they have no more need for the partisans. And since most of them were trained fighters already, they infused all of us into the Red Army-- obviously, not in the same brigades of the Red Army, or platoons, or divisions. 

I happened to fall into a field military field hospital, and I was appointed chief of security of that hospital. And the hospital was near Grodno, which is in Poland-- Grodno, Bialystok, it's a large-- it was a large Jewish community in Grodno, but at this present time, was empty. And I became chief of security of the military hospital in Grodno. 

And then, this is-- the war still was going on. And then I don't know, and I still don't know to this day as to what has happened, but some German group trying to make its way back from the Eastern Front had jumped this military-- Russian military field hospital. And there was a severe battle. And that's where I was wounded. 

I was wounded, fortunately for me, within my appendix area by a fragment of a hand grenade. And, uh, our forces, apparently, had driven away this German group. And, uh, the only thing I can remember is, I woke up in the hospital after the surgery. They operated on me right there and then, and they removed the shrapnel. 

And then, when the field hospital was moved into Berlin already, I was in Berlin, and I had the rank of a high officer at that time already. I was only-- how old was I? About 13, 14? 13, 13, 14, in this vicinity. [SIGHS] 

My parents, I got in touch with them, and they came to Berlin, also. Berlin was divided into a four-zone city at that time-- Russian, French, British, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: American? 

SUBJECT: American. And we decided-- we found out that many of the survivors are moving towards the Western part of Berlin, which meant either to the British zone of Berlin or the American-- primarily the American zone of Berlin. And then, already, the Joint Distribution Committee had set up receiving camps in Berlin. And that's when I have decided to send my parents there. 

I came there myself for a visit. I shed my Russian uniform. I buried my automatic in a flower pot outside the window. I put on civilian clothes. And with the first transport from West Berlin, they took us to a displaced persons camp in West Germany called Eschwege. Eschwege was near Frankfurt-- Frankfurt am Main. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was it like to be in Germany as a soldier with a weapon and see the Germans at the end of the war [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: I'll tell you, I had seen-- at that point already, I had seen so much bloodshed that there was no desire, no urge, no-- no-- no animalistic feeling to see any more. Obviously, the German people were are broken down, beaten people at that time. And this by itself made everyone who was against them feel good. 

Uh, the hunger, the poverty in Berlin was very, very severe. However, I have seen gruesome things inflicted by the Red Armies the moment they had entered German soil-- absolutely gruesome. I would not like to go into that, because this would not allow me to sleep for some nights again. 

I had questioned, once, a Russian captain, why he's doing what he's doing. And he started to cry. And he told me that he came to his hometown after the Nazis were driven out of it in the Ukraine, and he found his entire family-- his wife, his children, his parents-- dumped into a water well, deep water wells, while they were still alive, with their heads down. 

Now, this is a depth of maybe 15, 20 feet deep. That's a water well. But some of the Nazis had taken each member of the family, held them by the feet, and just dropped them in there. They couldn't move. They couldn't even turn around in there, because a water well is very narrow. 

And he saw them there when they died, he says, and then he went crazy. He says, he never took-- since then, he never took a German prisoner alive, regardless as to what the rules and regulations were. He never took one alive. He used to walk around with two submachine guns, one on each shoulder. [SIGHS] 

All right, how much further do we go? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Several things. I know you don't want to describe what people behave like and what you saw, but people in the future have to know what the effects of atrocity and brutality-- outcomes. 

SUBJECT: It seems to me that if one is given-- and I'm speaking about the human race-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Not in-- in broad, but in specifics, what you saw-- the kind of-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Like the Russian captain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said you saw the Russians doing things to the German people that you didn't want to describe. I'm asking you to describe as best you can, without risking your own well being, because posterity has to know what war does to people and what brutality does to people. 

SUBJECT: I have seen Russians-- Russian soldiers actually carve the hammer and sickle on the back of an SS man after they had disrobed him and tied him up-- his hands and his feet-- with a bayonet, actually carve out a hammer and sickle on the back of the skin. I have seen SS men being hanged with piano wire by some of the Russian soldiers. But it still-- it is not compared to the type of atrocities that were carried out by the Nazis, by the SS men upon the Jewish people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were there specific hunts for Nazis, for SS men? 

SUBJECT: Were there hunts for them? Yes. This was left, most of the time, to the partisan groups, since they knew the local people, the local population, since they knew who to ask and who would tell them where they are hiding, or where they are, or what they are. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever want to go back-- did you go back? You-- 

SUBJECT: No. I never would. I never will, no matter what. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you, did you-- I know, but did you think of going to Israel? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I will. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- 

SUBJECT: I haven't been there yet. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't think of going after the war? You were a fighter. 

SUBJECT: Yes, that's a very good question. When we were in Eschwege, the displaced persons camp, I was contacted by the Haganah. Again, somehow, in some way, I wind up always either in law enforcement, or military, or something that is, perhaps-- from childhood on, I was driven to it with some type of an emotional desire to be in this type of a condition or situation. 

When I was in Eschwege, there were about over 2,000 displaced people, displaced persons-- Jews, primarily-- who were waiting for quotas, either from Israel or the United States, to be taken out of there. Somehow, and I still don't know how or why, I was appointed as police chief of that group, because we had our own police force. We had to police ourselves. 

The camp was in a army camp during World War II. There was an army camp there. And then when the camp was vacated, all the facilities were left and then utilized for the displaced people. 

So I wind up, and I still have pictures of that, as chief of police of Eschwege. I had my own motorcycle, and I had 2, or 3, or 4, or 5 other policemen that were working with me. And we kept law and order as the best way we could. 

INTERVIEWER 1: 14 years old. 

SUBJECT: Everybody thought at that time I was 18, 15, 19. I was wearing high-riding boots, you know, with those Russian cavalry pants, you know, hanging out, riding pants, and everything else, and-- 

OK, when the time came, and I was approached by the Haganah, do I want to go to Israel? I said yes, without reluctance. They said, but we want you to understand one thing. It's only you. This was during the illegal time of immigration. 

It's only you. We cannot take your parents with you at this time. Maybe later on, they will. But right now, we need guys like you. And it was an extremely, extremely painful and difficult decision for me to make. After finding my parents and living through with them as much as we have, do I separate now into unbeknown destiny? Will I ever be able to see them ever again? 

