MR. KRAUSS: It is one of the shortest addresses in the world. 

CREW: Did you say Israel? 

MR. KRAUSS: Yes, Israel. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, [LAUGHS] well, that's-- how fortunate you are. This is a release. We have to ask you to sign it. It's a legal form that's required in the [INAUDIBLE]. 

MR. KRAUSS: Near Netanya-- not far from Netanya. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Rolling. 

CREW: 24. [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Krauss, will you begin by telling us where you were from right before the war? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, I was born in Prague, how do you say, the-- the heart of Bohemia. And um, I come from a-- well, they call it upper middle class, middle class family. We were rather assimilated, and I hardly ever knew I was Jewish. 

You know, I did know I was Jewish, but I wasn't very conscious of it. My father had a small factory where he worked-- is why. I mean, my mother worked as well. And I had a small brother who was eight years younger than I. 

I attended a Czech elementary school and a Czech high school. The war broke out when I was in the last-- in the senior-- my senior grade of high school, and I was dismissed from school because of being Jewish. 

And that was actually the first time I met with-- with being different. With being-- with being different. Not-- not belonging. And somehow I lost-- I lost the ground under my-- under my feet. 

And that-- that was the beginning of my Holocaust. I lost my friend. I-- I lost the girl I loved very much. I thought she loved me too. But she wasn't Jewish, and I was Jewish. Her parents apparently told her that she can't meet me anymore. 

And out I was, in the cold, having, I mean, nothing left of what I did have previously. That's until the war started. Then the war started in September '39. And I didn't mind. I was quite glad that the war started, because I thought, well, the war might solve the problem. 

Well, it did, in a way. But it always solves, you know, the problems. The old man above solves the problems differently than we believe. 

Um, but I couldn't go to school anymore. I started working. I joined the Zionist Youth Movement. And with a group of about 20 youngsters, I went to what they called a Hachsara. 

And I worked for a year and a half, almost two years, far away from home. I haven't seen my parents for longish periods, 3/4 of a year, a year, because we couldn't travel. And our situation deteriorated slowly. 

First we had to give up our home. My father lost his business. We had to hand over valuables, carpets and pictures and the piano. We were forbidden to visit certain places. Well, all these things are quite-- quite well-known. 

Until '42. In May '42, I was recalled to Prague. And we were deported to a ghetto in Northern Bohemia, called Theresienstadt, which was called a special ghetto or a showcase ghetto or something like that. That's about before the deportation. What would you like to know more? 

INTERVIEWER: What did you feel? You were not particularly identified as a Jew, but you went to this special camp that trained you for being Jewish. I mean you were... 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, it wasn't the camp. It wasn't the camp. It was a movement. It was a youth movement. As we lost-- as we lost our identity, in a way, we suddenly didn't-- we-- we-- we were not what we thought that we were. It was not only myself, it was a whole generation of people who were assimilated. 

We looked for-- for some new identity, and well, we found it. We-- we thought we found it in the Zionist-- in the Zionist movement. What we felt, in the beginning, we felt bitter. Because we didn't see any justification. We didn't see any reason why we should be treated as we were treated. 

But then it was a kind of feeling of belonging again. Because we-- we-- as we-- as we found our-- our-- our new-- new identity, we did identify with the Jewish-- well, idea of justice with the-- with the Jewish-- I wouldn't say religion, but rather the-- the Jewish moral, which is a bit different from the Christian moral. 

We were afraid, of course. We were scared to death. We didn't know. We were-- people are afraid of the unknown. And as more and more Jews were transported to ghettos and to concentration camps, east, and as we didn't know what-- what expected us, it was-- it was a day-- day by day and night by night fear. 

And that fear, I would say, which, by the way, was much worse than anything else. Worse than starvation and worse than humiliation. That fear accompanied me for the next-- well, for the next six years. Never-- I mean, sometimes more fear, sometimes less fear. 

But there was always-- in the back of our minds, there was that incessant fear of the unknown, of the-- of the-- of the-- fear of the-- well, actually, we-- we-- we were aware that we were-- we were handled by people who-- who-- who hated us, but we didn't-- we actually-- we didn't know how far they would go. So I would say the main, if I recall today, at the time, it was a time of anxiety, time of fear. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened in Theresienstadt? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, Theresienstadt is one of the more interesting, I believe, issues of the Holocaust or the persecution. On one hand-- on one hand, young people, strong people, were allowed to work. And as long as we worked, as long as we produced things, we-- we-- we didn't feel degraded so much. 

I worked-- I worked in a garden, in a vegetable garden. Very-- very-- well, we worked very hard. It was forced labor, after all. I remember, I-- I-- I lost, within a year, about 40 pounds. But still, we worked. And work is always rewarding. 

So for young people, it wasn't that bad. We were hungry. We were constantly hungry, but it wasn't starvation. One couldn't-- like, one could survive. One could survive. 

And as I worked in a vegetable garden, we actually fed the whole SS troops in Prague by-- we supplied them with vegetables from the garden where I worked. We could always eat some cucumbers and some tomatoes, and we could always smuggle something into the ghetto and give our parents, so that it wasn't that bad. 

Elderly people died in multitudes and in droves. They died, I believe, tens and hundreds every-- every-- every-- every-- every day. The whole-- the whole Theresienstadt experience wouldn't have been, again, that-- that horrible hadn't it been for the transports. 

Because every now and then, every 10 days, every fortnight, every week, every months, we never knew. We never knew. The Germans-- the Germans sent transports east. And these people who went east disappeared, and we never heard about them anymore. 

We didn't know where they were going until one day, I found out by chance. And-- well, I went in the vegetable garden, and one-- in '42, in-- no, it was in spring '43. The Germans made us build another camp outside the ghetto. 

Theresienstadt is a fortress built by Joseph, the emperor of Austria, against the Russian invaders, who actually never invaded. But beyond-- beyond the ghetto, beyond the walls, beyond the fortifications, the-- the Germans made us build a camp. And the camp was closed with with wooden holdings. 

And then one night, they-- people, they populated that camp with some-- somebody. From the ghetto, they took, a doctor, I believe, a nurse, a cook, a number of people who worked in that camp. But the camp was off limits. Nobody could enter the camp. 

And as I was working in the vegetable garden, and I was irrigating the-- some beans, or whatever it was, I approached that-- that-- that fence, and there were eyes in the boarding. I pushed one open and tried to communicate with the people within. And I was rather surprised that they were children. Well, not children, they were something between 11 to 16. 

And then I learned-- it was the first time I learned about Auschwitz. These children were sent to Theresienstadt from Bialystok, if I'm not mistaken, and they were a part of an exchange project that should have been done through-- through-- through-- through Switzerland, I believe, Jews for cars. Jews for tires. Jews for money. Something like that. 

But some stupid Germans sent the wrong children. He sent children who knew. And then uh, well, in the run of two or three nights, I listened to the story of Auschwitz. And the children told me about-- about the-- about the death chambers. 

They went through Auschwitz somehow. Their parents were exterminated there. And they knew the story of Auschwitz. And so I learned the story of Auschwitz. 

I tried to convey to my friends. I was then in the council. The chalutz council, or whatever it is called, of the Zionist movement in-- in Theresienstadt. And I try to impress my colleagues and my friends that Auschwitz is Auschwitz, and that it is what it is. 

The tragedy was that none, I believe not-- not one of the people-- I tried to tell them what I heard from these children. They weren't ready to believe it. They weren't ready to believe it and said it's sheer nonsense. 

People can't-- I mean, the Germans are cruel, but "Streng aber Gerecht." You know? They are severe, but they are just. And they would not-- they would not, certainly, Kulturmenschen they would not send thousands of people into gas chambers and then burn them in these-- in these crematoria. 

Nobody believed it. Nobody believed it. The children were-- well, somebody discovered the mistake, and the children were shipped back to Auschwitz and gassed and killed, of course. That's about the first time I learned about Auschwitz. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you believe the stories? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, I did. A Well, I did. Privately, I have a very pessimistic, you know, disposition. Maybe I was credible, but-- but I didn't-- I didn't talk to one kid. I talked to-- to-- to several. 

You know, they-- they came, and they were eager to spill. To spill it. To tell it. They were full of it. They told us, don't go. My god. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What language did they speak? 

MR. KRAUSS: They spoke Yiddish. I did not understand Yiddish very well, but German and Yiddish are related languages. And well, I did understand what they said. I did understand what they said. 

INTERVIEWER: They went to Switzerland first, and that's where-- 

MR. KRAUSS: No, no. They went from Bialystok through Auschwitz to Theresienstadt. And when the Germans discovered that they were the wrong children, because they had to send the children to Switzerland, they would have spread-- they would have spread the news. 

So the moment they learned what the children know, they sent them back to Auschwitz, including the people from Theresienstadt, the doctor, the nurse, the teachers, the cook, and the-- the Juden Elster, the man who-- who-- who was responsible for the whole ghetto. And they were of course shipped in December, December '43, to Auschwitz. Well, which was also my train to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You went with them? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, not with the children. The children went before us. But-- but-- but all the people that were close that knew something that could have known, were shipped to-- to Auschwitz in a transport that went in December '43. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you shipped in that transport? 

MR. KRAUSS: I was shipped on the transport, but not because I had to. I went voluntarily. I'm one of the few people who went to Auschwitz on my own. My parents and my brother were in a transport. 

I was working in the vegetable garden, and because I worked in a vegetable garden that supplied the vegetables for the SS people in Prague, I was on a list of people who need not go to transport for the time being. 

But as my parents were on the transport, and my brother, who was eight years younger, and my parents weren't very well, I said, I then-- you know, the young hero-- will go and save my parents. Neither did my-- did I save my parents, nor did I save my brother. And on the contrary, they still could help me, rather than I could help them. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How? 

MR. KRAUSS: Um, well, my mother always saved a piece of bread and sent me rather a piece of bread than I sent my mother. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: In the camp? 

MR. KRAUSS: In the camp. Again, I was in Auschwitz in a very special camp. I-- I-- I went from one special camp to another. I was in Auschwitz in a camp in Birkenau, which was unique, because it was what they call a family camp, where there were a BIIb in Birkenau, Auschwitz. 

There were man, women, and children in that camp, which was a unique thing in the concentration-- in the-- in the history of the concentration camps. Not the ghettos, but concentration camps. Why did the Germans decide to do it is a-- is a-- is a riddle, as so many things are riddles. 

Because they-- they-- they-- they were-- well, you could never fathom. You could never know what they would do next moment. And that was one of the program to keep people in the state of uncertainty. We never knew what would be, and would they say tomorrow, we are going left, and I was sure that we would go either right to stay or go straight. 

It was a camp where there were about-- oh, there were 10,000 people, most of them Czech Jews. The women lived in-- in barracks of 500 on the-- on the-- on the-- on the left side. The men left in barracks of 500 people on the right side. 

The barracks were barracks where I understand in the First World War, the horses were kept. Stables, actually. And there was one-- one-- one-- one barrack that served as a lavatory, one as a latrine, and one as a kitchen. 

There were about 1,000 children, from no age till 12. Later on, I mean, 13 up, were not-- they were not children anymore, and they weren't considered children. And those children usually are an unruly element. 

They-- they-- they couldn't be regimented. They couldn't be, you know, Germans are very orderly people. Even in the camps, very-- well, you know, the whole thing-- well, went-- went-- went-- went on in an orderly fashion. An hour was an hour, and-- and-- and-- and-- and a day was a day, and night was a night, and so on. 

The children couldn't be kept-- kept to the regimen, and they ran around and played. There was one tree-- one tree in that-- in that camp. So we got-- I mean, we. The management of the-- of the camp. The whole camp was operated by-- by-- by the inmates. All the camps in Germany were operated by inmates. 

Now, the top-- the top jobs had people who were-- who were, well, what do you call, professional criminals. Germans, murderers, and well, all kinds of-- all kinds of offenders. And the lower-- the lower jobs were given to-- to either polish or Jewish or French or whatever people there were. 

So that the management, actually, it was like that. The German beat only one Jew. The one Jew beat, then, three other Jews, and the three other Jews beat, you know, nine other Jews. So it went from upstairs. 

And if you were not good at beating people, so you were disposed, and another person was installed. Yes, well, the management, the Jewish management, got-- got an order, a command, to concentrate, to keep the children in-- in-- in one place. 

And then a very strange thing was established in that camp. We had a kind of what they call a kinder block. It was a children's barrack. Well, actually, two. One where they slept, and the other where they wake up during-- during the day. 

And there were about 20 people who are assigned to work with the children during the day as-- well, we were forbidden to teach them. But we had to keep them somehow occupied. Well, there were some teachers among-- among-- among the inmates. So these people took them on. 

And there was a-- there was a children-- children block in B2-- in Birkenau for about two months. No, more longer, until March. Of March. And then in March, half of the camp was-- was transported to gas chambers. 

Half of the camp was taken out and gassed. Still were about 5,000 people left. And then as most of the teachers, most of the people that worked with the children, and half of the children were away, I was among the rather lucky 20 who started working with children there then. And I worked with the children until I left Auschwitz in July '44. 

INTERVIEWER: '44? 

MR. KRAUSS: July '44. I left. I was transported then to-- to Germany. The children-- out of the children, I believe about two survived. About two or three survived. Out of the thousand children, one or two survived. By-- by-- by miracle. By miracle. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you ever see those two? 

MR. KRAUSS: Yes. One is my-- one is my-- my wife. One is my wife. Yes. And the other lives in America, I believe. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How old was she? 

MR. KRAUSS: She was-- she was not a child. She was 13. She was 13. I was 19. I was 19, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And when did you meet up with her again? 

MR. KRAUSS: After the war, I was queuing somewhat in Prague for some charity. Because I came back, and I had nothing. I mean, no shirt, no trousers, no nothing. And so we were queuing for charity. And she-- she-- she met me and says, hello. I said hello, and I took her to see a theater, and so we met. 

Um, and I had, in Auschwitz, I believe there were three-- three-- three worst moments. If you can call three moments worse. They-- they were worse. The worst-- the first worst moment was when-- when we arrived. 

It was a very cold, cold, December night. Actually, we arrived on Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. And I remember, we were in what you call box cars. Box cars. We were transported from Theresienstadt three days and three nights. And we were about 60 people in a box car, with one bucket only, no water, very little air, and that was pretty bad. 

When we came to Auschwitz, they opened the-- the doors, and out we spilled out of these-- these box cars. And that was one of the worst moments in my life. Because the first time I saw dead people. 

I mean, people dead, frozen, bloody, in-- in-- in-- in snow drifts, a-- a-- along the road we went. And again, I-- I-- I-- I would like to repeat that well, not the physical suffering was ever so-- so devastating. So-- so-- so-- so-- so-- so terrible, as was-- as was the-- the apprehension, the fear. The scare. 

When you walk, on the left and on the right, you see the dead people who probably after three days had to relieve themselves, and the moment they started, you know, stepping out of the-- of the-- of the-- of the-- of the column, they were shot at and killed and left there to freeze-- to freeze to death. 

And you know, and all these lights and-- and-- and-- and-- and the barbed wires, and-- and-- and the snow and that strange, unknown landscape in-- in-- in Poland, in Poland. Near to the Vistula. That was-- that was one of the-- one of the-- one of the well, worst moments. 

And if I ever dream about-- about-- I don't dream about it. I speak about it. I've written a book about it. Two books. I-- I-- I-- I got rid of it. I'm-- I can speak about it freely. Even-- even smile and laugh about it. Because there were also funny things there. People lived there. 

INTERVIEWER: What funny thing? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, a concentration camp is a part of the world. And as it is a part of the world, people loved, hated, and told jokes and were cynical. And it-- it-- it is part of-- it is a part of-- of-- of our lives. And I don't know whether it is the worst part. There are worse things than the concentration camp. 

What-- what-- what-- what-- what a really terrible was was the feeling of uncertainty, of fear, of being scared constantly of the unknown. Once can get accustomed to-- to death, I believe. But one cannot grow accustomed to the unknown. You know, what will be? How it will be? 

The second-- the second-- well, the second moment that I remember. The worst moment that I remember. Was the-- what they called the selection. Before we were shipped out of Auschwitz-- well, we were very lucky, of course. 

Because anybody who survived survived not by one miracle, but I call it always by five miracles. One miracle was not enough. Two miracles, definitely not enough. Five miracles at least, and then you could survive. 

But who has such a thing as five miracles? How many? You know? Only those people who had a very nice and very special guardian angel, you know, got these five miracles happen. I-- I was one of them. 

So selection. Before we were-- now, during-- during our-- our Auschwitz period, we learned that-- that-- that we had, next to our names in the-- in the-- in the books that they kept, somebody-- somebody told us, there was written the name, the number we had tattooed on our-- on our hands. And SB, which means sonderbehandlung, sonderbehandlun, was the formula that was agreed upon on the Wannsee conference as extermination. 

So we were-- we had SB6. That means six months Auschwitz, and then you know-- you know, in a nightgown, up we go. And before-- you know, during-- during the time we were in Auschwitz, a miracle happened. And a miracle happened in Berlin. 

There was-- the Germans were short of-- of-- of cheap labor. Of slave labor. They were running out of all these slaves. How many slaves can they-- you know, can-- can one have? 

Well, the immense industry they had to keep up. And they passed a-- a law which is called the Totaleinsatz. Anybody who-- who had-- who-- who-- who had two legs and two hands was supposed to go and work in Germany until he died. I mean, work to death. It's cheaper, and it's more productive than to just burn them and make soap of them and-- and fertilizer. Which they did in Auschwitz. 

Hair they used for-- for the Norwegian troops to-- to-- to warm-- you know, to-- to-- to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Fill the jackets? 

MR. KRAUSS: Fill the jackets. Fat, as much fat as there was, soap. And the bones were ground into-- into-- into fertilizer. But that's-- that's-- you know, everybody knows. 

Well, so they had-- they had to-- they had to-- they had to find out who was able-bodied and who wasn't able-bodied. So at the beginning of spring '44, they made us all strip naked, women, children, and men. And then we stood in a long, long row, and Mr. Eichmann, a cursed memory and two other Germans put a table there. 

And well, we had to step in front of them, and they asked us, who are you, and what-- what is your profession? What do you know? How old are you? 

And they looked us over, and if they were satisfied that we could still hold out for a number of months, they sent us either left-- they-- they sent us left, and they-- they saw that the people who were emaciated and-- and rather sick, they sent them right, where they were marched to the-- to the gas chambers. 

I was fortunately among-- among those who were sent to-- to-- to slave labor in Germany. But still, as we-- as we knew, the Germans were always selling us the opposite. We-- we-- we never knew. And so the last worst moment in Auschwitz was when we were marching towards-- towards the boxcars, which should have brought us to another camp. 

And we walked. And-- I-- I-- I am pretty sure that it was-- that somebody found it very funny. That he-- he considered some of the German command as considered extremely funny, because there were three crematoria, and he led us around all three of them. 

I mean, we were about-- we were 1,000 chosen, strong, as far as we were strong young men between 18 and 35. And we were marching and marching, and we marched to one crematorium, and then the other, and to the third. And at last they took us to the platform, and we boarded a train, and we went to Germany. 

That was, I believe, a-- that was a tricky moment, when we walked to the first, and then we circled it around, and then we went to the second and to the third. I was a great hero then. I had a spoon, a teasp-- a-- a-- a-- a soup spoon, a big spoon. Which I-- not only I, but many of my friends and myself, honed, honed, you know. At night, we honed it on a stone until it was very sharp. 

The handle, of course. We were not allowed to have any-- any-- any knives, of course, but I had a sharp spoon. And I made up my mind that if I go, I'll take one of them with me. You know, I was so accustomed to having German sentries, so I said, I'll take one with me upstairs. 

But I don't know. I believe I would have collapsed, probably, before. But that's what I wanted to do. But fortunately for me and for him, it didn't come to that. 

And then we were shipped to Germany. And we were so happy in those box cars. And as we were driving for four days, again, through quite a nice landscape. Germany is beautiful, especially in the summer. 

We saw it through the small window. Always looked out where we were going. We went to Germany, to Silesia. I was so happy that we were away from Auschwitz, because we thought there couldn't be any worse place. The trouble was, that place where we came was worse. 

You want to hear about the worst place. All right. The place was called Schwarzheide. Schwarzheide, which means Black Forest or something. And it was a labor camp, but we produced what today would be, well, it was synthetic-- synthetic fuel. Synthetic gas. Benzine. 

They made of-- out-- out of-- out of-- out of-- brown coal. Brown coal, which was right on the surface there and mined by-- by-- by tractors or by bulldozers. And they produced-- they produced fuel. They produced fuel. 

Only the British used to come every Monday and Wednesday, and they bombed that-- that-- that factory. And they need people to-- to-- remove the rubbish and to build a system of of bunkers over and above the whole factory, something which is-- which is incredible, but we did it. We did it. 1,000 people. 

Now, the trouble was that everybody well-- the-- we worked about 12 to 15 hours a day. And it was rather difficult to work under the conditions we had. We carried sacks of cement. We-- we carried-- we unloaded-- we unloaded sand. And we unloaded the iron rods and-- and-- and-- well, all kinds of things you need to build-- to build a bunker. 

And we also should have gotten enough-- I mean, enough. We should have gotten about 1,500 calories a day, which is a very good number of calories to-- to-- to slim down, but not enough to-- to-- to do work. But still, we could have survived, had not the man who brought for us the food, stolen, half of it. 

And then from the half, half it was stolen by the SS people, who sent parcels home. You know? The sentries. And then the half of the quarter was stolen by our own cooks. And then out of what was left was stolen by the people who-- who-- ladled out that soup. 

And we lived on-- well, I-- I couldn't count the calories then, but I believe, definitely not enough. So that within about 10 months, there were only 200 of these 1,000 strong, young men, and all the others had starved to death. And those that did not starve to death were just skin and bones, and you know, dying slowly off, one by one. 

And then again, you know, as-- well, that-- that-- that was one of the miracles. Suddenly we heard the Russian guns coming from the east. And the Germans didn't like the Russians. They liked the Americans much better. 

So they packed all the food and all the provisions and all the things they had on large lorries. As they had no fuel, they hitched us, the unlucky and unhappy 200 remaining prisoners, and we-- we-- we carried their provisions and their clothes and their things they had south, towards Theresienstadt again. 

And we were on our march, well, about-- I believe about 10 days. And in these 10 days, we didn't-- we didn't get anything to eat, whatsoever. But it was already in March '45. 

The Russians were coming from the east, and the Americans were-- very slowly, very slowly, coming from the west. And well, we knew already that Germany was collapsing. Not that we had any radios, but well, word traveled. Rumors traveled. Grapevine. You're also listening to the Germans when they were talking. 

And there were dandelions. There were dandelions, and there was grass. And whenever we stopped, whenever we stopped for night, so-- so we grazed. We grazed on dandelions. which is considered a very delicacy in France. They make salad of dandelions. Grass. 

Well, we arrived. We arrived at-- at-- at the certain bridge, not far from Theresienstadt. About 120, because 80 of us died during these 10 days. And about 120 survived. 

And then we were brought, you know, the-- the-- the Russians came, and-- and-- and we were fed. And some of us died afterwards. But I believe, out of the whole 10,000 people we came to Auschwitz, we are about 80. We are about 80, scattered all over the world. We're about 80 that survived that. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel now? What has it left you with, this? 

MR. KRAUSS: Well, [LAUGHS] this is a very complex question. It has left me with-- I would call it three things. One, well, it-- it-- it-- it will sound funny, you know, but it-- it will sound maybe-- but I don't-- don't boast-- don't boast about it. I'm just-- 

It has left me with the feeling that every day I live is a gift. And I try to live it as a gift. You know, a beautiful gift wrapped in, you know, paper. 

And I try to-- to-- to-- to-- to live. And enjoyment. I have a nice, nice time. I try not to work. I mean, I have to work to live, but I don't-- don't-- don't amass money. I'm-- I'm-- I try to be happy with what I-- I am happy with what I have. Of course, you know, after-- after these five years, my God. Seconds 

The second-- oh, I'm sorry. The second-- the second thing it has left me, I would like to tell a story. I would like to tell a story to people. And I would like to tell them that Auschwitz and the Holocaust is not a German invention. 

And I believe that the Holocaust and Auschwitz is all-- all-- all-- all-- you know, all we-- we went through, can happen tomorrow. Anywhere. Anywhere. With any people, if they are foolish enough, if they are foolish enough to do it. Or if they are wicked enough to do it. Or if they feel superior enough to do it to other people. 

It's happening right now. In one place, one place we know, but in many places we don't know. Right here, now. I would like to tell a story and tell them, beware. Don't. Don't. Don't. 

And the third thing, which is a very-- I mean, for me, a very personal consequence. I believe that as a-- as a Jewish person, I have to live among Jewish people and in a Jewish country, where I don't believe I could be sent to concentration-- or my children could be sent to a concentration camp just because they-- they were born Jewish. 

That-- that-- that's about that. That's about that. That's about it. OK? All right. I hope we haven't kept the lady too long. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER: [INAUDIBLE] 