LEON SPERLING: My name is Leon Sperling. I am a survivor of the Holocaust. I was born in Krakow, Poland. And during the war, I was incarcerated for-- 

INTERVIEWER: What year? What year? 

LEON SPERLING: I was born in-- in Krakow, Poland. And I was incarcerated during the war for-- since 1942, '43. 

INTERVIEWER: What year were you born? 

LEON SPERLING: I was born in 1921. And I spent three years in various concentration camps, first in Poland and then in Germany. And I was liberated on the last day of the war in Theresienstadt on May the 8th, 1945. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you tell us little more about your family background and yourself before? 

LEON SPERLING: I came from a middle class type of a family, very assimilated, with relatively little identification with Judaism except for my attendance at a Hebrew school before the war. Um, I was the only child who lived a relatively happy life before the war. And I guess that's more or less what I can describe my childhood before the war. 

Had little identification, or maybe more than a little, with Zionism by belonging to a Zionist Scout organization before the war. 

The war experiences, uh, were pretty bad. Our town was occupied right at the beginning of the war on the third or fourth day of the war. And from then on, the life for the Jews became miserable. We were forced to, uh, wear armbands with the star of David. The businesses of my-- of all the Jews were expropriated. My parents' business was expropriated. And the third or fourth month of the war, uh, we were-- robbed of all the jewelry and furs. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think then, at the beginning? 

LEON SPERLING: What did I feel? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

LEON SPERLING: Helpless. We weren't receiving any help from outside world, nor from the local Polish population. And we were just counting our days until we felt eventually we'll be exterminated. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Sperling, do you remember the first day of the German occupation, or the first days? 

LEON SPERLING: Yes, I remember them, how they marched in into our town. 

INTERVIEWER: You were in the town. 

LEON SPERLING: I--I stayed in town. As a matter of fact, I was wounded on the second day of the war. And one of the bomb shrapnels injured me. So where some people escaped to the east, I stayed in town. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was what year? 

LEON SPERLING: This was in 1939. It was September 2, 1939. The Germans came in with large convoys and motorcycles and armored cars. And for the initial day or so we just saw these troop moving through town. Of course they were preceded by the strafing and bomb attacks of the German Stuka planes. And from then on, every day we saw a new announcement on the billboards telling of different new measures. And people have to wear armbands, people had to perform forced labor, people had to surrender their valuables, jewelry first. 

And then-- then we saw the name of the peoples who were either taken as hostages or were executed for some acts like not surrendering their valuables or being caught without an armband or an identification. And eventually it got much worse. They created a ghetto in part of the town. And the Jews from wherever they lived had to move into a small area probably the size of 15 to 20 city blocks. And that area held a population of probably 80 to 100,000 people. 

Now my family decided not to move into the ghetto. So we moved to a small village about 60 or 70 miles away from my hometown. And we lived in that village until 1942, where a decree was passed to have all the Jews come to a-- the marketplace with 25 pounds of personal belongings. 

And at that time we had our-- my grandmother living with us. She was in her early 60s, but she broke her leg several years before, which never completely healed, and therefore she was limping. And when we had to enter the wagons for the transportation to a collection place, she asked my cousin in Polish to help her get on the wagon. 

And one of the German soldiers, who apparently understood Polish, said yes, I will help you. And he took out a gun from his holster and he killed her. I've seen it. 

Well, we went then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you-- I understand that you are in emotional upheaval remembering. But what especially you are moved now by, the memory of then? Could you tell us then reaction? 

LEON SPERLING: Well, the inhumanity. Somebody asking for help And the help is expressed as a killing action. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you then cry? 

LEON SPERLING: Did I cry then? I don't think so. I don't remember, but I don't believe I cried. I was too petrified. I have seen some Jewish girls, who were pretending that they were Gentiles, being caught by Polish Baudienst, which is kind of an auxiliary labor corps. And of course they were denying that they were Jewish. And I knew that they were Jewish. And they were being led away. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was it? 

LEON SPERLING: This was in a small town called Skawa near Ojcov. And from that marketplace we were taken on horse driven wagons to another town called Slomniki, which had a railroad siding from which the transport were going to wherever they were going. And we, together with other Jews from adjacent villages, we stayed there three or four days waiting to fill up the train under horrible conditions, yes, sleeping in the open air. And there were no toilet facilities, no food. 

And finally, before the day when they started loading the transports, they took a group of older Jews and they loaded them up on the horse driven wagons. And they drove them uphill to face a firing squad. And I had this picture before me, these old people wearing their talesim, the prayer shawls, going to die. To me this is a picture of Kiddush Hashem viduy [prayer] 

And then the selection. A group of officials from the German railroads came with SS people, and they had to fill a requirement for several hundred people for labor camp. So we lined up and they selected able-bodied people, teenagers and young people. The rest of them were led away. 

And of course, throughout this thing, they were making announcement that these people will be resettled in the eastern territories. But that's how I was separated from my family. And that's the last I saw of them. 

This was in September, 1942. And I was taken to a camp called Julag, which is a abbreviation for a Judenlager, a Jewish camp, in the town of Plaszow, which is a suburb of Krakow. I spent there little over a year working with a few thousand of other Jews on building a-- a railroad station, freight station, building viaducts, storage facilities for coal, working six days a week, 10, 12 hours a day, constantly on the move, under very horrible conditions. 

And we were tortured. Not a physical torture, but let me you're an example of actual experience. The guards in the camp were Lithuanian and Latvian volunteers. The food that we were getting consisted of a watery soup and a few pieces of bread. And of course, the watery soup gave you at night constant need for urinating. But you couldn't go out at night to latrine. Whoever went out at night to latrine was shot, pushed into the latrine. 

So what people tried to do, you secured a bottle and you tried to urinate into the bottle. But then these Lithuanian and Latvian guards walked into the barracks, and if they found a bottle, they shot the people. So they were in constant pain, and the alternative was not to eat anything, not to eat the soup, or suffer tremendously. And this kind of a tortures we were endured. 

There was an epidemic of typhus that broke out there. But you were afraid to go to the-- which I couldn't even call dispensary, but whatever it was-- because you were afraid that people would be killed who would report in there. So people with temperature of 104, 105 degrees were working. And I was working when I had that high fever. And of course, the other inmates tried to protect you. In other words, if you reported for work and there was an opportunity to hide, they did the work for you when you were hiding. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you tell more about your friendships and colleagues? 

LEON SPERLING: I just want to finish the episode with the typhus because I remember it like today. I had-- was just the onset of the disease, and I had a very high temperature. And we were unloading a freight car full of coal. And I was just sitting by this side because I couldn't work. And a German railroad policeman came by and he saw me. And he took out the gun, and he made me jump up on that car, which was six or seven feet off the ground, and down. And I had to do it probably 20 or 30 times. And I knew if I didn't do it, he would have killed me there because he had his gun out of his holster. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was not an SS man, and not a gestapo, just a regular German-- 

LEON SPERLING: It was a railroad policeman. 

INTERVIEWER: Ostbahn? 

LEON SPERLING: Ostbahn, Ostbahnpolizei . And I remember after he left me there, I just passed away. 

Well, we stayed in that camp-- 

INTERVIEWER: How was you helped? 

LEON SPERLING: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: How have you been helped when you passed out? 

LEON SPERLING: They took me to the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who's they? 

LEON SPERLING: Other people who worked with me, my friends. They took me to a shack nearby and revived me, and I went back to the camp at the end of the day. 

But these are some of the episodes. And I probably don't recall all of them, but some of them that stand in my mind. 

We moved from that camp in '43 after a few days transfer through a camp on the [Jaroszalynska?]. We went to Skarzysko-Kamienna where we were working in a ammunition factory, HASAG. And this was quite an experience, as usually, when the transport arrived, we had to get out, double time, and run through a gauntlet of SS people who beat us with their rifle butts and clubs. 

And we were somehow arbitrarily divided into three groups. Now that camp had three factories. One was called Werk A, which is a works, Works A, B, and C. One-- and my group went to Work C. And this is something really nightmarish when we came to that camp. I can probably describe something for somebody who hasn't seen it what has seen the film the Apocalypse Now. 

We came at night and we were surrounded by a group of people with yellow faces begging for scraps of bread, covered with blankets, a typical Muselmanns. As we found out the following day, Work C was fabricating the chemicals, namely picrine [picric acid], to fill the shells. This is the explosive thing that explodes in the artillery shells. And working with that chemical, your life span is only three, four months. Your skin turns yellow. You shrivel. And these were the picrinaires that surrounded us. 

Now I was fortunate enough that I knew some carpentry, and they needed some carpenters for Work A. And therefore I only stayed there one night. And the following day, when they asked for people with carpentry skills, I raised my hand, and together with a group of 20 or 30 other inmates, were taken to Work A. 

And I remember like today the guard who was escorting us, a German guard, he says, you don't know how lucky you are. You have to thank god that you are going to Work A. 

INTERVIEWER: And the others? 

LEON SPERLING: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER: And the others. You had friends in the group who stayed and-- 

LEON SPERLING: I had some friends who stayed. They didn't survive. Now there were some people in Work C who weren't directly associated with this, and some of them survived. But most of the people who worked with the picrine maybe worked for three, four months, they were dead. You weren't any-- didn't have any protective clothing or anything. 

But the sight of the people, yellow faces, hair falling out, stooped, shrivel. We worked on that camp until July 1944, at which time the Germans were withdrawing from the occupied Polish territory. And they evacuated us to Germany to a concentration camp, Buchenwald. 

Now Buchenwald-- 

INTERVIEWER: How were you evacuated? 

LEON SPERLING: By train. And this may sound strange. Buchenwald to people is synonymous with a terrible conditions. To me, when I came to Buchenwald, I felt for the first time that I'm going to survive the war. 

Now from what I heard from the older inmates at Buchenwald, the conditions were terrible there until 1943 or thereabout. But at that time, the political prisoners took over the internal administration from the criminal inmates. I don't know-- you're probably familiar with various type of triangles that people were wearing. Well, the red triangles denoting political prisoners. They took over from the green triangles. 

Now typically what surprised me was we came with a group of Jewish policemen in the camps in Poland, Skarzysko and Julag, who was the Jewish police. These people collaborated with the Germans. And of course, they have all kind of privileges. They were pretty cruel to us. But upon our arrival into Buchenwald, these people, policemen, strutted forward, reported in German to the prisoners who were registering us. There was general administration. The prisoners were administering registration and processing of new transport. And of course, these people thought that the other guys are also collaborators and they would get a privileged treatment. 

Well, I never seen them again. We never seen them again. We found out later on that they were killed. 

INTERVIEWER: How? How did you know about it? 

LEON SPERLING: We were told. These people were taken into a hospital or whatever it is for supposedly examination and were injected. They injected a bubble of air into their veins. And I get the feeling all of a sudden that there's some justice. 

And maybe because this was in 1944, it was either August or September, we heard that the Allies were already in France. I became very hopeful that I'm going to survive the war. 

INTERVIEWER: From whom did you hear [INAUDIBLE]? 

LEON SPERLING: Well, there were people in Buchenwald-- there were people from various nationalities. There were Frenchmen. We have contact with the German gypsies. There were students, Norwegian students from Oslo University who apparently-- there was either a strike on an uprising, and they were incarcerated in concentration camps. So these people were telling us that either Paris had fallen or was about to fall. 

And somehow the atmosphere was on an upbeat. Another which a very nice gesture was that when the old-- old timers, the old time prisoners, they made a collection of various food rations that they were receiving and they brought them to us. But we didn't stay at Buchenwald very long. This was just a processing camp for us. They re-registered us and we were transferred to a labor camp. An our Arbeitskommando of Buchenwald, called Schlieben, again, working in ammunition factory. 

And here is an interesting fact that I told you before. Condition, of course, not as good as Buchenwald, if I can call the Buchenwald conditions good. We were given a group of the German green triangle kapo. These are the Germans, not Jews, with criminal records who were also in concentration camp. 

And of course, these people didn't have much empathy, like the red triangles in Buchenwald. And frankly, they were stealing our rations. And then the word got to Buchenwald through one kapo who got into a fight with another one and got badly injured. And upon his return to Buchenwald, he told the political administration, the red triangles, what was going on so that with the next transport of Hungarian Jews, the kapos were all political, all red. 

And of course, upon their arrival, the old timers from Buchenwald, they had sort of a reunion. And the lageralteste the oldest kapo, gave a reception for them. And the following day, five or six of these leading green kapos were dead. I don't know whether they were poisoned or something. And from then on the conditions improved because at least we were given our-- whatever meager rations we had, they weren't stolen from us. 

There was another thing which, to this day, I don't know if this was an act of a sabotage or if the factory was bombed. But either in November or December of 1944, middle of the night, the whole factory exploded. And many of the prisoners were killed. But I don't know if this was done through a bombardment or this was an act of a sabotage. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your reaction? 

LEON SPERLING: My reaction, I was glad that something was done, although I didn't have any part of it and I didn't know what caused it. But I thought this is at least-- the war may end it much sooner. It was maybe an act of vengeance. 

But then the following day, we got a-- two or three companies of new, newly recruited SS people. And under their supervision, if you can call it, but this was just like a double time running with whole stack of boards or two by fours or-- we rebuilt the entire factory in 10 days. 