INTERVIEWER 1: Well, nobody knows about that, so that's one thing to say. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I don't want you to say anything. Let me just finish, take it off. 

SUBJECT: Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Secondly, your psychology. I mean, you happen to have a way of explaining things that I think could be so valuable-- of how you took these horrific experiences, memories. 

SUBJECT: 45. This is the very first time, the very first time that I'm talking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, let's start with that. Let's start with that. And then you talk in your own way. There's no point in my making suggestion. You talk in your own way about what you had to do personally. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To become a person-- 

SUBJECT: To integrate. 

INTERVIEWER 1: To integrate. That's what I want. 

SUBJECT: Are you ready? Oh, OK. All right, I will-- we went from-- I will cut this short now. We went from Gross-Rosen, we were at roll call for 18 hours on end, many people died. We were transported in open railroad cars from Gross-Rosen to Buchenwald, to the inner camp of Buchenwald. 

The inner camp of Buchenwald, as opposed to the outer camp, was, again, as hell compared to heaven. I went to work camps in Buchenwald. I was subsequently transported from Buchenwald to Dachau. I was at Dachau, I was in one of the cleanup crews at Weimar after it had been bombarded. We went to further camps, to sub-camps of Dachau. 

You've got to understand that the political prisoners, that the concentration camp prisoners were for some reason the most important commodity at the end of World War II in Germany. That a transport of concentration camp prisoners took precedence over a transport of army troops. We wound up in a small camp not very far from the Swiss border with maybe 40 men, accompanied by SS, who dragged us from town to town ahead of American tanks. 

And then one day, on April 27, 1945, we were put up in a barn, and there was no noise early in the morning. And I woke up a friend of mine, who lives in Brussels now, and I said to him, it is so eerie. The SS had a submachine gun outside in case anybody tried to escape. Also, the roads at this time were patrolled by SS men on motorcycles with side cars. The side cars has submachine guns mounted on it, and when a straggler was found, when a straggler was seen, then he was shot. 

I took my cap off, and I crawled through the door, and I put my cap on his stick, and I put the door ajar, and I crouched. And I pushed the cap out, and I expected to hear a burst of a submachine gun. It did not come. And we pushed the door open, and the SS was gone. 

It is impossible to convey, even for me to understand today, what it means to be free after having been for 33 months in concentration camps. We knew of the danger on the road. We went to the German village mayor and asked him to give us an escort of a defense force, which the Germans had instituted at this time. Because we felt we did not want to walk on the road and be gunned down. 

He was happy to see us get away from his village, because he was afraid we were going to destroy his village. He knew us, every German knew what a concentration camp was. Every German knew about Auschwitz. Every German knew about concentration camp prisoners. Every German knew what happened, every German. His knowledge or her knowledge may have been a matter of degree, but everybody knew. There was too much of it, for too long a period of time. 

He gave us an escort of his local defense men, men who were in their 60's with old rifles. We grouped ourselves in rows of five with these men on the outside, and we walked back the way we came. We saw the SS patrols going by-- they did not bother us. We were in proper surveillance. 

All of a sudden, there were no SS patrols any longer. All of a sudden, there was nobody, and even our guards left. And 10 minutes later, we saw the first American tank. I stayed in Germany from-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened right at that moment? 

SUBJECT: They stopped, a major stepped out. He knew, he had seen camps. I think it was-- it must have been Patton's army. And he asked me some questions, and he told us where to go and what to do, and they were prepared to take us. And took us into lorries, and brought us to places where there were doctors who told us not to eat, because if you ate, you could die. The system had to get used to food. Very difficult. 

I stayed-- I had assumed, I had sent-- I had tried to make inquiries about my family, my parents, my brother, and my sister, who remained in Brussels after I had left. The gestapo-- I'm going back now to 1942, September 1942--- 

INTERVIEWER 1: I have to interrupt you. 

SUBJECT: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because if I don't get this part about Hartford, I can't make a film. 

SUBJECT: All right. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So I have to bring you to Hartford. 

SUBJECT: I came back, I came back to Brussels. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We'll have to skip over some things and interview again. 

SUBJECT: I came back to Brussels, I got married in Brussels in 1947. We moved to the United States in 1948. My wife and I almost immediately came to Hartford. We had a friend who lived in Hartford, and his being here was instrumental to settling in the area. We have been living in Hartford since 1948. We lived in Bloomfield, and now live in West Hartford. 

I did one thing which I think was important. I completely put my experiences into a capsule in the back of my mind. I refused to talk about it, I refused to discuss it, not even with my wife. I refused to partake at this time in any documentation such as this. I felt that the only way-- the only way-- that I can integrate myself into society is by completely putting this into the back. 

In the beginning I did not understand people. I could not see how people walked, and lived, and went about their business, and did things, and ate, and got married, and had cars, and moved, and how they did not know about us, how their life was important. How they didn't do anything about what had happened. 

And I recognized that in order to become part of society, I had a choice to make-- either to stay a survivor, or a prisoner, and be imprisoned for the rest of my life, or try to preserve my sanity by putting this away in my mind, and integrating myself into society as if nothing had ever happened. And obviously I choose the latter. I came to Hartford, we set up a business, we have a son who was born in Hartford in 1948. 

And we lived a normal life. And until this day, until this day I have never done any documentation of any kind-- I have been approached a number of times-- for three reasons. The first-- let me disperse one thing. My wife tells me that for the first 10 years of our marriage, I woke up every night, every night, and I sat up in bed screaming. And I'm not aware of this, I am fully unaware of this, for 10 years. 

The reason I did not want to do anything so far was, as I said before, that I felt that my own sanity had to be preserved. And I felt that preservation was possible by getting a distance from the events that have happened. Secondly and this was much later, I saw a certain amount of commercial exploitation of the Holocaust, and I objected to it strenuously. And I felt that what I had to convey might be exploited commercially, and I felt it was a sacrilege to do this towards the people who have died. So I didn't, until this point. 

And I feel for a long time now-- I mean, I I never have had any psychol-- I think. Let's say I think I never had had any psychological problems. I'm sure I have some. I did have some physical problems. I have a friend, his name was Walter Spitzer. He's younger than I am, and he is a very renowned artist who was with me in the barracks for a long period of time, who lives in Paris, France. 

In 1946, about six months or so after I had come home, my brother went from Brussels, where we live, to Paris, and I had asked him to look up Walter and see how he is doing. Walter is a painter, and he took a piece of wrapping paper, and made a gouache, and gave it to my brother to give to me. And he told my brother, "This is how I remembered your father in April, 1945, when we were liberated." Let me show you the painting. 

INTERVIEWER 2: This is you? 

SUBJECT: This is, yes, this is me. And it is signed Walter Spitzer, Paris, 1946. So integration into everyday life, I believe was possible by shutting out the indescribable events that have occurred. And even as I tell it to you today, I am very far removed from it. Because it can only be told-- I think it is important to be told-- but it cannot be felt, it cannot be experienced. I cannot even experience it anymore. 

It's as I said, a person who has a very, very sharp pain-- you may feel sympathetic to this person, you may do something for this person, but you don't feel the pain. It is important, I think, to put this on the record, that it has happened. It is important to try to see to it that it doesn't happen again. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

