INTERVIEWER 1: OK. All right. Rolling. 

Yes. You were saying? 

RUDY: Well, in one part, the Hungarian army didn't want to fight any longer. The Horthy group resigned. There was a fascist group, Szalasi, who took over and they continued the fighting. 

And we were at that time working for a farmer. It was about a dozen of us. And we had it pretty good that time when we worked for this farmer, because he gave us food to eat and we could keep ourself fairly clean. 

And then when he heard that this thing happened, we just didn't want to go to work anymore. We said, well, we are about 100 kilometers maybe from home. We'll go home. War is over. 

And the next day, there's a little-- or two days later, a little lieutenant appeared. He was-- and took over. And that time, I used to be an interpreter for a major from Austria, because they were fortifying the city. And they had there a lot of different nationalities. They needed somebody who speaks German and Czech and Hungarian and Polish and Russian, so they needed an interpreter. 

And there were occasions that he used to come down and pick me up with the staff car and I used to travel with him. He was a very elderly gentleman. I wish I could remember his name. I don't. And he used to bring me stale bread and occasionally a little ham or a little cheese that he was able to sneak away. 

And-- so when we didn't want to work, this guy, this Hungarian lieutenant, he says, well, the court martial and was made it very short. He pulled us in, the 10 of us, and said-- he had two guards also, the Hungarian soldiers. And he read a little article from the book. And he says, we gonna hang you, because it's sabotage. Well, hang us. 

And they locked us in overnight in a wine cellar type of a thing, where these farmers usually had in Europe this stone. It was all stone. It goes deep in the -- you know, in the mountain. Sometimes they kept wintertime their potatoes there or beets and-- But this was maybe a wine cellar. 

And in the morning, around sunrise, could have been 4:30, 5 o'clock, they took us out to an apple orchard, and they're going to string us up. Fortunately, that-- on this day, the-- this Austrian came looking for me. He needed me. 

And he asked the farmer. The farmer took me to come up. He didn't know what was going on with the-- to the apple orchard. 

And he came up with this guard and they got into an argument. He didn't speak German. This one doesn't speak Hungarian. So they needed me again. 

INTERVIEWER 2: To argue about your hanging. 

RUDY: About my-- because the big decision that he has make. And the German says, fine. Sabotage, I agree with you. Give him a different punishment. 

He says, no. The law says-- at first in beginning, he didn't want to back down. He just wanted to string us up there. 

And so then the German said-- in his last thing he says, OK, You want to hang him, hang him. But I want to tell you something. I outrank you. He says, now, you come down. I will arrest you and put you in front of the German court martial. 

And that's where he backed down. And to tell you the truth, the punishment that this man devised for us, there was more than one occasion when we went in for this punishment I wish he would have hung me, because it was absolutely brutal. 

He tied our hands in the back and tied our legs and hung us by our hand, hanging. After about 15, maybe 30 seconds, you just feel that your hands will come out from the socket. And you faint. 

You can't stand the pain. It's-- it's just unbelievable. So then he cuts you down, pail of water in your face, pulls you up again, daily, two hours. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what damage, physical damage, did you suffer as a result of those-- 

RUDY: Well, physical damage, the-- the skin was completely gone from the rope burns that you had on your hands. And we used to put, you know, cold like water with a rag over. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because you had no medicines to treat you. 

RUDY: There was no medicine. There was even worse thing later when we got in into-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rudy, there's another damage. You still keep thinking of it. 

RUDY: I still remember. I still have nightmares about. And after I spoke with you, I had twice. It's-- and I see it so clear. It's-- I don't think I'll ever forget it ever. I wish I could. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- are your hands all right now, or-- 

RUDY: My hands are all right. My mental and physical damage, I had a tree that fell on me in-- in Poland, nearly killed me. And it hit me right across from down here. I have a bad back. I have to wear on occasions the brace and the smallest irritation, my back goes out on me. 

I have frozen leg. That was even-- the frozen leg is even worse, because in-- in camp, we had no medication whatsoever. And sometimes, I-- these things, all you were able to do is put a piece of paper over. 

And the thing was rotting away. It's like rotting meat, you know. It festered and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How could you sleep with pain like that? 

RUDY: You don't, or you sleep from exhaustion, or you go to sleep and you close your eyes and wish yourself that you are not there, because you had to devise in camp, in a labor camp, certain things for your mind not to go mad. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Like what? 

RUDY: Like what? We used to play games, because the group that I was in was-- was all guys who went to school, went to college. Games, we used to describe like you have these impersonation games, a certain personality, and you have to recognized who it is. Or we used to play a geographic game where we used to say cities and with the end of the city, you have to name another city, and then countries. 

Or we used to play games-- we used-- we devised 21, a game of 21, whoever reaches. Two people can play it and you only can add three numbers to it. Just something to keep you occupied. 

There were some people who-- with as little food as we got in camp, I saw there's somebody who saved up each day a little bread and made-- made himself a chess set. Just something to do, because if you wouldn't have had something to discuss, to talk or keep your mind occupied-- because the-- the thing-- the spirit, they tried to break you. You would never survive. 

When they took us out to Austria-- to Uzhorod and that was in labor camp, the middle of the night the railroad stops. None of us knew where we are. They threw out their belongings and they told use to get off. 

And next thing we see there, an officer of the Hungarian army. And he makes to us the following speech. You all came here the same as Attila's slaves. Now, and to explain you what this means is when Attila-- when the-- the Hungarians came into Europe, their leader was Attila. 

And when he was buried, they diverted the Donau and buried him by 2,000 slaves. That's according to Hungarian history. And when the water came back and these slaves came back, they were all killed. So he compared us that we got in there to Poland, Ukraine, that we won't be able to tell the Russians where we build the bunkers or where we build the tanks, you're all going to die there. Nobody will come home. 

INTERVIEWER 2: In spite of all, there was Jewish humor. 

RUDY: There was a lot of Jewish humor. You had-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me. 

RUDY: You had to have it, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can you-- 

RUDY: And some of that is-- is Jewish humor, you know, that maybe to some people it isn't that funny. But one of the jokes that these Jewish, two Jewish people were condemned to be shot. And as they are tying their eyes to be shot, this German comes around and he says, what, waste two bullets on Jews? We'll hang 'em. 

And one Jew gives the other a nudge, he says, [NON-ENGLISH], Yankl, they're running out of ammunition. That's concentration camp humor. Or some of the humor-- I mean, it's a sad humor. We used to take out a license, says, oh, he's too small to die. Let him go back for a couple of more days. But it was humor to us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were people laughing? 

RUDY: Yes. It was a sad humor. It-- it maybe-- you know, for people who were not there, will-- will not understand this humor. But how can I tell my kids that-- you're talking about food. Now, we used to put down a blanket. This was in Gunskirchen in camp. 

They used to give for 14 people a loaf of bread, was a lot of it was sawdust. And we used to put down 14 names from slips of paper and fold it up so there is no partiality, and put it down, then take this bread, cut it up into 14 pieces, put it next to each slice, and then wherever you picked up, that was the bread was yours. 

The one who gave the blanket was entitled to the crumbs. And we used to rotate so everybody has a chance at the crumbs. And the bread was moldy. You couldn't eat the bread. 

So what we used to do with the bread, they used to give us water. So we saved the water and made bread soup out of it so you have a hot meal. I used to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you cook it? How did you heat it? 

RUDY: We had-- we were-- in Gunskirchen, there was-- in the back, sometimes we snuck away and able to make a little fire. And I had a friend of mine-- this was in the beginning in Gunskirchen, where I used to-- we used to go down to the kitchen and bring the food for our group. The Germans used to dish it out. 

Now, the thing was in a covered container. But we used to shake the container so a little bit overflows. And the fat used to settle on the outside. And we used to go, you know, scoop it up, because unless you somehow find a way for survival-- and a-- and a lot of people lost their-- their-- their will to live. After a while you-- and I went through that-- that period too, that-- where I says, oh, how beautiful it would be just to go to sleep and not to wake up, because there is a limit, you know? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you pray to God that-- 

RUDY: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: For this? 

RUDY: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What? 

RUDY: Just in plain words, says, please, God, it would be-- just not to wake up. Just take me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Some people were more active in-- in-- in taking their own lives. What-- how-- how do you explain that the people you were with and you, you had this desire to live under these terrible circumstances? 

RUDY: It-- it-- it depend on the mood, because at times, the more I went through, the more I-- I felt I want to live, I want to survive. And somehow, in the back of my mind, I-- I always thought that maybe it's worthwhile living because I'll come home and find somebody. I-- I know I had a little sister. 

I says, well, she's going to have to be taken care of. I am the older one. Maybe if my parents don't survive-- because in camp, we knew already about concentration camps. But we didn't know the extent that the minute they were taking off in-- in Auschwitz that my mother and my sister were killed in the gas chamber for because my mother went with my sister to take care of her child. I spoke to somebody who was there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You spoke to somebody who saw your mother and sister? 

RUDY: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did she say or he say? 

RUDY: He just said-- he says to me, Rudy, we didn't know what we are doing. They went to the right. They went to the left. And she went-- when she was carrying your sister Pessy, she went with her, with the kids, to take care of her. You-- she didn't know where she was going. She knew she had to take care of her child. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't-- you were not sent to a concentration camp. 

RUDY: No. I went in first to labor camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And after that-- 

RUDY: And I went from Poland all the way through the Carpathians through Slovakia through Hungary on foot. And then I went into-- still didn't go in-- in the beginning, I was with the Todt Organization in-- in Austria before we went into concentration camp. 

The concentration started with Mauthausen. I was in Melk. I was in [Wehrbau?], Gunskirchen. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you ever ask yourself what the Todt Organization was? 

RUDY: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just-- 

RUDY: We just thought-- you know, we saw the black uniforms with, you know, red and thought, that's an engineering organization that is watching us we should do our work. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Although you knew what the word is. 

RUDY: Right. I could-- you know, there is something that I didn't mention to you and it's not the most pleasant thing. We were going from-- how cruel things can be. 

We were going from Mauthausen to another camp. Now, when each time the transport stopped, once we were marching, you know, those people who weren't able to march, they killed, right there on the side of the road. And on this one occasion, there was a-- never met him-- and a very-- an elderly gentleman. And he was complaining. 

So my friend who was the same age as I am, he took him under the arm and we were helping him. And we sat down. And there was a young German fellow. And he saw us that we are helping him to walk. And he brought him over some bread or whatever. He gave him some kind of food. 

Then in-- towards the evening, he comes again looking for this man. And he was there with us, this gentleman. And we thought that he's going to bring him again food. And we bring him over. 

And this is this elderly gentleman, like this leaning against a tree, you know, dozing. Guy takes out a gun and shoots him. That-- couple of hours before, he gave him food. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you say? 

RUDY: What can you say? You-- you didn't talk to a guard. You didn't talk to him. You were afraid to talk to them. You were completely demoralized. 

What can you say? You ask him why did he kill him, and he's going to kill you too. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you do? 

RUDY: What did I do? Very little that I can do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No. Did you walk-- did you walk away? Did you-- 

RUDY: I just walked away. I walked away from other people that were killed behind me who couldn't walk all day long. It wasn't nothing new. But it was still shocking, because a couple of hours before he gave him food. 

We were walking barefoot I don't recall how many days. They did not give us anything to eat. People were dying. It was described by us as the death march. People were dying like flies. 

You're talking it was humor. I had with me there an uncle, my father's younger brother. And as we are walking there in one village, I noticed on one of the fences snails, about half a dozen snails. I picked them up. I was thinking to myself, gee, I always heard that the French eat snails, so I'm going to eat snails. 

So in the evening when we sat down I'm looking, how do you eat this snail? I never-- you know. So I took my spoon and put the snail on the spoon, put it over the fire. And from the heat, the snail came out and I roasted it. 

And my uncle looks at me and says, how can you eat that? I says, I'm hungry. I says, we didn't eat. You want one? Nah. Don't want any. 

I saved a couple of snails for next day. By next day, my uncle, he was so hungry. He says to me, can I taste your snail? I gave him a snail. 

He says, you know, it tastes like a fish. He says, you're right. It tastes just like fish. So for a few days, you get to eat. 

You had to survive. You ate anything. We were out in-- in the labor camp where they gave us a soup out of dried carrots. Now, you took the soup and you looked at it and it was white. And you took a look and it was little white worms on top of it. 

So the first day, you throw away the soup. The second day, you throw away the soup. But how long can you go without it? 

The third day, you started picking out the worms and tried to eat with no worms. After a while, you says, to hell with it. You eat because you want to survive. 

I saw one-- one occasion where I could have sworn that those people ate a human brain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A human brain? 

RUDY: A human brain, yes. Yes. Because somebody was shot, the skull come off. They found it. They said, it's an animal brain. I could have sworn that it's a human brain. 

I saw on one occasion, these were neighbors of mine, where a son beat up his father. And the son-- son beating up his own father, because he couldn't get out the gold tooth to buy a little bread. He had a gold tooth. They couldn't knock it out. 

I mean, all these experiences are so degrading. And then you start asking why. You can expect a certain amount of people commit sins. But somewhere there-- I can't find justification. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is life today for your? 

RUDY: Life today, it's a beautiful present. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How do you feel about people? 

RUDY: How do I feel about people? I feel with some people-- you know, when-- when you're putting people-- sometimes I categorize people. I cannot just put a whole tent over all humanity. I cannot. 

I have compassion for people. I love people. Yet certain people I hate with vengeance, and I mean with vengeance. I-- I hate the Hungarians when you're talking with people. I hate them more than the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I mean, most of the things were Hungarian officers, not Germans who did it. 

RUDY: I went through more with Hungarian-- you know, when-- when you're think back here you teach a man to take exams to become a-- a sergeant and-- and he's a sadist. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Are you suspicious of people now that you meet? 

RUDY: Am I suspicious? Overall, no. I trust people. I'm very gullible. 

I became-- when-- when I came to this country, I became an eternal optimist. If somebody shows me a piece of cheese, I don't see holes. I see cheese only. And I-- one of the things that I-- and I don't even know who wrote it or who said it and I accepted it for my measure, the way I'm going to live. If you take life by the inch, it's a cinch. If you take it by the yard, it's very hard. 

I take things as they go. I cannot accept, you know, the past and plan too much ahead. All right. You plan a little bit. But that's-- it's-- I find it very hard. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's-- is it so confusing? 

RUDY: Yes at times very confusing, because I cannot make peace with myself why I survive. And I cannot accept-- and this is years and I-- you know, you read about it and you speak to other people who were in camp and we all-- each person that went through camp has-- has volumes and volumes. I didn't even scratch the surface the things that I told you that, you know, if I would keep on talking tell you about things of-- of-- of degrading things. You know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And the question is what? 

RUDY: Why? Why? Why? 

INTERVIEWER 2: To whom? 

RUDY: To who? To God. We believe in God. I believe more today than I believed when I got out from camp. When I got out from camp, I went home to my hometown where I was born. Now, for my whole family of hundreds of people there were two uncles left, two brothers on my mother's side. 

Now here is a house, in the house where I was born, where my mother was born. And I came home on the high holidays, towards the high holidays. And they asked me to come to the synagogue. And I said I didn't want to go. I found any stupid excuse. I don't have a hat. I don't have a coat. I don't have clothes to go to synagogue. It's the high holidays. And they got me all these things. Karma. 

That was Rosh Hashanah. And you walk into a synagogue where-- in Chust, this was, where sitting in pews at least 300, 400, 500 people. It's a handful of people. And you sat down and you ask yourself, what the hell am I doing here? I don't belong here. 

And yet I grew up in an Orthodox surrounding. I-- I-- I lost it. I lost that feeling. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have it back now? 

RUDY: No. I wish I could find it. I have it more back than in 1945, '46. I feel that I should give something-- when my kids were younger, something about Judaism, something about going on. But I cannot explain why it happened, because I cannot-- I cannot find the answer. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think it was just as hard for you, even though you had a Jewish heritage, as it was for people that didn't have an understanding of their Judaism? 

RUDY: I don't think so, because one of the things that-- that we-- in our hometown-- in fact, we were laughing about it-- was about the Hungarian Jew that when they were transported over the border and they didn't know that-- where they are going and they knew they are not going to a paradise, that it's a camp, they were singing the Hungarian national. They were Hungarians first. We were Jews first. 

You see, we grew up in a city where you had Zionist organizations, Betar, Hashomer Hatzair, Poale Zion, Mizrachi. I mean, we used to fight, and I mean fight. The Munkac rebbe used to say, people should not go to Hebrew gymnasium. He'd rather prefer that they go to any Hungarian school or German school or Russian school or Czech school, but not to Hebrew, because he was against Zionism. 

So when me father sent me, you know, he says, oh, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we were-- this rabbi went as far as somebody who had a wine business and sent their daughter to the synagogue, to Hebrew gymnasium, he said that the wine is not kosher. It's [NON-ENGLISH], being they go to Hebrew school. 

But my father-- Jabotinsky stayed in our house as a kid. I remember wearing a brown uniform when he was there, because I belonged to the Betar. And in the schools, there were frictions between us, but we were united as Jews. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Why didn't you go to live in Israel after the war? 

RUDY: Why didn't I go to live in Israel? It's a hard question to answer. And I worked with the underground after the war. 

And looking back at it, why I didn't go, maybe from some of the stories I've heard, true stories. Maybe I was looking for an easy way out. I-- I couldn't find the answer then and I couldn't find the answer but made my decision, that of coming to this country. 

One thing I wanted, and I wanted to continue my studies. And one of the things that I figured that I would have a much better chance-- maybe that was a selfish reason-- of continuing medical school in this country. But I couldn't, because I wasn't a GI when I came out. I have most of my-- I have quite a lot of classmates of mine who are doctors, but they finished their studies in Switzerland or went to England or stayed in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is there anything else you want to tell us? 

RUDY: I wish somebody would be able to tell me why, give me an answer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It's-- it's plaguing. 

RUDY: I can't find answer and it's-- it's driving me up a wall. 

And I-- and I can't get rid of the guilt Why me? Why did I survive? 

But I felt that my mother, my father, they will never achieve the-- the tzedakah or-- or-- or-- you know, these people, you know, they were in business but they didn't live for themself. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Rudy, you're-- you're very religious, you know that? 

RUDY: Yeah. And you know, they-- they did not believe. And-- and, you know, on showing it, you know, they didn't want to embarrass people or people knowing what they did and what they didn't do. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What have you told your children? 

RUDY: I told them some of the things. I will not tell them all of it. Maybe later. I don't know. I told them about the camp 

INTERVIEWER 2: You know, you're a very religious man, even if you don't observe. 

RUDY: I believe in giving, you know, but-- if I could only find the answer to put me at peace. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Rudy, one last question. It's a terrible question, but I'll ask it anyway. After all you've been through, are you afraid to die? 

RUDY: No. I don't want to die. I celebrated my-- it sounds funny. I celebrate two birthdays a year. One of is October 10. That is my birthday when I was born in 1922. And one is May 4th, when I was liberated. And I consider it being reborn. 

And I count every day a blessing. I have a very nice family, very nice kids. But innerly, one of the things, you know-- maybe that's why I'm that strong about it-- I-- I beg my kids if and when they do get married, I don't want to know what that man will do. We have two girls. But I'm begging them just to be Jewish. 

But if I could answer just one question to myself to put myself at peace, you know, I can't now. That's why I was so surprised when we had that initial interview and that lady there, I don't recall her name, made a statement that after she spoke she felt better. I don't feel better. 

I feel bitter. I feel bitter, the other way. So little was done for all those people that perished, because it could have been done more. United States could have done more. The Pope could have done more. 

But when it comes to Jews, nobody raises a finger. We have both people and the whole world is hollering. 6 million people were killed. Anybody raise a finger 'til after the war? 

I hope one day I can make peace with myself. I can't. Over 30 years and I can't make peace with myself and I still have nightmares. And then I wake up or even during the night, I feel I don't belong there. I went through this already. I just can't accept it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't belong Where? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Don't belong where? 

RUDY: You mean-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You said you don't belong there. Belong where? 

RUDY: I don't belong in a concentration camp. In my dreams, subconsciously, I know it, you know, I see it. I'm there. I'm marching. I'm doing-- and like after I spoke with you, I had a horrible nightmare, you know, that evening. And you wake up in a cold sweat and you get up and you have to step in a different world. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And have to remind yourself that it's over. 

RUDY: It will never be over. 

INTERVIEWER 2: It will never be over. 

RUDY: How could it be over, because maybe daytime I'm occupied with my business and the family, it's over mentally. But subconsciously, it's laying and it's laying and it's festering and it's bothering me. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think that telling it now, you may not feel better, you may feel bitter, but do you think it will be less bothersome for you? 

RUDY: If I could find-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 2: Tell me, do you think we heard you? 

RUDY: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What? 

RUDY: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have not. 

RUDY: No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What was the question? Do you think we hurt him? 

RUDY: That you hurt me? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

RUDY: No. No. I just don't-- I-- I just feel that none of these things should be ever forgotten. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Have we heard you, not hurt. Heard. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

RUDY: Oh, heard me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: mir ist gehoert 

RUDY: You heard me. But I don't think anybody could really comprehend the feeling, unless you were there. You can listen to a thousand people. 

How do you describe hunger for a lengthy time? How do you describe that you can't take a bath? How do you describe to somebody who didn't have lice on him that-- what it-- what it is? How do you describe that you get into a camp and it's dark and you don't know what it is and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. Let's just start, Mr.-- 

