SUBJECT 2: Hitler had-- 

CREW: Rolling! 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK? 

CREW: Yep. 

SUBJECT 1: So this one night, when nobody could use a telephone or any form of transportation, I was very sick. And my father had to wait till 7 o'clock in the morning for daylight. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This-- this is 1920, right? 

SUBJECT 1: '22. 

INTERVIEWER 1: '22. 

SUBJECT 1: To run and get the family physician. There was no way of getting anyone. So this was probably a very stark experience, plus the fact that in that night the open-- opera in our town, city, there had been a Rienzi performance. And more theaters have burned down with Rienzi performances. 

So the theater burned down. Well, the last scene is Rienzi coming on stage on a horse and being burnt. And at that time, the burning was actually on the stages. And theaters burned down. And though there was no communication, you saw all night the firey pieces flying over the city. 

So anyway, that was after the war. My-- it just popped in my head. The one experience in school time of anti-Semitism I had, that was during the-- it must have been the last year of the war. My father was gone all four years. 

We had a girl in the same school. Um, she was the daughter of a butcher. And while we all had very little to eat at that time, she looked nice and round and fat. 

So one day she came up-- and we all had to collect money and things. And there was some figure, the iron siegfried, where if we brought in a certain amount of money, we could drive a nail in it. Turned out to be a completely like iron clad god of the-- Teutonic god. 

And-- and I had-- I had brought in something. She had brought in much more. Her father ran a good butcher store. 

So she made a remark about, oh, the Jews don't spend so much money for patriotic purposes. I was always a quick thinker. I mustn't have been more than seven years old. 

And I said, yeah, especially if their fathers are in the war and others run butcher stores. [LAUGHTER] That took care of that. I never had any trouble with her anymore. 

Um, I didn't have any anti-Semitic experiences during school time. It was rather the opposite. I did not write on the Sabbath. And we had six-day school. 

Every once in a while, teacher would come in and say, oh, we will take a test now. And I was always, for all my years, the only Jewish girl in the lyceum, in my class. And the whole class would always come up in chorus, oh, we can't. Trudy Kronenberger doesn't write today. They enjoyed that. 

So I came out of school. And we had-- we didn't know what was going on in the rest of the country because of the occupation that was there. We had very limited radio news. That was somehow censored or monitored. We didn't know of the blossoming of the Nazi organizations. 

And Wiesbaden was freed of the last remnants of the occupational forces from the First World War in June-- the last day of June in '30-- '30. And there were some people at that time who had opted-- Germans who had opted for a separation of the Rhineland from the rest of Germany. And, um, they were called the separatists. 

And the night-- the 30th of June, after the troops had left, there was horror in the town. They destroyed the-- the stores and smashed places of-- where people lived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who did this? 

SUBJECT 1: The very nationalistic people. 

SUBJECT 2: The Nazis. 

SUBJECT 1: We didn't know whether they were Nazis or what they were. It was just the ones that were very nationalistic and felt that the ones who had opted for the separation of the Rhineland were traitors to the country. So then things became a little simmered down. 

And then, of course, in '33-- this was only 2 and 1/2 years later-- Hitler came to power. And then we saw there were quite a few that had been Nazis. But you didn't know. Even our non-Jewish friends didn't know who was or wasn't. But they kind of kept out of the woodwork, you know. 

There was a very sad thing. Um, at one time, before I was born, there must have been a circus in Wiesbaden. And one girl in Wiesbaden became pregnant from a black participant of the circus and raised a very black boy, who was one of the first ones that ran around with a big swastika in his buttonhole. And he was rabid. I mean, I never had any experience, or my family, but people said that he was very obscene on the street when he saw Jewish people. 

Well, then, when the racial laws came out-- what was it, Rosenberg, Rosen, Rosen something-- in the Nuremberg laws, of course, he was-- he was just dropped, like a hot potato. Um, in-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What, he was what? 

SUBJECT 1: Dropped, dropped. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because-- 

SUBJECT 1: Of course, he didn't apply, you know. 

SUBJECT 2: The Nazis didn't think Jews-- 

SUBJECT 1: Wait, wait. The first-- the first rallies that they had in big places. They had the big banners across that said, Juden, hunde und neger -- Jews, dogs, and Negros, not admitted. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How close was your town to your husband's? How close were you geographically. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, that was-- that was a few hundred miles. 400 or 500 miles. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you meet prior to 1933? 

SUBJECT 1: No, no. So, um, that was in '33 in generally, the first-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to the black kid? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know. (LAUGHING) Nobody gave a damn what happened to him. Because everybody thought he deserved what he got. At that time-- 

SUBJECT 2: He was a man there. 

SUBJECT 1: He was a man. He wasn't a kid. He was a man, you know. 

And he was so unbelievable. And at that time, you got already that Juden und neger, you know, that combination. So if he felt that he wanted to be that exposed and take a chance, so he-- 

SUBJECT 2: He couldn't join the party or any part of the N-N- Nazi party. 

SUBJECT 1: You know. 

SUBJECT 2: Neither the guards nor anything. Because-- 

SUBJECT 1: He was no German. The-the-the what? 

SUBJECT 2: He was German, all right. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, well, he was German but not by their definition. 

SUBJECT 2: And race. So-- 

SUBJECT 1: You know. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Because he was-- 

SUBJECT 2: He was schwarz. He was black. 

SUBJECT 1: He was black, he was black. I mean, there was nothing of-- visible about the mother. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, he-- 

SUBJECT 1: He could have been raised by two black parents. 

SUBJECT 2: You know, there were no black people in Germany before this war. 

SUBJECT 1: The first time we saw-- we saw black people was with the French occupation, you know. Mainz was the neighboring city. And Foch, the famous Foch was stationed there. And his personal guards were North African Spahis, none under six feet, with the big capes. What do they call it? Burnous or what? 

So that was the first time we saw blacks. Um, in June '33, I visited an aunt and uncle of mine in a small town in the Eifel. It's a little-- a mountain range. 

And um, on the shortest night of the year-- that's the 24th of June, that goes back to pre-Christian times, heathen celebrations-- the Nazi youths had been promised a big torchlight parade. And when it got-- started getting dark, a terrific thunderstorm broke. And it poured and didn't stop. So everybody thought, well, they saved the torchlight parade. 

Then all of a sudden, in the middle of the night, I woke up. And I was sleeping in a room with my cousin, to the front of the house, on the second floor. They were small houses. 

And I woke up by a flashlight being shined in the room. And I really-- it took me a while to figure out that somebody must be standing on something and on somebody's shoulders, in order to be able to shine into the room. And I heard noises. And I heard, Heil Hitler, and I heard, the goddamn Jews. 

So I woke my cousin, and that light didn't go away. I said to my cousin, what we have to do is we roll out of bed on the floor. Because we heard shooting, and I was afraid if we'd stand up, we would be exposed in the light of the flashlight, and they would start shooting in the house. 

So we rolled on the floor and slithered to the door and reached up and opened the door and slithered out and brought the door between us and that front room, closed that door. Well, it so happened then that we heard-- there had to be some entertainment in that night, as long as there was no torchlight parade. They just went and smashed up all the Jewish businesses and homes. 

And the reason that was given was some communistic, um-- flugblatter, what's flugblatter? 

SUBJECT 2: Leaf-- leaflets. 

SUBJECT 1: Leaflets, leaflets had been dropped over Berlin. And the money for those leaflets had been come from this little town, insignificant town. I wonder whether anybody in Berlin knew that that town existed. 

And so they had of course to show those people that they couldn't do that, you know. They arrested all the men. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your town, you mean? That's what-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, this is the Eifel, where I visited. They arrested all the men and took them. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Were they mostly Jewish? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, all the Jewish men. The women, they didn't do anything, they just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: They said the leaflets were financed by the Jewish people-- 

SUBJECT 1: Community of that town. So next day, let-- they let them go home. My aunt, who had been very sick the year before, collapsed when they came in. 

And um, the-- somebody had called the gendarme. They didn't even have police. It was the gendarmerie yet. 

And he came. And he wanted to take my uncle then-- protective custody, I don't know what they called it. And I persuaded him to leave him. Because I was so afraid what would we do with my aunt. 

In the meantime, I asked a-- a Christian neighbor who looked in, would he please go for the doctor. They have of course torn out the telephones. And he said, I don't know whether I can do that. I said, well, if my uncle isn't here tomorrow, you can arrest me. And with that, I somehow got through to him, and he left my uncle there. 

When I came home and-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did the neighbor get the doctor? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, yeah. When I came home a week later, it was very funny. That was the night I started smoking and inhaling. After everything was over, I said, I need something. I grabbed the cigarette. And I've been smoking ever since. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were 20-- 

SUBJECT 1: 2, 21, 22. I came home. And just to show you how it wasn't-- hadn't penetrated in Wiesbaden yet at that point, my father was a member like every soldier from the First World War of the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Veterans. 

SUBJECT 1: Veterans. And he hadn't attended anything. And one of his friends had called him up and said, Hugo, why don't you come to a meeting in the beginning of July? I-I pick you up, we go together. 

So my father said, all right, I go with you. And he picked me up at the railroad station when I arrived. And he looked at me, and he said, what happened to you? 

I mean there was-- there must have been just an expression in my face, in those few days. I said, let's go home, I tell you. And when we came home, and I told the story, my father went to the telephone and called up this buddy of his. 

And he said he just want-- I just want to tell you that I will not attend any veterans meeting. Because I don't want to have any part of the big heroes. The man said, what happened? 

He said, I put my daughter on the telephone. She will tell you what happened. So I had to tell to that man. 

And they thought it was absolutely crazy. So, I mean, people at that time were very subdued yet or whatever. They were not that aware of it. 

SUBJECT 2: Uh, just to make it more understandable, this veterans organization was not a Jewish organization. Everybody was in there. The Jewish people were with the other veterans in there. So that makes it clear then, what the guy, uh, why my father-in-law didn't want to go with the guy. 

SUBJECT 1: So that was-- and then, that following year this, in '34, we belong for years to a tennis club-- my brother, I, quite a few friends. And there was a Miss Goring. Her father was Dr. Goring, ophthalmologist in Wiesbaden. He was a brother or step-brother of Hermann Goring. 

And we always got along very nicely in this club. Everybody that was there needed a partner to play, everybody played. In the summer of '34, we had a little clubhouse. And the mother of the pro-- Sauer, Mrs. Sauer, was Ma Sauer to all of us. 

And whoever came in, sat down and chatted for a little while with Ma Sauer. This must have been in June, '34, I was sitting in the clubhouse, chatting with Ma Sauer. And Miss Goring came in and looked around and very pointedly said, good morning, Ma Sauer. 

And Ma Sauer, very hesitantly said, good morning, and looked at me, felt terribly embarrassed. But I-- I just pretended it hadn't-- didn't take place. And I said, I'd better go out now, my party should be there. And we played. 

A week later, I had quite some satisfaction. I walked in, and Ma Sauer was sitting there with Miss Goring. And I said, good morning, Ma Sauer. And Miss Goring, you slowly saw the color creeping up. The lesson, I think, had been learned. 

But a few days later, the pro came to me. And he said, Miss Kronenberger, would you consider resigning? I said, why? I'm in good standing. 

I said, if you think that being non-Aryan has anything to do with playing tennis, I said, you throw me out. I will not resign. I've been a member of this club ever since its inception. You will have the unpleasant task to throw me out. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your family had been in that town for how long? 

SUBJECT 1: My family lived in Wiesbaden for, oh, 1907. My mother was born in Schwalbach, which was a small spa place, not too far from Wiesbaden. And my grandparents moved to Wiesbaden. 

My father came from Hochstetten on the Rhine, which was a, a village. And his family had been there for at least three generations. The family of Kronenberger came from a small place outside of Kreuznach where they lived for-- well, I have proof the first birth of a family member is in 1680 or something. The family always lived on that-- near the Rhine. 

Um, a cousin of mine, in the '20s, took a trip to Paris, where at that time, all the old church, um, books where birth and death of everybody was entered-- were under lock and key. And he saw in those books-- but there was a guard standing over-- looking over his shoulder. He could neither make notes nor photograph any documentation that was there. But he saw with his own eyes that there was 200 years prior to that that the family was living always in that vicinity. 

I said that to a Nazi once with whom I talked. He said, well, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: That your family had been living their since-- 

SUBJECT 1: 14-- the late, the early-- no, 1490, something like that. He talked to me about the Germans, the Germanic race. And I said, well, you must make a distinction. Not every German is a member of the Germanic race. 

I said, now Adolph Hitler, for instance, had to become a small state employee in Braunschweig, in order to receive the German citizenship, because he was born in Austria. I said, I, myself, can prove to you that my family lived in Germany, let's see, since 1496, '98. I said, now I ask you, who is more German? 

He said, well, you know what I mean. I said, yes, I know what you mean. But it's not logic. We were on friendly terms, otherwise I wouldn't have dared to say that. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Where did you see this Nazi? Where did you meet him? 

SUBJECT 1: Was, was a neighbor, a neighbor. Um-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: When was that? 

SUBJECT 1: That must have been in '34 yet. After that, you got more careful. 

SUBJECT 2: Couldn't talk after, later on. 

SUBJECT 1: You didn't talk. We had, um, we had a friend of the family, a Protestant, a lovely family. And the man's wife was very sick at that time. And the boy, his oldest boy, was about 10, 12 years old, and was always ravenously hungry. And he was afraid the boy would really be sick if he wouldn't get meals, substantial meals. 

So my father said, why don't you send him after school and have the one warm meal with us? That boy came for years. One day, his father came and said, he's the last one in his class. He has to join the Hitler Youth. 

My father said, does he have to go to school in the uniform? He said, yes. He said, George, I'm sorry, I will not feed a Hitler Youth on my table. If you feel you want the food for him, come and pick it up, you, yourself. I will not sit with a Nazi uniform in my own house. 

Well, this man went through hell. When the food stamps were taken away from the Jews-- I mean for butter, for eggs, for meat, for anything-- um, he would bring food over to the house. 

SUBJECT 2: This was in the '40s. 

SUBJECT 1: No, this was not in the '40s. This was after we left, in '39. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, after we left. 

SUBJECT 1: Um, my father had, um, an acquaintance, a butcher-- Gee, I don't know his name anymore-- who it turned out must have been one of the very earliest, er, Nazis in town. Had a very low number, everything in the typical fashion was-- and when these things were withdrawn, and he was also an acquaintance of this friend of ours, of this George, um, he said to George one day, what does Hugo eat these days? No eggs, no butter, no meat. 

And George said, well, he eats what, what he gets. No eggs, no butter, no meat. So he-- and this guy had a small restaurant. So he said, look, tell him, I will give you some of those things, and you can give them to him. 

And George came to my father and said that. And my father said, no thank you. And this went on and on. He came two times, he came three times, always with the same. 

And my father said, if that guy thinks he can salve his conscience with giving one Jew something to eat, let him choke on it himself. So after a while, the guy-- he said, I will, I will take it if I can pay. I will take, if I can pay for the merchandise. There were some Jewish people living in the house, so my father figured, you know, everybody could get something. 

And this he didn't want, the, the-- 

SUBJECT 2: (WHISPERING) Butcher. 

SUBJECT 1: Butcher, you know. So, but after it had gone on for three or four months, he said to this friend of ours, all right, he can have it his way. He can pay. And that's when they got some food. 

But this was only for a short while. Because this friend of ours was denounced for associating with Jews and was hauled before the gestapo. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can we go back to the tennis club? 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because we left, and we don't know what happened when you-- 

SUBJECT 1: Well, I never got a bill the next year, which meant I was no longer a member. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you start that again? I'm confused. You talked-- we're talking to the pro. 

SUBJECT 1: I was talking to the pro, who asked whether I would consider resigning. And, uh, I said, no. You have to throw me out. I'm in there ever since the inception. If you don't want me, you write me a letter that by the law of non-Aryan membership is not permissible, I consider myself thrown out. 

He said, I wouldn't do that. I said, well, I am not going to resign. So we played a few more times-- just out of, to prove a point, not to enjoy it-- and the following year, I never got a bill, which meant I was no longer considered a member of the club. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You say, we played a few times. Who were the we? 

SUBJECT 1: A few Jewish members that were there yet. My brother, my brother, and a couple of friends that were members all the time, at the same-- the same length of, of time. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you ever talk about this problem with your non-Jewish friends? 

SUBJECT 1: No, no. By that time, you had gotten very careful. I had some-- two school friends. One, her father wrote one of the very famous, rousing songs, Deutschland wacht auf es ist fruhling am Rhein, a Nazi song. 

SUBJECT 2: Germany wake up, it's-- 

SUBJECT 1: Spring on the Rhine. And of course, her-- there was no, no doubt that she wouldn't talk to me. Another one, who was engaged to some official, who would say hello to me if she would see me, when she was alone. But when she was with him, she ignored me. So she didn't have to bother after that, because after that, I ignored her. 

I had one friend who was a Catholic girl, Herta Ziegler, who I saw occasionally, whom I met on the-- when was Hitler's birthday? The 20-- 

SUBJECT 2: He's April, April. 

SUBJECT 1: In April, yeah, the 20-- 

SUBJECT 2: First, I don't know. 

SUBJECT 1: First, the 23rd. And I've left Germany to join Kurt in London on the day before Hitler's birthday. And on the busiest spot in town, I happened to run into this friend, this Herta. 

And she said to me, how are you doing, Gertrude? She had heard, in a round about way that Kurt had been in Dachau. I said, I'm leaving tomorrow, Herta. 

And she wanted to stop and talk. And I kept saying, Herta, please move on. Because I really was concerned for her, you know. You were seen-- if you were an Aryan, standing, talking to Jew, to a Jew, the association was already-- it tainted you! This girl was, was an Aryan, and she was talking to me. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How would anyone know you were a Jew? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, they knew. 

SUBJECT 2: They know. 

SUBJECT 1: They knew, they knew the people. They knew everybody. So-- 

SUBJECT 2: They arrested me on the street when I walked there, when they wanted to take me to Dachau. So they-- they knew I was a Jew. I don't know how. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Without a scar, without-- 

SUBJECT 1: Right. That was before then. So I said, keep, keep walking, keep walking, Herta. 

She said, I tell you, I swear to you. You know I'm a Catholic. She said, I swear to you, I never raised my hand for the German greeting. She said and short of losing my life over it, I will not. 

She kissed me and said good bye. And I was so scared for her. Because I, I figured it would be horrible if the few decent people that were there would be punished for what character strength they showed. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know what happened to her? 

SUBJECT 1: She survived. I heard just about a year ago, a friend of mine who had gone visiting, to visit the grave of her father, really, and contacted her. And she said she spoke to Herta. And Herta was very sad that she never heard from you. 

But I had no address. So she brought me the address. And I wrote to her. But in turn, I haven't heard from them. 

Um, in our house, in the house that my father owned, on the next floor was the retired window of a, a judge. She lived there with one unmarried daughter and one daughter who was a widow from the First World War. 

A third daughter was married to one of the big industrialists, Tyson? 

SUBJECT 2: Thyssen. 

SUBJECT 1: Thyssen, Thyssen. 

SUBJECT 2: Steel. 

SUBJECT 1: Steel. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When you say in your house, it was an apartment house-- 

SUBJECT 1: In the apartment house that my father owned. And this-- the Thyssens had two boys that were about my age. They were young teenagers, 13, 14 years old and would climb the trees in my father's garden together. 

And after Hitler came to power, I remember distinctly one day going down the steps from our apartment, and one of them coming up the steps. And the way he pressed himself against the wall in the stairwell, as if to avoid possible contact of my closing brushing by him, contamination, you know. I mean, needless to say, there was no greeting. But I don't know, you see dirt, you see unbelievable, nauseating dirt, and you shrink away from it. That kind of thing, you know. 

So after the war was over, I got a letter from the-- one aunt of his that was still living in the house, the unmarried of his that was living in the house. And she-- a very bitter letter, where she justified that it was very bad that my parents had to end up so pitifully. But her nephews were killed, serving their-- 

SUBJECT 2: (WHISPERING) Country. 

SUBJECT 1: Country, you know. And then as an afterthought, she mentioned that food is very scarce in Germany. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your parents had to end up-- 

SUBJECT 1: That pitifully. She had heard that they had been, uh, deported. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What happened? Your father was a very proud man from what-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yes, he was. Um, I went through letters, just this past week. There are a few letters that we saved. Most of the things we destroyed. 

Because at the beginning, when, when America joined the war, again, we were the Germans. We were suspect, you know, possibly spying-- in here. We went through the same in England. When war broke out, we were the enemy aliens. I gave birth to a child who was a British subject, and I was the enemy alien. 

So um, that letter said they evidently called the men, the Jewish men, for street sweeping and snow shoveling. This was before they were deported. And they knew this was coming, that becomes evident out of the letters. 

INTERVIEWER 2: The letter was from whom? 

SUBJECT 1: From my mother and father, a couple of letters. [COUGH] The whole letters and the cards that I eventually got were sent to an uncle of mine, who lived in Luxembourg. 

SUBJECT 2: He was a brother of her father's. 

SUBJECT 1: Brother, the youngest brother of my father, who was married to a non-Jewish woman. And he left in '34 or '35, Germany, and moved to Luxembourg. 

He survived the war. He had to wear the yellow star. They didn't-- they lived on her food stamps. He became a no person. Um, he-- I just read that letter over. It's unbelievable. 

He couldn't use a telephone. He couldn't use a public transportation. He couldn't buy a newspaper. He couldn't talk to anyone. He, he was just a blob of something. 

SUBJECT 2: Let me just add there up for a second. This was after the Germans, he went to Luxembourg, was an independent country. When he went-- and when the Germans during the war occupied Belgium and France, they also occupied the neutral country of Luxembourg. And, and there, they treated him like Trudy just explained. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, Luxembourg of course was-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was not a German country. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You were talking of a letter, of letters that came from your parents to you-- 

SUBJECT 2: To Luxembourg. 

SUBJECT 1: To Luxembourg. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And were sent then-- 

SUBJECT 1: My uncle sent them-- 

SUBJECT 2: To us. 

SUBJECT 1: To us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And what happened to your parents? What did they say in the letters? 

SUBJECT 1: Um, they knew when they were told to get, to get to a place where they gathered the Jews of the city that they would be deported, that they wouldn't be relocated. Um, I don't know whether they knew at that time about the camps already. And if they knew, there was nothing you could do. We couldn't bring them out. 

That's one of the things you live with for the rest of your life, that slight feeling of guilt, whether you left one path un, unopened, where you could have done something. We wrote letters. We approached organizations. 

We wrote to our senators. My brother, who lived in New York, who lives in New York, tried everything. There was no way, no way, whatsoever. 

Um, there was-- at one point, there was, during the war, some people went via-- across Russia, to I don't know, China and were eventually sent. But even that wasn't possible anymore. 

SUBJECT 2: Where did they send-- 

SUBJECT 1: They sent them to Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What year? 

SUBJECT 1: '43, I think '43. I can check it. '43, I believe, or '40-- late '42 or early '43. And they wrote-- they must have been allowed to write postcards. You know, the printed cards, I acknowledge receipt of. 

And they didn't have too much to eat, even though Theresienstadt was considered the better of the concentration camps, if there is a-- 

SUBJECT 2: Best. 

SUBJECT 1: A grading of concentration camps. Um, this uncle and aunt of mine, with her food stamps, by that time were eating horse meat and using the, the rendered horse fat. They baked cookies and must have gotten hold of some cans, and kept sending packages to Theresienstadt. 

And they acknowledged the packages. And it seems they must have been able, both of them, to acknowledge the same package. Because there is a doublication of the cards-- from the same date, the package. 

And the way my uncle heard that his brother was dead was the acknowledgement of a package of my mother's hand-- with my mother's writing, where she signed, Bella Kronenberg, widow. And the next card, she wrote the date. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did your mother survive? 

SUBJECT 1: No. Unfortunately, she couldn't die in Theresienstadt. She was sent to Auschwitz. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you have the letters or the cards? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Oh, where does it open? That's the family thing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Just open them and hold them in front of you, please. 

SUBJECT 2: Let the camera see it. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, I want to get where the-- Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you hold them up-- 

SUBJECT 1: Like so? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. Can you get very close to them? No, the camera will do it. 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, oh. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is it the card signed widow? 

SUBJECT 1: I don't know whether that's the one. You want me to look? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: These are the earlier ones. 

INTERVIEWER 2: That's father's. 

SUBJECT 1: That's father's, yeah. Here, Witwer. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And show them on both sides, please. 

SUBJECT 1: And he says, my uncle says, this is what he told us on this side. This was-- 

SUBJECT 2: And now turn it around. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that was the only communication that was allowed out of Theresienstadt, those cards? 

SUBJECT 1: It seems. He got, he writes in the letter, my uncle, that um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Can we see the other side again? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is that Hitler's picture on the stamp? 

SUBJECT 1: Oh, of course! 

INTERVIEWER 1: And would you turn it around again and hold it still? 

SUBJECT 1: I think via the Red Cross he might have, uh, gotten-- he writes in the letter six months later or so-- he got official announcement. Can I put it down? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um, where did you meet? How did you get out? What were you doing in London? 

SUBJECT 2: Uh, we met in 19-- 

SUBJECT 1: '34. 

SUBJECT 2: '34. After I passed the final law exam, I was assigned to the quarter of my hometown, to become a judge. You know, in the first few years, you worked for nothing. That's the way it was handled then. 

And I needed a little money. And I got an offer from a friend of mine who was an attorney in Wiesbaden. And his partner was a, uh, a, uh, leader in a Zionist organization. And he moved in 1932 to Palestine with his whole family, left a fantastic office with his partner. And this partner, who was a brother of my fraternity, offered me to come and take the guy's place in the office. This was in '32. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Until then, you were a German judge? 

SUBJECT 2: I was a Gerichtsassessor. That means the lowest step to judgeship. And uh, I took, I worked in his office. I went to the court and do all the attorney work. He didn't like the work of the court, he worked on inside work. 

So then came the 31st of January, 1933. And with that, Hitler was in power. And very shortly afterwards, came the Nuremberg Laws, and that's the civil servants, no Jewish civil servants allowed anymore. So that means I couldn't become a judge as long as I live. 

And I figured, like this dumb optimist that we German Jews were, that Hitler wouldn't last long enough, and that there wouldn't be all-- it wouldn't be all as bad as he had promised. And I applied for admission to the bar in my hometown. And of course, that-- laid that till April 1st, and then I got the information that I couldn't be appointed an attorney. And so I hang around, I hung around in my hometown for a while doing nothing, living on my mother's fleshpot. 

And then I had met another guy in Wiesbaden who was an export agent for German and Finnish outfits. And he sold the stuff, the merchandise, in Egypt, Greece, Palestine, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, and those countries. And he needed somebody to take care of his office. He offered me to stay in his office as bookkeeper and typist and anything he wanted to do-- office manager. So I took that job. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Although you were a full attorney at that time. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, I couldn't get a job. I couldn't, I couldn't do anything in the law business. So I went to Wiesbaden and worked for him. And there, I had the pleasure of meeting my wife. And-- 

SUBJECT 1: (LAUGHING) You said it different. 

SUBJECT 2: And, uh, it-- you know, I had all the qualifications I have here. Uh, this is from '32, when I was appointed Gerichtsassessor. You know, this is the lowest grade of a judge that you have. He works for free but does the same thing as a judge does. 

And then here is, here is the notification from the German-- 

SUBJECT 1: Abschied, I never saw that. 

SUBJECT 2: Justizminister, minister of justice. It says you are now pensioned off, on account of the laws-- I don't know, the date is on there. You've got it? 

SUBJECT 1: Pensioned off, but without pay, you know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Meaning that you were not allowed to work anymore as a civil servant. 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT 1: Put out to pasture. 

SUBJECT 2: And this, this, this on account of the law from 7th of April, 1933. And I got this official note, Berlin the 28th of June, 1933. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Does it say because you were Jewish or because-- 

SUBJECT 2: Because of the laws. 

INTERVIEWER 1: No, it says-- 

SUBJECT 2: Wie der Hersteller [INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. The rest recovery of the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Civil service. 

SUBJECT 1: Civil service. They had to be recovered, because a few Jews had been in there. 

SUBJECT 2: So I worked for this friend of mine. And he went to all these different countries and sold the goods there. And I sat in the office in Wiesbaden. And we got married in 1930-- 

SUBJECT 1: 7. 

SUBJECT 2: '37. And we weren't married very long when one morning the doorbell rang. This-- we were married in May, right? 

SUBJECT 1: Right. This was the 17th of May, '38. Just a few days before our first anniversary. 

SUBJECT 2: And the bell rang. And two nice looking man came to the-- were out in front of the door, the two got to the door. And they said, we are from the gestapo, that's the police, and the internal revenue was the other guy. 

They had their credentials there, they come in. Of course, she couldn't say no, and she let them in. And he said, is your husband here. Yes, he's here. 

So she called me. I was just dressing to go to the office. And we went into the living room. And they looked over the bookcase, and they pulled out some books, German books. And they asked me first, do you have a passport? 

Yes, we have a passport. Because we had-- for our, for our, our honeymoon, we had gone to Luxembourg. And they took the two passports away. And then they said, have your breakfast, and then you have to come with us. So I couldn't ask any questions. 

SUBJECT 1: And don't, don't, and don't talk to each. 

SUBJECT 2: And don't talk to each other. 

SUBJECT 1: Because then it will take that much longer. One has to supervise what you are saying. 

SUBJECT 2: So I went with him. And when I got outside, I-- there was a little-- I didn't have any, I was a heavy smoker, I didn't have any cigarettes with me. I said, may I go into the store and get a pack of cigarettes? Let me do that. 

And we walked, of course in those days, to the police gefangnis, jail. And they delivered me there, so to speak. And I was in custody all day. And I asked the cop that was in charge there, what is this? What goes? 

I explained to him who I was and that I was a-- had worked for Dr. Landsberg, the lawyer, who was a well-known guy with this policeman, because he did a lot of, lot of criminal law. And the guy said look, we can't tell you anything. We don't know. 

So I sat in that jail without knowing anything. And it was awful. And that night was-- it was murder. 

Anyway, the horse stables were right below my, my block there. Next morning, I asked the cop, what's-- don't I see anybody? Is anybody going to help me 

No, he doesn't know. In the afternoon, the guy opens the door. And he says there are two guys over there. They want to see you. 

And at that time, the guy-- the cop called me still, addressed me with Herr Doktor, you know, because I had the law degree and the doctor degree. So he paid full respect to me. He didn't treat me like a dirty kike or Jew or whatever you want to call it. 

SUBJECT 1: That came later. 

SUBJECT 2: And so the two guys were standing there. They arrested me. And he says, come on with us. 

And so we went into a big, huge office. And we sat down, I had to sit down. And they sat across the desk. And they started to ask him questions-- was I this and this guy and so on and so on, personal questions. 

Then he asked me, do you work for Max Tendlar? That was the guy-- my friend's name. I said, yes. 

What do you do there? So I told him that I do the correspondence and go to the post office and bring the money to the bank. Do you have vollmacht, what is that? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Power of attorney. 

SUBJECT 1: Power of attorney. 

SUBJECT 2: Power of attorney or something. No, I didn't have any of this kind. So, they asked and asked and asked. 

So finally, I got a little bit hot under the collar. And I was very careful with my answers, you know, I knew the business. So I said, tell me one thing. What am I doing here? What is the cause, what do you want to know, what did I do? 

He says, you know that this company of Pichodo in Cairo went bankrupt. I says, yes, I know that. And you know that they all sent money. 

Now, I got to get a little bit off the thing-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, you have to dig  in. 

SUBJECT 2: They-- this guy, Pichodo, was the sub-agent of my friend, who bought a shipload of cotton goods-- unprinted, unfinished goods-- in Japan. He took that and send it to Germany, to Grunow, and wellen-- that was a printing and finishing outfit for this kind of cloth. It was all cotton. 

And then it went back to Egypt. And it had on there finished in Germany. In those days, nobody wanted to buy Japanese goods. Finished in Germany. And he made a pile of money on it that way. And he sold-- 

SUBJECT 1: But the, the, the real purpose was in order to get foreign currency-- 

SUBJECT 2: Wait a moment. 

SUBJECT 1: --Germany subsidized export. That was the-- 

SUBJECT 2: The, the-- and this company in Germany did the printing. They got paid for it, labor or whatever you want to call it. And then Picotto owed the company in Gronau after he received the goods the money for the labor that they did it for him and went bankrupt. 

Now, they said, the Germans said, you, Max Tendlar and Picotto, in they fixed this up, in order to get this money that he owes the German company, give it to Max. And then he gets foreign currency. 

SUBJECT 1: Outside of Germany. 

SUBJECT 2: Because you couldn't take any money, if you go traveling, you had to apply for a permit, 500 marks was the minimum-- the maximum that you could get for any trip. You couldn't send any money out of the country. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was Max Jewish? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, sure. And so they said, they two, the two worked together to get that money out for him. And this was a good sum of money. 

And you know there was a law, which called sabotage of the economy, Wirtschaftsabotage is the German word. And that is punishable by death penalty. And you are under suspicion that you helped him. 

So now I knew what I had to say. And I told him 16, five times that I didn't have any authorities on anything, that I did-- that I got 120 marks a month and a bedroom and so on. And that I had no things. 

And I told him, I says, and he didn't do it either. Because he was just in Finland. And he didn't go. If he would have done that with his family-- 

SUBJECT 1: He would not come back. 

SUBJECT 2: --He wouldn't have come back. So anyway, make a long story short, after a while of talking back and forth, they says, you can go home now. But don't go into the office and don't do anything. 

SUBJECT 1: They had sealed that anyway. 

SUBJECT 2: It was sealed up, and I couldn't go in there. So Max, of course, which I didn't know at that time, was in another cell room in the same jail, you know. They had gone to my house, and they got-- two other guys had gone to his house. 

And apparently, they had interviewed him first and had found out-- probably already this is my suspicion that I didn't have anything to do with his business affairs anyway. I was just a little, low-class employee. 

So what happened now is he stayed in jail for I don't know how long. And there was one Jewish attorney left, who was also brother of my fraternity. He had served during the First World War in the uh, Goring-- Goring had a, had a air force command, you know, during the first-- 

SUBJECT 1: Luftwaffe 

SUBJECT 2: Luftwaffe they call it in German. I don't know the English word for that. And this-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Wing. 

SUBJECT 2: Huh? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Wing. 

SUBJECT 2: Wing, he was a commander, wing commander, that's right. And this guy-- what was his name, war der Anwald? 

SUBJECT 1: Goodman. 

SUBJECT 2: Goodman was in his group. And he was left as the only Jewish attorney in town. So I helped him to put the material together for the defense of my friend, Tendlar. 

But it took a long, long time till we heard from other companies in Egypt, confirmation from the court that it was an official bankruptcy, it was nothing-- 

SUBJECT 1: You know when he came back? 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: In September. 

SUBJECT 2: And he was released out of jail in September. But his, his case wasn't closed. And by the time-- a little while later came November, the 10th, the Kristallnacht. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm hm. 

SUBJECT 2: And we were both arrested then. I was on the way to the office. And they grabbed me there. And they took me and put me in jail. And there I met my friend Max in the same cell. We were six or eight Jewish guys in there. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember the Kristallnacht, how it started, your arrest, what happened afterwards? 

SUBJECT 2: Uh, how it started and how it got together, I know what the cause of it was. What they-- 

SUBJECT 1: What they said it was. 

SUBJECT 2: That's well-known, right. There was a guy in Paris that shot somebody. We only know that all of a sudden this particular night, everything was on fire. Our synagogue on Michelsberg in Wiesbaden burned. 

The office of Rechtsanwald Goodman, I saw that the next day, was-- I've never seen anything. Just the files, the paper were on the floor, that high. The everything was smashed. 

The little taps in the-- on the water taps, the little porcelain, where it says warm or cold, they were smashed. Now how little, how cruel the guys were. 

SUBJECT 1: Pillow cases were slit, you know, with feathers flying all over. 

SUBJECT 2: The pillowcases, yeah, the pillows. And the store windows were smashed. And there were a lot of fun for those guys. 

Now the next morning, they went around-- the gestapo-- and arrested the Jewish men. And they put them-- the first groups went to-- 

SUBJECT 1: Buchenwald. 

SUBJECT 2: Buchenwald. And-- where was the other one? I don't know, it was some other place. I wasn't grabbed the first day, neither was my friend. Because I don't know, I wasn't one of the prominent citizens of that town. And he wasn't so well-known either. 

But we were grabbed a couple days later. And we were put in this jail cell. And there was a whole bunch of guys that was in there. And we stayed there for I think two days or nights. And then one day, they grabbed us and put us on a truck and brought us to Frankfurt. 