SUBJECT: --not to talk impromptu as the style. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I see. Right. All right, fine. Then let's-- I'll ask you questions, then, as they come up, OK? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Very good. 

CREW: Give her room. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why don't you just continue? 

SUBJECT: Well, where did I stop? 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were talking about that you had heard that-- we were talking about Lvov, and that people had been getting killed in the ghetto, and that you had heard stories about people getting killed in Lvov. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. And there was ghetto introduced in Brody. And around this time, it-- there was talk that the-- those Jews who do not have arbeit card would be in danger. And so my mother decided it will be best for us to leave. 

As I-- I think I have mentioned before that she had her-- through her friend-- the-- she had herself registered-- the-- under the false name as the situation become dangerous, because by this time she already realized that we would eventually have to-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you went to Przemysl. 

SUBJECT: Yes, and we went to Przemysl. On our-- we left during the night, because this being a small-- small town, it was dangerous to walk-- the possibility of being recognized. Though, my mother wasn't so well known any more since she spent many many years-- ever since she was married she lived in the-- no-- not any longer in Brody. But even so, we took night train. 

And I do remember that living in Brody's ghetto was a considerable shock to me. For so many years I have lived between Jews-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm. 

SUBJECT: --I mean, ever since the ghetto was established. And it was such a large part of my life. And now I knew I would be living in a place where there would be no more Jews and that there will be constant danger, which I knew by this time, since, as I have mentioned before, Germans paid everyone who denounced a Jew being con papers, or the Jew who was hidden somewhere. They paid certain sum from each person who was caught. 

If there was, for instance, on person that was denounced, then they paid for one person; if there were two, they paid for two persons. And some people that was considered poverty in in Poland, some people were quite willing to denounce someone in order to get the money. And there were people who were also not very inclined, the-- to hide Jews, because, as I-- I think I mentioned it, those who did so were shot by the Germans together with their entire families. 

It so what happened when we were on the train, there were two women sitting next to me, and they happened to be discussing a Jewish family who was in hiding. It was a Polish woman-- some neighbors. So they said denounce this Polish woman to the-- this Polish woman to the German. And a Jewish family, together with the Polish woman, were killed. 

Later on, the two women started to speculate how good are their chance of any Jews surviving the German occupation. And one of them come to the conclusion that eventually, the German are going to kill all the Jews. This upset me considerably, being at the start of this new kind of life. 

Well-- but next morning we arrived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Cutting two minutes. You're upset. 

SUBJECT: I tried to sleep. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: I mean, in this way my mind was not working anymore, and I could relax. Then we moved to-- to Przemysl, to this house where there was this lady whom mother came to meet through-- through parents of my cousin's fiance. I think this lady guessed who we were, considering the way she get acquainted with my mother. 

As for others in the house, they did not know of them, the-- at the beginning, that is. However, our room, which was not what you would call here first floor, the window from the room went on the courtyard. At the courtyard the children were playing. And as I was rather careless in talking with mother, I often allowed-- to the things past-- to ghetto and matters like this. The windows in the-- during the summer were open. Some children heard it. 

Well, soon, they repeated the story to their parents. And the majority of the tenants in the house already knew it. Well, there was, however, an element of safety in the fact that it was not a single family who knew it, but so many families. Because should they-- should any decide to denounce it-- well, if they all would denounce us, then they would have to share the money that they would get from the Germans, and they would get next to nothing-- there being many families who knew. 

If one of them would do so, then one would get all the money, but other neighbors would hate him for getting all the money for something all of them knew. And since nobody knew how the war will end, they kept quiet. From what we heard later, from this-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What year was this now? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Around what year was this? 

SUBJECT: At-- at this time it was before Leningrad-- about a year before Leningrad-- I mean, before the Germans starting losing. And this time German were on the advance, and it looked like that they will win the war. It was already a year later that the methods were that they suffered the worse. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember how much money was given for denouncing one Jew? 

SUBJECT: I do not remember this, but I know that many Jews were denounced. Of course, there were some Poles who did help Jews. 

Well, at any rate, I were-- and I was kept quiet. There was no point. They knew the last one was no point of asking for blackmail, because they could see very clearly that we are very poor. They could see the way we lived in this single room, the way we were dressed and the-- from everything they knew we were poorer than they were. So-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: There wasn't any profit in it. 

SUBJECT: Well, there would have been profit if they would denounce us. But usually, the matter started-- first people tendered to us blackmail. And then they continued. And finally, when the person could no longer pay, and they saw that they-- in case thing changed, they would be in danger-- I mean, if the German lose the war-- so then they denounced. As there was no chance of blackmail, then things were safer. No one could blackmail, and there was no profit in denouncing us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Could I ask, who did you play with? Did you play with these children? 

SUBJECT: Ah, yes. There was a neighbor across the door. She had three daughters. Two of them was-- were close to my age. And occasionally I played with them. Though, when-- not too often I hear-- did not do it very willingly, because even though they were a family, and though the mother was friendly with my mother-- in fact, they-- our mothers used to exchange the food receipts. But I knew that they know. And even though they would not speak about it, it make me uneasy. I never felt un-- at ease with the people I'm-- that-- about whom I knew that-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know they knew? 

SUBJECT: --they know it. I knew soon that everyone know-- everyone in the house. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you know it? 

SUBJECT: How did I know it? Well, this I do not really remember. What I know is that I know. Aft-- from time to time, the telling-- though not direct remarks-- were made. Some of the children would say something. 

INTERVIEWER 2: So you never felt safe, and you never felt like you can trust-- you can trust anybody. 

SUBJECT: Well, no. It wasn't exactly this way. Even though I was very young at the time, I was able to figure out that it is very unlikely that some of the neighbors would denounce us-- at least as long as the relations were reasonably friendly. 

There was, however, another thing. And this was a terror. And this were children on the street. I haven't mentioned it, but it was in abroad. It was in other cities. The children were awful. Whenever they recognized someone as they are Jews, they always would keep attacking, screaming. 

Well, it so happened that the-- oh, I have forgotten to mention. Every Po-- every Pole had also to have an arbeit card. Everyone had to work. The arbeit's office did assign everyone a place to work, and this was it. So my mother started to looking for work. For one thing-- that she had to have money. We were already without any income. And also because it was necessary. 

And she could not work in the factory, because she was not strong enough. Also because of her look, because of the-- she had delicate looks. And the-- the way she spoke Polish-- you see, common people spoke different kind of Polish. And educated people spoke different kind of Pole. Had she taken a work in the factory, she would be considered a big danger. 

The safer thing seems for a work in an office. To get work in an office, one-- it was much easier if one knew German. Of course, mother knew German, but it was-- since in the part of Poland where she came from, the Jews spoke either German or Yiddish. And like, Polish was much less spoken except by Polish population. 

So she applied for a work in an office, and she worked in a private office for a while. 

Oh, yes. I was coming to the children. 

Everyone was receiving cards. On those cards, one was entitled to certain amounts of food at reduced price. One of those food was milk. The milk was located in special places according to where a person lived. 

As mother worked during the day, I usually went to pick up this milk. I don't know how it happened, but some children happened to recognize me. Maybe it was that at some time before I was walking somewhere in-- through the street was mother and speaking about ghetto-- something like this. You remember, I was, as I said, I was rather careful-- careless-- in the beginning; or that they just thought that my look was suspicious-- whatever it was. 

When-- many times, when I went to pick up this milk, a group of children would start screaming after me, "Jewish! Jewish!" And I was always terrified about this happening, because if somebody heard and cared to denounce me, of course, I would be immediately killed-- or if some German would hear and understand what they are screaming. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did they say? It was in Polish. Do you remember the words? 

SUBJECT: In Polish-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hmm. 

SUBJECT: --it was [POLISH]. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Ah-huh. 

SUBJECT: Well, at any rate, I soon learned, also, that the German never recognized Jews unless they happened to have black hair and black eyes, because they have their own stereotype of a Jew. And whoever had light hair or light eyes was not suspect by them. But Polish people had some special way of recognizing. My mother wasn't-- was never recognized. But to me it happened on a number of time. 

Well, I still was-- those things would happen. I was meeting those children. I mean, they were screaming after me. I already hated to even-- to drink this [CHUCKLES] milk. But I couldn't bring myself to say that I am afraid to-- to go to pick this milk. So I continue going. 

Well, one day, when I was picking the milk, I went out of the store. And there was a whole crowd of boys, and they starting running after me and screaming, "Jewish, Jewish, Jewish." I thought that they would be tired after a while. But even after I left the street and was walking to the central street of Przemysl-- this was also a street where I lived-- they kept following me all the way, screaming, screaming. Now of-- everybody was hearing them, and I did not know how to get rid of them. I really don't know what would happen. 

But we have met mother, who just came from the opposite side. And she saw what was happening. And she send the boys away. Somehow they did not suspect her. And also, in Poland, the-- the children have great respect for the grown-up people. So I think they didn't thought she might be a Jew-- a Jewish. There it was. They went away. 

Later on-- what's the state for the one in Przemysl? My aunt from Brody went-- stayed for-- came and stayed for a few days. This was also an incident, he said, but I won't spend time on it, because I want to limit myself to essentials. 

Well, one day we were going-- the street, mother and I, and we had a woman calling my mother name-- I mean, her real name. Of course, mother ignored it, and we continue walking. The woman run after us and said, "How does it happen you don't recognize me?" Mother told her that she was mistaken, and that she's not the person she takes her for, because it was clearly evident that nobody who wished her well would have called her the-- seeing her there, called her by her real name. 

Well, the woman persisted and persisted, but I have accustomed myself early-- early not show any emotion, because I knew that there were many people who were the-- observing anyone who pass-- who was passing the street or was on the railroad station, or whatever. And if someone showed-- seemed afraid, it was already dangerous. All such people were considered suspect. 

So I was accustomed not to show any emotion whatsoever. When I head this woman, I smiled, and I said what a funny incident. You must-- that you have taken us for somebody else. 

Well, she didn't thought it was so funny, and she at once called me by the name I was called when I was a tiny, tiny child-- I mean, very little girl-- the name which was often-- that small children were often used. 

INTERVIEWER 1: A nickname. 

SUBJECT: Nickname, yes, which I was no long-- which was no longer the-- nobody any longer called me by this nickname. And it was evident. Well, she said she remembers me as well, though I did not remember her. There was not much to be said. 

Soon she was joined by a man, and the man said that he is a voksdeutsche. Volksdeutsche was a-- a German who lived in Poland but was of German descent. These were usually collaborators. 

Well, now he says since he sees that evidently that we are Jewish. He fears it's his duty as a good volksdeutche to denounce us. Well, the woman said to one-- that-- she said then that she had nothing like this in mind when she stopped us. She meant only a friendly conversation, but she got offended that mother did not recognize her, or did not wish to recognize her, or to speak with her. Well, it become clear this was a couple of blackmailers. 

By now, mother started to talk with them of how much they would take-- no. First she pretended that all this is not true. After a while, the man said, OK, then let's go to the police. We walk with them. It happened off a-- a little time. 

Then-- mother started to mention money, because it was evident that this was what they wanted. I do not know if it was mother or they. I think it was mother who mentioned money. I was sure they would take money. Well, the man said, no, he wouldn't take money. He is a good German. 

Well, it was no. So, no. Well, let's go to the police. Now she pretend-- she pretended that she did not care. And they said there was a kind of impasse. I was very, very frightened. I was sure the woman would have taken the money. 

Well, eventually, the woman think that mother did not come with another offer; suggested that it could be arranged amicably, that is, by paying blackmail. As there was no money to pay blackmail-- but all employees at certain time of a year got coupons for the-- hmm. What would be the name? For coats. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For coats. 

SUBJECT: Yes, for coats. Mother had such coupon, and she gave this to the woman. This was temporarily the end of these blackmailers. But in order to give them the coupon, she had to take them home, because she had the coupon at home. Now they knew where we were living, and this was a catastrophe. They could come again. 

Well, some time passed. And then suddenly-- I did not know exactly at the time what happened-- but mother took me, and we went to visit some peasants who were living in the close by village, and whom we have met at our neighbor. Well, we went there. Probably these-- those peasants may think mother invited her at some time. Well, so we went there. 

Still, it was quite unexpected visit, and they started to suspect something, especially as the next day mother, at the time, did not know evidently what to do. And we stayed there another day without mentioning anything. And the peasants grew suspicious, and also afraid about possible consequences. 

Until now they have no idea that we might have been Jewish. But now maybe they thought that we might be Jewish. Maybe they thought that mother was involved with underground, or whatever. But they thought that evidently we are-- we wanted to be in hiding. And, of course, they were afraid. 

So they mentioned to mother that there-- since there is a law that everyone who stays overnight must be registered with the authorities; therefore, should we wish to stay with them for another night, they would have to register us as staying with them. Of course, this was the last thing that the-- mother wanted. So we left. 

What appears, though, I am not quite sure if I remember correctly, that it was about this time that mother was looking for another job. And usually one gave an ad in a newspaper for the-- that one is looking for the jobs, taking the qualifications. Well, it seemed someone in the newspaper, when she came there, told her that there was some inquiry. 

The next thing I remember, we moved from Przemysl to a place called-- oh, it's getting already so late. We moved to a place called Surowica. This was actually the village. But it was also the greatest railroad station. All the trains which were sent with the German soldiers to the Eastern front went through this Surowica. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's a junction. It's a junction. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

Well, that day, mother got a job as a telephone-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Operator. 

SUBJECT: --operator, yes. All the people who work in connection with railroad eventually got a small apartment. And there was a row of wooden houses. Each was two family house. And they lived the-- those who lived-- who worked for the railroad and their families. Each house was separate but close to each other. 

There in this place there were the people from different part of Poland. And because of this reason, nobody was very suspicious of them. Well, this seemed quite a safe haven after all those dangers that we have passed through. Because there nobody knew anything. Nobody suspected anything so far as I could know. 

There we would have stayed quite a-- without being much bothered to the-- till the Russian came-- except that this blackmailer, this woman, remembered us. And she went to the place where we lived. And she asked this old lady who had-- in whose apartment we had-- from whom we had rented the room-- if she does know where we are. 

And this old lady, since she was friendly to us, she would not tell her. And she also tried to explain to this woman, who told her in more detail, it seems that you are Jews, and so on-- which at any rate, she either knew or suspected. Probably she knew everyone there knew it in this house. 

She thought she will discourage her from bothering us further. She told her that we are very poor. But this did not convince the woman. And she left a notice with this old lady thinking that maybe my mother will see her; that if she see my mother, she is should tell her that mother should get in touch with her. Otherwise, she will find us. 

Well, of course, it was possible to find everyone, because everyone had to be registered. Had she lied, she would have found us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: She knew your false name. 

SUBJECT: She knew our false name. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did she find that out? 

SUBJECT: I do not remember. Well, at least she knew where we lived. And knowing where we lived, she could check who was living there. Because everyone had-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Gotcha. 

SUBJECT: --to be registered. So even if she did not know our false name, which I'm not sure if she did, she could still track us. 

Well, my mother went from time to time to visit this old lady, and she got the message. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Sure enough. 

SUBJECT: And a few days from-- after this, she went-- she said she will be back in the evening. I did suspect that she went to see this woman-- though she did not say so. I later found that it was so. 

When she arrived to the town and to the place that the woman said she should get in touch with her, she found out that the woman was no longer there. The people who were there knew nothing about mother-- not about the whole blackmail business. And of course, mother did not tell them about. She just said she wanted to see this woman. 

They said the woman went to Warsaw. What have-- there were the staff fights in Warsaw ghetto. This woman had a-- a fiance who was a policeman. During this fighting in Warsaw ghetto, this fiance was killed. 

Well, at any rate, mother collected as much information as she could about this woman. We never heard about her at any-- anymore. It seems she went at this time to this-- to visit to the funeral. Or maybe the fiance was just uh, hurt. Not that-- I don't know. But in connection with his-- with what happened to him, she either went to visit him, if alive, or to his funeral, if dead. 

At this time, German were catching people for false paperwork in Germany. And evidently, they caught her as well, because she completely disappeared. We never heard from her later. So the life become quite peaceful, except for another thing. 

And this thing was that as this was the train station, the trains with the German, which was sent to the front, were stopping there for quite a while. And those Germans saw just whoever, but evidently-- and looking for company-- and just to sit in somebody's house-- were running all around to those houses. 

And it so happened that at this time, if one worked at the telephones, it meant working one day, having a day free, working night, having a day free and working day; having night free, working night, and so on; so that every second night my mother worked. 

And the Germans were there around night and day. During the day when the mother was home, it wasn't so bad. And even when I was home alone, I kept the door closed. But in the night I was always afraid. Not that they would suspect us-- this was-- they wouldn't. But I was alone at home. 

The apartment on the other side-- because this was two house apartment-- there was some German who lived there. And the German, during the night, late in the evening, during the night, they would-- oh-- they would knock-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Knock. 

SUBJECT: --to the door. They would look in through the window. And this bothered me extremely. I had-- I always went to bed before mother left for the night, and I closed the door. And I was reading, because I could not get a sleep so early. But whenever I heard some people approaching, I turned the light. I pretended to sleep so that they would-- would not knock to the door. And I was sometimes afraid that they may force the door. 

I never knew exactly what would happen, but I thought they might open the apartment. I heard about rapes. I did not know what rape meant, but I knew it was something that women were afraid of. And I was afraid of all those things happening to me. So the nights was-- were very bad. 

And the situation continued like this for a while. Then, the Germans suffered the-- a reverse at Stalingrad. And from this time on, they were losing the war. 

Well, when it was evident that Russians will soon be in, I started to think, what the life would be from now on. And I just could not visualize very clearly. But I decided to believe that it would be wonderful. I thought that possibly some members of the family were left. And if none, not-- so then, there was a-- little cousin of mine who was placed to a Polish family. And I was sure she will survive. And if nobody from the family will survive, then she would be, and she would stay with us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you think you might see your father again? What did you know about him at the time? 

SUBJECT: I doubted it. I doubted it very much. By this time the German had killed so many Jews. Oh, yes. I have forgotten. At some time, I think, though, I do not remember. But-- but sometime although all the families of the people who were arrested at the time got notice that they were all killed. 

At any rate-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember when your family got-- when your mother got the notice about your father? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Now I do remember, yes. 

By the time the war was coming to an end, it was quite clear that few Jews could have survived-- and only those who were at the-- in hiding or the-- who were under the false documents. I was very surprised when after the war I saw some people who returned from concentration camp. 

Well, at any rate, later on I used to-- when I found from mother that if-- that one could hear all the little advance, the sounds of the-- of the battle. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT: If I-- and so I hear-- laid on the floor. And laying on the floor I could hear from far away the sounds of the battle. Otherwise, then I think it was not possible. This way one could hear it. So I knew the Russians would there-- would be there at any time. And I thought that the life will be wonderful. 

Well, there was a new scare that Surowica being the greatest railroad station in Poland, might be bombed by the allies, and the houses in which we lived, which were close to the railroad might also be bombed-- of course, accidentally. 

At this time, for a couple of nights, I stayed with the neighbors-- because, of course, mother had to work like usual. Then some day German started to leave. Also some collaborators who were the-- working with them started to leave. And Russians entered. 

INTERVIEWER 1: That must have been a very happy day for you. 

SUBJECT: Yes. But what followed was kind of a let down, because none of my happy expectation was realized. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was that like when the Russians came? 

SUBJECT: Well, when the Russians came, it was expected that the battle will take place there. And almost every one who lived there in this Surowica and who knew some peasants went to stay with them for the day or two. So also mother did. And we went to stay with a peasant woman. 

There was a battle. There were some shells of-- some shells was-- were flying everywhere. And after a few hours everything become quiet. And I saw Russians entering. 

And-- and then later we returned to our-- the-- to the place where we lived. After a little while, we found that there were some Jews returning to Przemysl, which was a nearby town whee we lived before. And of course, mother registered herself and-- in case somebody would be looking for her-- and started looking for her relatives. But none of them had survived except for her niece. This we have found much, much later. 

I also remember the trip we made to Lemberg. And there we went to visit-- there was one cousin of my father that was married to a Polish woman. So we went to see her. From her we have found that none of our family-- our family had survived. Her husband did. He was a-- I think second cousin of my father; and also her daughter. 

As for the rest of my father family-- nobody; and we planned still to go to Brody to find if there were some survivors from my mother's family. But it was in Lemberg that we met a woman from Brody who knew my mother's family. And she told her that no one was left. 

And we returned then to Surowica. Well, we stayed a short while that the wife of the sister-in-law of my mother, the wife of her brother, did come. And she said also that not only all the family was dead, but also her little daughter that was placed with Polish family, and that I thought that in case nobody else remained would stay with us. She was also dead. 

My aunt was in awful state, because she expected that at least the child would be alive. Well, she stayed for a little while with us. The next thing we-- I remember we moved Przemysl In Przemysl-- why-- the period following the war was financially very, very hard. There was scarcity of food, scarcity of almost everything, even medicine. At this time I hurt my food. And because of this so-called avitaminosis this was a sickness due to the lack of vitamins, this wound would not close. This forced me to stay home for entire-- the winter. 

After the winter was passed, I have developed a fear of going into the street. I had a feeling that all the people are hostile. I did remember all those what-- what I've lived through in Przemysl when we stayed there-- those children and all this. And though, now, there was no danger whatsoever, yet though, before I was walking the street, notwithstanding the danger. Now I just gave in and wouldn't go out of the house till a time when my mother went to work one day and didn't come back. She was long-- I mean, not at-- when I expected her. 

When about an hour past and she still was not there, I decided I was so worried that I decided to go out to the place where she work and find out what happened. I found out that this was just a simple delay, and she was there. But from this time on, I walked again everywhere, and this particular problem I had with fear of the street disappeared. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you come to the States? 

SUBJECT: It was much, much later. The-- first we stay in Przemysl. It was a period interesting in itself. At first we-- ah. We had-- we moved from Surowica to Przemysl. There we had quite a nice apartment. But shortly afterwards the Russian took all this apartment building for the use of the army, so that all the civilians had to evacuate the house. After this, we got an apartment, which was small and inconvenient. 

The financial situation was very bad, almost as bad as during the German time. And I was sick, as I mentioned, with this foot trouble that I had. There we stayed for while. 

Then we moved for Warsaw. Where mother did worked in a-- an American institution called Joint-- Jewish-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Joint Distribution Committee. 

SUBJECT: Exactly. And I went back to school. And the life was very uneventful. After mother got this job with Jewish-- American-Jewish Distribution Committee, our financial conditions had greatly improved. But this sense of let down persisted. 

Then after a while, the-- I do not remember exactly how long we stayed in Warsaw. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you know what the let down-- was the sense of letdown was due to? What had you expected? Well, I expected that somehow I should be in some re-compensated for all the suffering. And I thought that there will be either a family reunion or at least that there will be this little cousin that left alive, and that she will staying with us. And this would have made life more pleasant. 

As it was, we remained just the two off us. And the life seemed going so uneventfully. I was very glad when we left for Italy. 

First we went to France for a few weeks. I liked France very much. I would have wished to stay longer, but it was impossible then. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you finance those trips? 

SUBJECT: What? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How were those trips financed? How did you manage to move around? 

SUBJECT: Well, As I mentioned before, the-- mother had this good job in-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: With the Joint. 

SUBJECT: With the Joint. I don't know if the institutions at this point did provided some assistance. I know that in the United States there was an assistance provided to all those who came from formerly occupied countries. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Mrs. Greenberg we're going to have to end now, I think. Is there something you want to say that you feel you've left out, or looking back on this-- your life and this-- these experiences, is there something you want to share with us before we end? 

SUBJECT: Well, you mean what effect those experiences had for me? For the one thing, I had-- I was completely unprepared-- unprepared to resume a settled life. It was always moving from place to place. And finally, when I arrived to America, I was horrified at the idea that this is a final place. Here I will have to stay. 

I mean, yet, before I knew if it will be pleasant or not, just the idea, this is the final destination was horrifying. I simply was no longer accustomed to any kind of settled life, and it took me several years to get used to living in one place and to adjust myself to this kind of-- to a kind of settled life. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Why horrifying? Why did that horrify you the idea of being in one place? 

SUBJECT: All my life, I mean, as long as I could remember, from before the war, I kept very few memories. And after the war, everything was temporary. Good or bad, I knew that it will not last. It will change. If it was bad, it will not last either. 

And also, I was accustomed to every-- that every time something was happening to the constant action, to the constant change. And the quiet life, which did not change from day to day, was something that I found it very difficult to accept. Well, let's say, for instance, when I arrived here-- first I arrived in Chicago-- I remember still I went very unwilling just knowing that it is a-- a final destination. 

And I thought in case I will not like it, yet, there is no other possibility; before things were always changing. And I suppose this had a very negative effect on my life. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The idea of impermanence being something that is part of the way life is. 

SUBJECT: Yes. The idea of impermanence become a normal for me. The idea of permanence become something I was afraid of. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you for sharing this with us. 