INTERVIEWER: [SIDE CONVERSATION] 

CREW: Camera is rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. Begin. 

SUBJECT: It's starting? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: So I actually owed our life twice to the-- my physiology course, because at that time, I had an American student, Helen Hurley from Chicago, who came to Vienna to study with Freud. And in order to study, you had to be a medical doctor. So she took medicine up at the same time, and I was teaching her physiology. When she realized that I was threatened, she offered to ask her father, who was a rich construction man in Chicago, to get an affidavit for us, which she did. And at the same time, distant cousins of ours in New York, Jack and Maddie Lev-- Levine. No, Jack and Maddie Faleck, and Libby Levine and Maya Levine got us another affidavit, and with those two affidavits we were allowed to enter the United States. And we came here-- 

INTERVIEWER: By the way, you mentioned Freud in Vienna in those last years. Did you know of him? 

SUBJECT: I knew of him, as anybody else did. I saw him, but I had no other contact with him. Stayed away from psychiatry. We had an interesting-- my wife's father was a military attache in Vienna at the Polish embassy and was a year before arrested, as they said, because he tried to spy against the Germans. 

He left Vienna, went to Warsaw, and on our trip to the United States, we stopped in Warsaw to visit my wife's parents. We could have stayed there. Fortunately, we didn't. We left with a Polish ship, Pilsudski, which was sunk later. And on our trip on the 1st of October '38, we docked in Copenhagen and were waiting for the judgment whether we could leave or not, because at that time, Chamberlain had the Munich conference. 

And I remember that everybody was, uh, waiting for the decision, and when the decision came that Chamberlain had arranged a kind of peace, all the bells were ringing in Copenhagen, and our continued journey was assured. And we came on the 8th of October '38 to New York-- Hoboken. 

INTERVIEWER: Why-- why would you have been stopped? What connection do you have to the-- 

SUBJECT: The-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT: --Denmark was neutral, and Poles were in war-- would have been in war. They-- that was-- I think that was the reason. When did the war break out, in September '39? And I don't know. It was the threat that we would be not allow-- maybe just not allowed to go on. And everybody was-- we waited the whole day there. It was war or peace that day. If Chamberlain hadn't succeeded, the war would have broken out that day. And we came to New York-- to Hoboken in '38. 

INTERVIEWER: Now, you left in Austria-- 

SUBJECT: We left Austria in September, '38. 

INTERVIEWER: And who did you leave behind? 

SUBJECT: My father, my older brother, my middle older brother, who was in between us. They both were sent to concentration camps. My oldest brother in France-- in occupied France, and my other brother to Buchenwald and Dachau. My uncle, who was my-- close to me was sent to Buchenwald. All my cousins were sent to different concentration camps, and my father stayed behind because at that time he didn't want to leave, not knowing what was going on. He was a middle aged man, and he was also sent to a concentration camp and died there in Theresienstadt. 

INTERVIEWER: So among all the people that you mentioned, did anyone survive? 

SUBJECT: Yes, fortunately my two brothers survived. I was able to send them affidavits from friends of mine. And at that time, again, no logic. The Germans permitted concentration inmates to leave if they had an affidavit. That changed after the Kristallnacht. Then you couldn't leave anymore, but up to then, if you sent an affidavit and could show it to the concentration camp leader, you were discharged and were allowed to leave. 

So I was able to get my uncle, my two brothers alive here by sending them affidavits of friends. My father didn't want initially, and then it was too late. My two-- the parents of my wife, who were in Russia, were also able to escape. They escaped via Lithuania, Russia, Japan, and came on the last ship before World War II over here. My oldest brother came on that ill-famed Navemar ship, which was on the ocean for four weeks, I think, with several thousand people on a boat which had enough room for 100, 150. And many people died on it. 

INTERVIEWER: So you arrived in the United States in '38 in Hoboken and-- 

SUBJECT: Without a penny in the pocket-- or to be exact, with $1 in the pocket, and speaking English enough to say yes and no the wrong way. So the next thing was that we had to study English, which we did. There was a beautiful teacher in-- of New York City provided by the education department. We attended her course for English for doctors, and in three months, we learned an awful lot thanks to her. 

We took the state board, which was a must in order to-- state-- the state part in medicine. And following that, we started to write for internship and residences, and we were very fortunate enough to get it-- I here, and my wife in New York. And we spent a year-- 

INTERVIEWER: Here in New Haven? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm, I. While, uh, in St. Raphael's hospital while my wife got it in the French hospital and New York infirmary for women and children. And we spent a year and a half apart from each other. So I'd shadow only on weekends, and the only way how I could do it was to give-- sell blood to find money for the trip to New York. So at That time, blood was only available from donors who sold their blood. There was no blood bank. 

INTERVIEWER: And in those internship were, you know-- 

SUBJECT: Salary in internship? I got $10 first, and then $20 a month. And from that, I had to send away the-- most of it, because we needed tickets for our family. So I-- but that's paid from there. 

INTERVIEWER: And tickets for your brothers? 

SUBJECT: Brother and my wife's parents. But then it went upwards. I became-- went into private practice after the residency from '41 to '44-- beginning of '44. At that time, I was-- felt a very strong card call to join the Army to save the world, as I thought, and-- but couldn't. As a doctor, I couldn't go as private. And as a doctor, I had to be an officer, and as an officer, I could go only if I was a citizen. 

So I had to wait until I became a citizen, which I did in May, '40-- May, '41 

INTERVIEWER: May, '41. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. I entered the Army as a lieutenant. I went to Fort Jackson, and then I went overseas in an evacuation hospital-- in the 131st evacuation hospital as an internist. 

INTERVIEWER: In what year? 

SUBJECT: '41-- uh, '44. 

INTERVIEWER: So from these-- 

SUBJECT: No, wait. I made a mistake. In '41, I went into practice. Could not become an officer or a doctor in the army, because I wasn't a citizen yet. In May '44, I became a citizen, and the same day I became a lieutenant in the Army. 

INTERVIEWER: So there was no way for a doctor to volunteer in the Army-- in the United States Army if he was not a citizen. 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah, I volunteered, but I wasn't accepted. 

INTERVIEWER: You volunteered but weren't accepted- 

SUBJECT: I volunteered in-- as soon as I was a doctor, I left the hospital in '41. 

INTERVIEWER: You have joked that you helped save the world, I think it's a bit more serious. What was-- 

SUBJECT: No, that was my feeling. I had the feeling that I had to go to Europe and do my best to add to the saving of the world, which was threatened at that time by Hitler and his gang. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know how-- did you know how much-- how-- what was happening? 

SUBJECT: Yes, by description from my family. 

INTERVIEWER: What was the-- the-- news? What available information? 

SUBJECT: That people became arrested if they were Jewish, if they were against the regime even if they weren't Jewish, if they were gypsies, and if they were homosexuals. And arrests occurred without jury, without judge, just say so of the police. 

INTERVIEWER: How early-- how late did you still get information from relatives in Europe? The letters from your father? 

SUBJECT: Quite late. Uh, up to the break-- outbreak of war. 

INTERVIEWER: Up to '42? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. No, didn't the war start in-- when did we enter? We entered earlier, isn't it? 

INTERVIEWER: '42. 

SUBJECT: '42? Then up to '42. 

INTERVIEWER: Nothing after that? Nothing. 

SUBJECT: I got-- I learned about my father's death when I came back with the American Army, and the Russians just had occupied out of Vienna. And with the help of a Russian major, uh, I-- in a Jeep, I came to Vienna, went to the police department. And orderly as the Nazis were, they kept exact record of anybody they deported, and there it was that my father had been deported to Theresienstadt to die there. 

INTERVIEWER: And it was also that he died there recorded? 

SUBJECT: It was all-- everything was nicely reported. 

INTERVIEWER: Nicely put in with dates? 

SUBJECT: No, just how many was deported, and many died. 

INTERVIEWER: No not recorded? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the last letter from him? 

SUBJECT: Yes, at that time, he told me that he had to leave his lady friend, who was non-Jewish, and that he wanted to come here, that I should send him papers, but it was too late. I was able to send him money every month. He received that. That was another thing. Uh, when a Jew was-- went to the concentration camp, the money which he had was taken away from him. When I sent the papers to my uncle and my brothers-- the affidavits at the time when they were still allowed to leave-- the few shillings they had were given back to them. Everything orderly recorded, just as it was orderly recorded who was killed and who-- who died whatsoever. So order was kept at all price. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Roth, did you envision, imagine the extent of the murder in Europe while you were here, while knew something from newspapers? 

SUBJECT: I knew a great deal, but never dreamed that it would be as cruel as it was when I faced it personally. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you know? 

SUBJECT: Oh I knew that people were arrested. I knew that people were killed, but I thought once in awhile, instead routinely and by sys-- systematically. 

INTERVIEWER: And up to 1944, you thought it was not a systematic operation. 

SUBJECT: That's what I thought. I thought it was cruel, but people got killed in anger, but-- but not with purpose. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there no newspaper articles in this country, books published about the concentration camps? 

SUBJECT: If there were, I didn't read. And if they-- if I read them, I didn't believe it, because it was unbelievable. You just couldn't believe what you didn't actually saw. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know here, and did you have information about [INAUDIBLE]? 

SUBJECT: There was a rumor. 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, there was some report about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Your wife must have been quite-- 

SUBJECT: At that time, no more, because her parents already had left and were in Lithuania, and then in Russia, and then in Japan. So already, she was terribly involved until she was sure she could save her parents, because they, again, came on the last ship, some model-- I forgot the name of it, which was allowed to enter this country-- a Japanese ship before the war broke out. 

INTERVIEWER: So when you volunt-- you became a citizen, and were finally allowed to join the Army-- 

SUBJECT: As an officer. 

INTERVIEWER: As an officer, you had somewhat of a vague idea that something terrible is happening, but not exactly what. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I felt a call that I had to join the Army, as pacifistic I am, as I am against the Army and against war. At that time, I had the feeling I could not stay behind. I became a nuisance to the senator and to the-- to the medical society-- Dr. Bacht at that time who was in charge. And they constantly refused until I had become a citizen. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, do you-- do you remember your arrival in England? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. We arrived there with the Queen Elizabeth. We arrived actually in Glasgow. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: And then when by ship-- train to Ottringham, which is near Manchester, and there we staged our hospital practice there in a field-- kind of a field hospital-- evacuation hospital-- 131st. And we stayed there about three months. And in-- we arrived in December, '44 in Ottringham and left in February for the continent. 

INTERVIEWER: In February '45? 

SUBJECT: '45. 

INTERVIEWER: Land in Europe? 

SUBJECT: No, I-- on the continent, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: In France? 

SUBJECT: In France. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember your first thoughts landing on European soil on the continental soil? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I had the feeling we have to win to save the world, as I said. At that time, I was a enthusiast, idealist. Didn't dream that the world would be in the worst trouble only 30 years later. 

INTERVIEWER: You were also coming back this time? 

SUBJECT: I must say that I was coming back for a purpose. But I didn't feel I was coming back to my native country. I had lost the binding with my native country, Austria, because they were worse than the Nazis. It was said that the Austrians were conquered by the Germans and the Nazis. The Austrians called for the Germans. They asked them to come, and when they came, they tried to prove the German-- their Germanism by being the worst Jew beaters. And they felt that, in order to show that they are real good Nazis, they had to show it by beating up Jews, killing Jews, spitting at them, forcing them to clean the street, by persecuting them, things which the proven Nazis didn't have to do. 

So the German Nazis actually were angels compared to the Austrians, and therefore, I had a bitterness against them, which I still have. And I didn't come home. I came to the continent for a purpose, and the purpose was to help. That's why I joined the hospital and not as a fighting so-- 

CREW: [SIDE CONVERSATION] 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. Ready? 

CREW: Are we rolling, Ruben? 

CREW: Okay. 

INTERVIEWER: 1945, February. 

SUBJECT: We crossed the channel where it touched to the fighting outfit there. We were about 20 miles behind. And we followed through France to Germany and Austria, and at that time, the Aus-- German army was breaking up, and I-- under normal times, I would be-- have become a big hero because I conquered almost the whole army. 

I remember I was with a friend of mine, a major. I was captain at that time, standing on the road when the whole German army came marching with their generals and so on in front of them, and asked, and begged to allow them to give themselves up to us. 

INTERVIEWER: A division? A regiment? 

SUBJECT: No, it was a big, big, big, thing. It was the whole army there which was ready to give up, but we sent them on and said give up to the fighting units, not to us. We are medical people, and it was interesting to see how those hochnasige people suddenly could become very docile and were interested to save their lives. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your experience? What did you feel that moment? 

SUBJECT: Not hatred. Disgust. Contempt that that super man and the super race suddenly became, uh, just like all the others, afraid to die. Uh, we followed finally an outfit which had liberated two concentration camps which were very close together in Austria-- Gusen, G-U-S-E-N, and Mauthausen, M-A-U-T-H-A-U-S-E-N. These were about one mile across the Danube from the city of Mauthausen. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this a choice? 

SUBJECT: No, I was assigned to our hospital, and the hospital was assigned to that unit. 

INTERVIEWER: So it's an accident. 

SUBJECT: Accident. And it was about 25 kilometers from Linz, L-I-N-Z, which was the capital of that area. I mention that because, despite all the horrors which we saw there, the people of these two towns to whom we talked assured us they had not the faintest idea, which anybody can believe-- I didn't. I think they were fool hearted, witted as I knew the Austrians, but they claimed-- again, to save their own hide-- that they had no idea what was going on. And I remember it was about 6 o'clock on a very foggy morning that our hospital arrived at those two concentration camps. We moved on trucks. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have any, uh, imagery of what-- or fancy of what you were going to see? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: It was just a name-- concentration camps. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: That didn't mean more. 

SUBJECT: Nothing. And they didn't look frightening. I have here the entrance to the concentration camp Mauthausen. Looks very not at all frightening, but hell was behind it. 

INTERVIEWER: So you arrived on a foggy morning at the gates-- 

SUBJECT: Of Mauthausen and Gusen. Gusen was the other one. Uh, this is the-- uh, the barracks of Gusen. When we entered it, we saw a tremendous heap of emaciated bodies. It was estimated there were about 5,000 of them. These were bodies which were not interred, not burned, which was the custom, because the Nazi leaders and, uh, uh, that waffenschaft and the people who guarded those two camps had left. And the inmates had taken over as much as they could. 

If you looked at them, there were about 20,000 all in all-- 5,000 about dead, the others-- many of them dying. If you compared the living and the death, there wasn't much difference. They all looked like skeletons. Women and men looked alike. They all were shaved, and all were nothing but bone and skin. But despite their weakness, these people were full of hatred against their captors. 

And they had only one idea in their mind-- not to save their life. They had one idea to take revenge, and they hunted those Nazis down who had been their captors. And they were able to capture the general-- SS general who was in charge of it-- General Ziereis. 

INTERVIEWER: Of? In charge of-- 

SUBJECT: Of the camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Mauthausen? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and Gusen. And they killed him, wrote heil Hitler on his back, and hung him-- strung him up in the-- on the fence, which was electrically-- previously electrically charged. And that was, for them, more than food or anything else. So hatred was the guiding thing-- revenge. 

We had the task to bury those people, and we did it, uh, in the cemetery, which was, uh, built for all those people. And we naturally couldn't-- in view of the mass of people who were dead and mass of people who were sick, we couldn't bury them individually, but buried them in mass graves. It was too much for us-- not physically, but emotionally-- to bury these people. So therefore we forced German people from the nearby towns to bury them, and they carried those poor devils on small wagons to the mass 

INTERVIEWER: You entered Mauthausen and Gusen in-- 

SUBJECT: Gusen. 

INTERVIEWER: Gusen. How long after the liberation of those camps? How many days after? 

SUBJECT: A few hours after. 

INTERVIEWER: A few hours after liberation. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- when you opened that gate, what was your first thought, response? What? 

SUBJECT: Un-- unbelief. I couldn't believe it. We entered the barrack, which was full of dying, dead, and half dead people. You didn't see the difference. They all looked alike, and here if you look at the floor, you see many dead ones. Here you see dying and people who just about were alive. And that was about what you saw. 

The people were dying of typhoid, typhus, dysentery, tuberculosis, and starvation. And it wasn't all Jews who were there. We found Russians. We found gypsies. We found prostitutes. We found gay people. We found Italian partisans. We found Spaniards from the civil war who were captured by the Germans when they took part in that civil war. We found political people. 

They all were differently marked. All had numbers, but the Jews had stars. The others had the triangle and so on. They all were shaven, and they all were starved-- skeletons. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Roth, why did you take the photographs? 

SUBJECT: Why did I take the-- I think to prove to the world that that was true. And I came back here, after being discharged from Europe to go to Japan, and I was invited by the Yale faculty club to give a talk on my experience. And I showed those photographs. They couldn't believe it. It was unbelievable, and I must admit that we made a bad mistake in good faith and out of a kind heart. We-- when we saw those starving people, we wanted to feed them. Unfortunately, feeding them meant them to cause hunger edema. Many people died from being fed too quickly. 

INTERVIEWER: But I'm still trying to understand here, the planning, presence of mind-- where did you get a camera? We obv- you- 

SUBJECT: Where did we get-- we all had cameras. All the officers carried cameras. 

INTERVIEWER: Had-- carried cameras. And what-- how do you come to the-- arrive at the decision to begin photographing? 

SUBJECT: Can't tell you. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm? 

SUBJECT: Can't tell you. I think to prove to the world that, in my little way, that this was true. 

INTERVIEWER: But you, yourself, didn't believe what you were seeing. 

SUBJECT: I couldn't initially, but I-- we stayed there for over a month. So our acute shock wore off a little. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you begin photographing? 

SUBJECT: After a few days. 

INTERVIEWER: Not in the first few days. Can you recall what you felt in those few-- first few days? 

SUBJECT: Complete confusion and also a little disappointment, I must say. I could see that hatred and revenge is a leading instinct, but I couldn't understand and justify the torture these captured Nazis had to undergo before they got killed. By the inmates, I could a little bit understand, but by our own officers-- I would say not officers-- by the outfit. They took part in it. They enjoyed it with them, and that opened somehow a terrible recognition that nobody's immune against atrocities. Anybody-- just give them a chance-- become animals. 

INTERVIEWER: And who in the outfit participated? 

SUBJECT: More-- in enjoying it? Everybody almost. But some took even actively part. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there other Jewish soldiers? Refugees from Europe like you? 

SUBJECT: No, I was the only refugee. There were other Jews. So it was a gruesome experience. 

INTERVIEWER: The revenge-- the revenge and torture. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and all the other things. So we stayed there about a months, lost a good number of people. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, what about you personal-- first personal contact with inmates? What did you say to the first-- what do you remember saying to the first inmate you spoke to? 

SUBJECT: It's all in the-- in the ocean of forgetfulness. I know about-- I talked to inmates, and I remember what I talked. I saw little children who lost their parents-- four or five year old kids. I saw parents who lost their children. I saw husbands who lost their wives and vise versa, and they were numbed, actually, to-- they didn't complain. Don't forget, after living constantly in fear of death-- and when the day of salvation comes, you don't realize it. Yeah, numbed. Many of them were confused. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't know that-- they didn't know-- and I mean know not only, I mean that, that they were liberated by you, that you were-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, they knew that. They were grateful, but I don't think they functioned correctly, as we didn't. For a number of days, we actually didn't know quite what we were doing, particularly when we saw all those atrocities. We saw- for instance, here-- you see a cage here. There are big German shepherds there. On the day of liberation, the inmates killed them all, and I couldn't understand why they killed beautiful dogs. They said those dogs weren't beautiful. They were trained to attack us and to kill us, and they did it. So again, revenge even against the dogs. And then if you saw-- 

INTERVIEWER: You were concerned-- were you that the dogs were killed? 

SUBJECT: I like animals. I don't like to kill anybody. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: And I can't see it. That's why I became a doctor. I-- my main purpose of life is to prolong life, not to shorten it. So whether it's a dog, or an ant, or a bee, I don't want to kill them. Here, we saw the incinerator. You still see bones there, and people got incinerated here. 

INTERVIEWER: Could you hold it a bit more towards the camera? 

SUBJECT: Behind these doors, people were burned after they had been killed in the gas chamber, and in the gas chamber, they were taken under the pretext that they needed delousing. And instead of using DDT and other chemicals, they used cyanide. The people got killed and then burned in those camps. 

All they got just for-- we found a whole experimental hospital, where doctors came in and said just at random you have a brain tumor. You have a cancer of the stomach. You have a gangrene of your leg, and they operated as if this condition had been there. 

They had the, uh, ice chamber there where they put people to study the death by freezing. They had a shooting gallery-- 

INTERVIEWER: In Mauthausen? 

SUBJECT: Mauthausen. They had the shooting gallery and the gallow where people got shot and hung, usually people who didn't obey, which was rare, but apparently sometimes rules were broken. And to be shot or to be hung wasn't that you had to kill somebody else, but it was enough that you stole a piece of bread or something to save your life. Those were the stories we heard when we came there. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you identify yourself to those prisoners? What did you tell them about yourself? Who were you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I freely admitted that I was a Jewish, uh, man who had escaped Austria. By grace of God, I was not one of them. And to-- I adopted a new native country, the United States, which I was tremendously proud of. And I told them that we were there to help them. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you find familiarity with-- with them? 

SUBJECT: Yes. As I said, there were not just Jews there. There were Russian soldiers there. There were Spaniards, Italians. And there was a kind of camaraderie. 

INTERVIEWER: What about Jewish prisoners that you spoke to? 

SUBJECT: We tried to help them as much as we could-- all of them. And we started to repatriate them. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember individual prisoners who you became more friendly-- who there was some tie? 

At that time, yes, but don't forget, 35 five years is a long span. It becomes all really a little bit, uh, foggy. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. No one particular incident stands out? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: In that hospital, were-- 

SUBJECT: Can you stop a little moment? I-- is there-- 

CREW: Tell us when you've already got speed. 

CREW: [SIDE CONVERSATION] 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

CREW: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: Ready? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: You asked me how I felt when I saw that tragedy, uh, and would I recall anybody in particular. It's difficult to recall anybody in particular, because those poor people all looked alike-- emaciated, confused, and they all were thinking the same way after so many years of imprisonment and threat of death. As far as my own feeling goes, I was stunned, confused, horrified. But then, as a doctor, you get used to death. As a doctor, you got used to misery. And you can't function properly by constantly feeling the misery along. You can do it only by your desire to help to get rid of the misery, to minimize it, but you can't feel it always. 

I don't think the best doctor is the one who constantly goes to pieces with his patients. You should feel with the patient. You should try to alleviate their misery and the family's misery, but you can't go to pieces. If you do it, then you're misfunctioning, and that was happening to us, too. We saw-- we were stunned first, but then we started to function tried to deliver our role as physicians and hospital people. And after mistakes at the beginning, I think we were able to function properly. 

INTERVIEWER: By keeping active and functioning, there was opportunity and time to feel-- 

SUBJECT: To commiserise. 

INTERVIEWER: But yet something happened to you over that week. 

SUBJECT: Emotionally I think I was, uh, badly struck without knowing it, because I turned white within a few weeks. 

INTERVIEWER: Without knowing what was going on inside you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, I had-- I was miserable. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you notice the change in your hair? 

SUBJECT: It was obvious. 

INTERVIEWER: It was sudden-- 

SUBJECT: Sudden-- within a few weeks. I was a little bit gray when I entered the hospital, but I was white when I left it. And I think I grew a little older, too. I didn't smile for a while. 

It's an emotion you can't describe. Un-- unbelief, confusion. Being stunned might be the best thing to describe it. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, something to your, uh, youthful enthusiasm to save the world happened with this experience. You became -- 

SUBJECT: No. I became even more so. I hope I am a devoted physician, but I lost a little faith in the world and more so in humanity seeing all this-- that a count-- nation of poets, and famous musicians, of beautiful songs can sink that low and do these things. That destroys your trust in you humanity. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Roth, when you saw those-- the inmates, did you think of friends, family members that perished-- of your own? 

SUBJECT: Yes, at that time I already knew that all my first cousins had been killed. Shortly later I learned, when I took the trip to Vienna along the Danube, that my father had died. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you imagine his death? 

SUBJECT: I was fearing it, but I hoped that I would be wrong. But then I saw it black and white in the registration books of the Vienna police. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you think that your family may have gone through a similar kind of experience? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: Like the camp you found? 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER: Let's go back. Uh, you opened the gates of Mauthausen. 

SUBJECT: Not I. They were opened for me. 

INTERVIEWER: I understand. When you walked through those gates, they were first closed. You-- you walked through them. It had an outlay-- it-- uh, what did you see, not only in terms of atrocities what else-- ? 

SUBJECT: It was a big camp-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: --with many barracks. 

INTERVIEWER: How many is? 

SUBJECT: Hundreds. Many. It was a camp with a subterranean big armor factory. They made the parts for airplanes, and the inmates were used as workers until they dropped dead. 

We found barracks of the officers and the crew which guarded the camp, and we found two barracks of the inmates. The barracks of the inmates were tightly filled, stacked with beds. No, they weren't beds. How do you call them? 

INTERVIEWER: Bunks. 

SUBJECT: Bunks. Four up. Some were full with people who were just about moving. Some were filled with people who had died. Some were filled with people who were-- had a little more strength than the others and were able to survive better than the others. We found the incinerator. We found the gas chamber. We found the place where people got hung or shot. We found the cages of the dogs, who had been killed by the inmates. And we found the dead people dying all over outside in groups ready for burial, and inside who had died since the Nazis had fled and the inmates had taken over. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there people or dying people in the factory or in the hospital that you discovered? 

SUBJECT: No, the hospital, which they used for experiments, was empty. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you find any of the staff? 

SUBJECT: No. They all fled. They had to flee, or they were dead because the inmates took bitter revenge. They were hunting for them. Those were the last things left. 

INTERVIEWER: So all you saw were empty-- was my empty hospital. 

SUBJECT: Empty hospital. 

INTERVIEWER: Charts? What? 

SUBJECT: We found, uh, books-- nicely kept, again-- about the inmates, about the experiments. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think of and feel when you opened those books? 

SUBJECT: Of experiments? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Disgust. Horror. 

INTERVIEWER: What you feel about-- do you feel about the medical profession in Nazi Germany? They were physicians, nurses doing it. 

SUBJECT: I came back to the same opinion. Give a human being the choice and let them become a mob, they will become animals. It destroyed my faith in humanity. I'm not so sure that not anybody can do that. If you give the right surrounding, the right milieu, the right pressure, the right brainwashing, I think that's the terrible thing which struck me at that time-- that it can happen again, and it could happen anywhere. It actually absolved the Germans, in my mind, as the special race. 

I have a fear it can happen anywhere. It wasn't much different-- what I saw-- I happened to be in charge of cardiology in Fort Sam Houston after my return from Europe. And that was the Army center where many of the people from the east came back from the Japanese war. They looked like skeleton-- sick, beaten, brainwashed. So it happened in a different part of the world, too, and that was the frightening and terrifying thing-- that it could happen at any time anywhere, unless we are constantly on the watch to prevent it. I hope that this adds to it. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh, do you-- did you cry? Do you ever cry? 

SUBJECT: I cry very rarely. I saw so much misery in my life that I cry rarely. But I feel. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. Night-- you mentioned nightmares. 

SUBJECT: Nightmares I have-- some from this, some foolish ones mixed up, as I am. 

INTERVIEWER: Is there dread? Is there a shadow of regret with you? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Don't forget, it's becoming part of the past-- the distant past. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: It was different a year, a week, months after, but it's 35 years. 

INTERVIEWER: How was it a year about after? Can you remember? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I didn't know what smile-- smiling was. I was-- I'm-- when I'm depressed, I don't talk, like many other people don't. I just had no communication with my friends. I just couldn't believe it, but I worked hard to try to improve the misery, and I must say, much to my regret, at the beginning we didn't do much right, because nobody had anticipated things. Nobody had experience with it. We all were beginners, no matter how experienced we were as doctors. We were beginners and amateurs in dealing with these problems at the beginning. 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Roth, I only hear a blame towards yourself. 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Not just -- 

SUBJECT: To all of us. 

INTERVIEWER: But obviously there were, uh, persecutors and criminals, and there were victims. 

SUBJECT: But I think the persecutors and the criminals were victims themselves-- victims of the time, victims of the brainwashing, of the mass hysteria. And they were just as bad as good, as we all are. 

INTERVIEWER: So for Austrians, Germans-- what I hear-- you're saying it's maybe contempt, but not hatred. Is that right? 

SUBJECT: No. I-- I'm not a man who can hate. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: It's just not my personality. I can have compassion for a criminal. I can have compassion with a murderer. I don't agree with it, but I can feel badly that the man was under a compulsion to kill somebody else and has to suffer for it. His family has to suffer for it. I don't have hatred. I just have compassion. I guess that's why I always wanted to become a doctor. 

INTERVIEWER: In all this experience, what shocked you most? Stayed with you most? There were many things. 

SUBJECT: The first sight of the camp. It was unbelieve-- I couldn't believe it. It wasn't horror, because, as I said, as a doctor, I'm used to bodies and death, but it was un-- disbelief. It just had to be a-- a nightmare. It had to be a horror show. It couldn't be true. 

INTERVIEWER: You felt as though you were in a dream? 

SUBJECT: In some unreality. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. Maybe that's why you wanted to take the photos? 

SUBJECT: It could be-- that I want to prove it to myself. 

INTERVIEWER: Mauthausen had an underground factory. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: And did you walk under that ground there? 

SUBJECT: It was, uh, safe from bombing. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see there? 

SUBJECT: Parts of machines-- many, many, very close together-- to make parts of airplanes. And, uh, we also found rooms there with skin of human beings, with lampshades, with soap made of human fat. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know that? 

SUBJECT: First, we saw it. And second, the inmates told us. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. And-- and seeing such a lampshade or a piece of soap, what did it do to you? 

SUBJECT: Disgust. Horror. 

INTERVIEWER: You stayed in that camp-- 

SUBJECT: Close to a month, maybe a little longer. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember leaving it? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. One morning, we got a message that we would leave. In the Army always you don't get warnings. If you leave in the morning, you get-- hear about it the night which precedes it. And I remember we got the message we would be leaving, and our room and where we lived became like chaos. We were celebrating. You see, it is full with toilet paper. Everything is thrown around. We really, uh, went to pieces-- that we could go home. 

And we went home with, uh-- with those, uh, big, uh, freight cars. They were put into those, and I remember also there, again, the inmates of the camps were freed immediately. They were left to leave wherever they could, but they couldn't leave. They were weak, had no transportation, and when our train left or stayed still anywhere, it moved very slowly. We had constantly a few more passengers than we had the moment before. People were entering, and we had permitted them to come along, to come with us to France, where we staged before we came back to the States. 

INTERVIEWER: Following the-- the opportunity to leave was a-- you know, a great relief. 

SUBJECT: For everybody, and we-- 

INTERVIEWER: To get out of-- 

SUBJECT: --tried to help them as much as we could. 

INTERVIEWER: To get out of that nightmare. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Not only that, but go back to their homes. 

INTERVIEWER: To their homes. And did you begin thinking differently of America at that time? 

SUBJECT: I thought it was heaven. 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: It had become my adopted country. I didn't feel anymore that Austria was my native country, neither do I feel now. I feel-- as much as my accent proves I'm not, I feel that I'm an American. And the Austrians made it very easy. I, again, have no hatred for the Austrians, but I have deep contempt for their behavior. 

INTERVIEWER: What has stayed with you? 