CREW: Just tell us when. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. Go back, Mr. Karliner, if you will, about Kristallnacht and your father's outlook. 

SUBJECT: Well, I'd like to go back to the Kristallnacht, but my father was quite depressed and he was a pessimist. And he mentioned, several times, that he's going to-- we had gas. We had a gas stove, where we cooked with gas. And he mentioned-- I do remember that, many times-- he was going to open the gas to-- I guess for himself or for all of us. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: Well, when you were on the boat now, on the ship, and you were outside of Cuba, what was your father saying then? What-- what did you know about what was happening? 

SUBJECT: On this boat, we didn't know what was happening. But they always said that it was going to land. They are working for us in Cuba. The UGA-- at that time, the Joint Distribution Committee, it was called, at that time. It was working for us, so we can land. And we understood, at that time, already, that the Cuban government wanted, for each person from the Joint Distribution Committee-- from each person of us-- to land there, they wanted from us $500 a person. 

At that time, in 1939, that would have been, for us, $3,000 for my family to land. We didn't have that kind of money. They wanted to be paid off for us to land. I don't know how many they wanted. I think over a $1 million for the whole-- all the passengers of the ship, which, today, is not so much, but, at that time, it was an awful lot of money. 

In the meantime, the men on that boat-- there was quite a few lawyers, and doctors, and so on. They put-- they started a committee-- a committee, you know? And they put up a bulletin board about what was going on. So if we wanted to find out what was going on, we went to that bulletin board. And they said, this is working for us, this man, this company is working for us, this party is working for us, [INAUDIBLE]-- the Hamburg America Line-- the president of the line was working for us, too. 

And they did. They did. They wanted to get rid of us. They didn't want to take us back. And well, this is what was going on. But what I want to say-- I was sitting with my oldest sister on one side of the-- of the boat, in the lounge chair, taking a sunbath. And all of a sudden, all of the people jumped up and run on the other side of the boat. I remember that. 

So I thought, in that moment, the news came-- somebody hollered from there-- that we was going to land. We were-- the good news come. So I run over to the other side, and when I come, and I look over board, and I see a man in the water-- just the upper part of the-- laying down, blood all around him. 

INTERVIEWER: Blood? 

SUBJECT: Blood all over him, he was-- at the same time-- he was laying there already, in the water. And I saw a German sailor jumps overboard to save him. And then people was running away. But I do remember this German sailor got to him and he didn't want to be rescued. He-- he cut his wrist and he tried to open more. So I remember seeing that. And then a boat came and they took him and the sailor aboard. 

And it was a man-- a lawyer-- from Germany that saw no end to it, so he jumped over-- he cut his wrist and jumped overboard. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think when you saw that? 

SUBJECT: I don't know what's going to happen to us. I-- I-- I thought maybe, after that, people will realize what's happening and they would let us in, probably. I don't know. 

INTERVIEWER: You told me about a sandbox. I didn't quite understand about the sandbox. 

SUBJECT: This was on the way back. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh. So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, we stayed for a week in the port of Havana, Cuba. There was always police guards on-- there was police boats around us and there was also two or three policemen from the police of Cuba aboard. Nobody could land. And I do remember a boat came next to us and they put some-- some food aboard-- some more food because we was running out of food. 

I remember they put crates of different groceries and some oranges aboard. And we didn't know what it was all about. Why should a boat come into the middle of-- of the port of Havana and bring us more food or something like that, if we was supposed to land? Anyway, after a week, in the port of Havana, the government of Cuba asked us to leave. Aren't they going to work? What's going-- they should be out of the-- of the area of Cuba within 24 hours. 

INTERVIEWER: Had-- had the people aboard paid the $1 million? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry? 

INTERVIEWER: Had the people aboard paid the $1 million? 

SUBJECT: No. They-- we didn't have some money and they-- the Jewish Refugee Service worked for us that we could land. They tried to pay $500,000 for us to land and the government didn't go for that. That's what I heard after. At that point, I didn't know it. Later on, I found out about it. But after a week, we was forced to leave the port of Havana, Cuba. And we was told we was going to go outside of Havana, Cuba and circle the island. 

So-- but, you know, people-- we went out. And we-- many people did not believe that we were circling the island. So I remember there was a sandbox for the children. And the men put some kind of a sun dial in the middle of the sandbox. If it was going to circle the island-- that means the boat was going to circle-- that means the sun would circle around, you know, the shadow. It would circle around. 

But if it was going to go straight, that means we wouldn't-- we don't circle. Because we thought it was-- we wasn't told the thought about it. Anyway, after a day or so-- our ship didn't go very fast. I remember it did not go fast. But about a day later, we saw Florida. In fact, we saw Miami, Florida. One morning, on the-- I remember-- on the left side of the boat, we saw Miami, Florida. And we also saw American warships next to us. 

By that time already, the-- the American government didn't want us either and they were afraid we would jump aboard or do something. And for that reason, they escorted us along the shore of Miami, of Florida, with warships-- one or two. 

One, I know. I think it was two. Well, in the meantime, the people aboard started a committee of people to-- the name of the boat was St. Louis. So they telegraphed the city of St. Louis. I remember that. They telegraphed President Roosevelt. They telegraphed many other people in America for us to be able to land. No. 

INTERVIEWER: You couldn't get permission to land? 

SUBJECT: We couldn't get permission to land. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you try to go back to Cuba? 

SUBJECT: No. The boat didn't go back to Cuba, because Cuba didn't want us either. 

INTERVIEWER: But hadn't money been paid to allow you to land in Cuba from Germany? 

SUBJECT: Yes, but the paper-- it was sold by the consul and he pocketed the money. We did not know all that. According to what I heard later, that man that took our money to go to Cuba, pocketed the money and he didn't pay the government or nothing. 

INTERVIEWER: The Cuban council had-- 

SUBJECT: Consul. Consulate. This is what we heard later. In fact, I think my father paid about $250, $226 for the whole family to leave Germany and get into Cuba. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they tell you? What was the atmosphere on the boat, on the ship, when this was all happening? 

SUBJECT: Well, on the very back the whole atmosphere stopped. It was a very nice atmosphere, going from Germany towards Cuba. But going back, we didn't know where we was going to go-- going back towards Europe, anyway. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you leave this sight of American land, American soil? 

SUBJECT: Probably, the end of May. Probably. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone try to jump off the ship? 

SUBJECT: No. It was too far. We was quite-- I do remember seeing Miami, Florida. I remember seeing it, but it was too far to jump. Much too far to jump. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your parents say to you? What was-- what was being said on board ship? 

SUBJECT: I was very young. And I-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you did every day? Or what you were doing during that period, between the port of Havana and-- 

SUBJECT: I do remember the food aboard was not the same. It was very poor food. And we didn't have any sweet water, we only had sweet water to drink when we had meals. But the water-- the faucets in our cabins was all salt water. And we was told not to take too many showers, because of a short of water. And the food was very poor, by that time already. But this-- the music-- the orchestra was still playing. Some people was dancing. But the atmosphere was terrible. 

And at that time-- you know, this was already later on. When we came closer to Europe, they was telling us that we're trying now to get into England, or maybe Belgium, or maybe France would let us in. They would try to telegraph to the heads of state in England, France, Belgium, and Holland, and maybe Italy-- no, not Italy. No. 

INTERVIEWER: What was-- what were people saying, at that point? Do you remember what your parents were saying? Or your older brothers and sisters? 

SUBJECT: Aboard, many people was-- many people was crying. And they also mentioned that we will never land there because, if we would land, they would try to burn down the ship or do something about it. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: They-- they said something that-- that if we get close to the coast of England or France, they would try to put fire to that ship, so that the ship wouldn't get back into Germany. Because going-- if it was going-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who would put fire to the ship? 

SUBJECT: The Jewish people aboard. If it was close enough to the coast. In fact, and now, thinking back, we should have done that when we was close to the coast of Cuba-- in Cuba or close to the coast of Florida. They mentioned that-- that they my do something like that. But I don't know. The whole thing was very sad, going back. It was-- I don't know. My mother was crying. She was quite upset about the whole thing, because going back to Germany, we had nothing. 

Everything that we had in Germany, we took with us. And going back to Germany-- we was told, if you come back there, they would put us-- all the 900-some passengers-- they would put us in a camp of some kind. Because none of us had any living quarters. We didn't have living quarters. We didn't have any place to stay, so they would have to put us in some kind of a camp. And we was afraid of that because of knowing what my father went through in Buchenwald. 

INTERVIEWER: When were you told that-- that no one wanted the Jewish people? In other words, a German representative told you something. When was that? And what was that? 

SUBJECT: But the captain of the boat, he was very, very good. And worked very much so with the passenger. But also, on the boat, there was some people that was put there by the gestapo. Later on-- we didn't know it at that time. But the-- most of the firemen. Each boat has a fireman-- has a group of 20 or so firemen, in case there's a fire aboard. And they were all put there by the gestapo-- by the Nazi gestapo. 

And the ship's captain had to fight between-- he was very good to the Jewish people. He tried us to land any place but going back to Germany. But he had some arguments-- I didn't know it at that time, but, later on, I found out-- with the ship's fireman that was Nazi people, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: And who said that no one wanted the Jews? Who was it that said that? 

SUBJECT: Well, Hitler said so, because he put, in the newspaper, we don't want the Jews, Cuba doesn't want them, and now America doesn't want them either. So they put big articles-- I heard it later-- in the "Sturmer" that, look, we don't want the Jews, the other countries don't want them either. Here they are. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the ship try to go to South America or-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: No. 

SUBJECT: They did not. Because we told-- it was almost sure we was going to land in America-- probably in New York. 

INTERVIEWER: But after you found-- the ship found-- it was not going to land in America, was there any attempt to go somewhere else besides Europe? 

SUBJECT: No. Because we didn't have no-- we didn't have no choice. The ship was guided by German-- by the German people and the German government told them what to do with the ship. 

INTERVIEWER: So what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, slowly but surely, we went back to West Germany. I know my mother was always in a hysteria because she knew what was-- probably, she knew more than I did or my brothers and sisters did-- going back to Germany and what might happen to us. And again, they telegraphed different state of heads and so on. 

And then, about a day before we arrived-- we were supposed to arrive in Hamburg, Germany-- we heard that about 220, 250 people would be able to land in Belgium, 250 would land in Holland, 250 would land-- about-- you know, a quarter-- in France, and England. So when we heard that, we was very happy about it. This was-- this was-- was a very good, very happy moment for all of us. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it true? 

SUBJECT: It was true. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened when you landed? Did 250 people get off in England. 

SUBJECT: No. We-- the whole ship went to Antwerp, Belgium. The St. Louis landed there. And there, the people that went to Holland and the people went to Belgium went right off there. But the people that were supposed to go to France and to go to England, were supposed to take another boat to go to those two countries. Now, we could-- my parents-- we could-- they had, more or less, a choice if they wanted to go here or there. 

Some people choose to go to Belgium, some people choose to go to England, and some people choose to go to France. I remember my mother saying-- she says, where God will send us will be good for us. So we didn't take no choice. If it was-- if it was our-- God's choice to land in Belgium, or France, or so-- so we didn't have no-- whatever they was going to do with us was good, as long as it wasn't going to go back to Germany. 

So my-- I guess whoever was on the committee at the board, choose us to go to France. And my uncle-- my uncle worked as a dentist. He chose to go with us us. He wanted to stay with us, while my other uncle and aunt-- the older people-- [INAUDIBLE]. Later on, they went to Baltimore. They chose-- they chose to go to England. And that was the good luck. 

Anyway, we was transferred from the ship, St. Louis, on a freighter in Antwerp, Belgium. The people that went from there, from-- that was going to go to England or to France. And this was a freight. And I remember that freighter was stuffed. There was about 50, 80 men in one floor. 

You know, they put some places up-- some wooden things down. And this was only for a night and a half, that we stayed on that boat. And we arrived in Bouillon, France. That must have been in June. 

INTERVIEWER: 1939? 

SUBJECT: 1939, yeah. And after we got there, we was put in some kind of a home-- no, in hotels there. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your things-- all of the 22 cases that you had packed? 

SUBJECT: The-- the cases was transferred in Belgium from that ship-- from the St. Louis, to that other freighter. I do-- this, I recall. And we got to Bouillon France. And once we got there, we couldn't speak French-- not a word French. My parents couldn't speak French. And we was helpless. So the Jewish committee and took my parents and my older sister, they put them with, I would say, maybe, 15, 18 other couples, to different small towns in France. 

And my parents was transferred to Poitiers-- actually, next to Poitiers. It's Mirabeau, France. And they couldn't take care of us or so. So my brother, Herbert, my sister, Ruth, and me, we was put near Paris in a very nice home for children. There was mostly refugee children there. It was the Villa of Helvetia. And that was owned-- that was run by the OZE-- that is a Jewish committee from Russian Jews. 

It was called, actually, in French, Oeuvre de Secours aux Enfants. 

INTERVIEWER: Meaning? 

SUBJECT: It means, Help for Children-- Help for Children. That's what it means-- translated. 

INTERVIEWER: France had not yet been invaded. 

SUBJECT: No, no. And I stayed in Villa Helvetia-- there from, I would say, June till the war started-- until September 3. Well, longer than that. I think the war started September 3 or September 1. And I do remember, when the war started, the first night, there was an alert that there was some German planes over us. And we run in the basement-- in the basement of that chateau, of that villa-- all of the children. 

And there was a lot of coal there. We stayed all night there. And we was frightened, we was shaking all over. And when they came out in the morning, they was all black from the coal and things like that. Later on, I was transferred to another home. There was three children's homes-- Jewish children's home-- in that area. That was the outside of Paris. That other home was called [INAUDIBLE]. That was a bigger home and that was a kosher home, by the way. 

The first one was not kosher, the other one was kosher. And over there, I stayed for about four or five months more. And the war of was getting worse, so they transferred all the children from there-- not all, but most of them-- to other homes in the central part of France. You see, this-- this home was very close to Paris and Paris was dangerous-- dangerously close to be bombed by the Nazis, you know? 

So we was-- I was put to a home in the central part of France, department dans La Creuse And that home was called Chateau de Chaumont. And over there, there was about, maybe, 120 children. I was one of the oldest one already, by that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you keeping in touch with your parents? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Always. 

INTERVIEWER: How? 

SUBJECT: They wrote to me, I wrote to them. In fact, they came to visit us. But I want to remember that with me was my brother, my little sister, and me in the same home, all the time. But when we got into that home in the central part of France, my little sister became very homesick for her parents-- for my parents. And she wanted to go home. So my parents came, and picked her up, and took her back home, which was a big mistake. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did they take her back to? 

SUBJECT: Back to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Poitiers? 

SUBJECT: Poitiers. With them. 

INTERVIEWER: They were living where? 

SUBJECT: They was living outside of Poitiers. 

INTERVIEWER: In? 

SUBJECT: In a small village. The-- the Jewish Refugee Service got them a small apartment. And by that time already, we got all our cases, believe it or not. Our cases arrived into that small town. And my parents did not want to open them because we did not expect to stay there. We still expected to go to America. In the meantime-- at that time, we still had the passport-- not the passports-- the affidavits to come to America. But we had to wait. We had to wait our quarter. 

And we tried to-- you know, my relatives in Hartford and in Baltimore, they wrote to us. And they tried very hard to get us out, because it was-- people was able to get out from France. France was already in war, but we was able to go out from France to Spain, from Spain to Portugal, and from Portugal-- every month, every week00 there was transport that went to America, because America wasn't in war yet. 

INTERVIEWER: So you thought you could go to Portugal? 

SUBJECT: We thought, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Well, I'd like to mention something. When I was-- no, this was later on. This was later on. Yeah. Well, the war started. It got worse and worse. And the invasion started. 

We didn't see much of the invasion because we was in the central part of France, but people came through and told us what happened. France was occupied-- most of France was occupied. The Nazis was all over. And I found out later that my parents was in the occupied part of France, while I-- while we, in our home, was in the free part of France. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you able to be in contact with your parents once they were in occupied France? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: You were? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, we was. We could write to each other and things like that. 

INTERVIEWER: What were they saying in their letters? 

SUBJECT: Well, things are going to get better, and we're going to be back together again, so on, and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't express any concern or fear being in occupied France? 

SUBJECT: No, no. We didn't know what was going to happen later on. By the way, I like to mention something-- because when my-- my father-- my parents-- my father and my uncle-- uncle Walter-- was in France, they was German citizen. 

And when the war started, the Germans-- the French government put every German-- if he was Jewish or non Jewish-- in a camp, because we was-- after all, we was German citizens. So my father and my uncle was in a French camp that we couldn't-- because they thought, maybe, we might be spies for the German government. 

INTERVIEWER: What was that camp? Do you remember? 

SUBJECT: I don't remember. No. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother there, too? 

SUBJECT: No. Only the man. Only the male-- the male, I guess, over 16 or 18, or I don't know what. My uncle was there and my father was there, too. Well, the German occupied the whole of France. And, about a few months later, the Germans sent many, many Jews from the Rhineland-- German Jews-- to send them to France, into a camp. It's called Camp Gurs. That was near the Pyrenees. 

And over there-- whole families. Families with children and so on. So again, the Jewish Refugee Service tried to get the children out from there. And I do remember, we got quite a large amount of German Jewish children that came to our home from Camp Gurs And they stayed with us. Some of them survived, some didn't later on. But anyway. 

Later on, I got to be told to be in that home-- Chateau de Chaumont. So I was transferred to another home, Chateau Montintin, where I could learn a trade. Because in that other home, there was older-- older boys and girls, too, and we all learned trades there. I liked to-- I wanted to be a cabinet maker, so I learned the trade of cabinet making. There was-- I was-- there was about 250, 300 boys and girls there. 

The girls learned how to sew and cook, while the boys learned to be cabinet makers, and also mechanics, and things like that. And I liked that place, until 1942, when one of the French policemen came to us and told us that all the men over 16 are going to be taken by the French police and be put over to the German government-- to the German authority. And we should try to leave. So-- 

INTERVIEWER: Leave for where? 

SUBJECT: To leave-- hide someplace. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, hide. 

SUBJECT: Hide someplace. So I had a friend. And I took a rucksack, and some food, and a few clothes. And my friend, too, went with me. And I said, we're going to live in woods and see what happens. So we run out in the woods. 

On that night, the French police came and took about 16 boys or 17 boys that didn't hide. They took them and we never heard of them-- except of one. Late, after the war, I saw one of them again. But all the others, I never saw them again. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he tell you what happened? 

SUBJECT: Would you like to know what-- what happened to them? Well, they was all very tall, strong boys. The Germans took them to Germany and they had to work. Later on, I found out. They had to work in a coal mine with very little food and they had to play football-- soccer-- with the Germans. They forced them to play soccer with them-- the Jews against the German, the Nazis. 

And many of the boys-- most of them-- all of them-- but one returned after the war. 

INTERVIEWER: Returned? 

SUBJECT: Returned after the war. One survived. You know how he survived? He was a very small, sickly boy. When he was taken, he was-- I remember his name. He was-- his name was [?Copel?]. 

He was, also, a German, Jewish boy. He was very-- always very sickly. So as long as I remember, he was sick. When he was taken, he was sick. And when he was in Germany, in Silesia, in this camp or wherever he was, because he was sick, they didn't let him work. He was always in some kind of a hospital. And he survived the war because he was always sick. 

INTERVIEWER: And the others? 

SUBJECT: The others was healthy boys. They was forced to work in the coal mines. And I understand they got typhoid, too. That's what I heard after. And none of them came back, except that sickly boy. 

INTERVIEWER: They all died in Silesia? 

SUBJECT: This is what I heard, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Was your brother hiding in the woods, too? 

SUBJECT: No, my brother wasn't. My-- I'd like to go back, later on, of what happened to my-- my father. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you still in touch with your parents? 

SUBJECT: Later on. Because my father was also sick, later on. And my father was not deported with my mother, and brothers, and sisters. He was in the Rothschild Hospital. Because he was sick, he couldn't be deported. It's weird, but-- well, I'll come back to that later because I like to make a point between that boy, [?Copel?], who was always sick and survived because he was-- he was too sick, probably, to-- to go to a gas chamber. I don't know. 

And my father-- because as long as he was sick, they-- they left him in the hospital, the Rothschild Hospital in Paris. Later on. Well, anyway, going back to-- to that Chateau de Chaumont. They came and I was-- I run away with my friend. And for one night or so, I stayed in the woods. And then I said, we can't stay here. I said, let's go back. I said, I know a lot of farmers that is going-- going to hide me. 

Let's go back to the other place where I used to be. I know a lot of farmers that I could hide there and they're going to take care of me. So I walked. I had some kind of a map and a-- and a compass. And I walked during the day. And at night, we were sleeping out in the woods. We got lost and so on. And we went to farmers and asked for some water. But the French farmer always gave us-- they gave us milk. They were very good about it. 

But one night, I do remember, it was raining. It was pouring rain. And we went to a farmer. And I ask-- we asked them if we could sleep in that barn. So he told us yes, but he looked very suspicious to us. 

So I said, you know, to my friend-- his name was Rudolf Katz. I said, you know, I think I don't want to stay here. That man doesn't look right to me. So we didn't stay there. And then we saw he called the French police. And they came and searched that barn. We wasn't in there. Anyways, we walked-- 

INTERVIEWER: You saw them searching the barn? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you? 

SUBJECT: In the woods. 

INTERVIEWER: Watching. 

SUBJECT: Because they was searching with lights, you know, for us. 

INTERVIEWER: You were-- you went into the woods in the rain? 

SUBJECT: In the rain. But anyway, we walked for about a week, from this one home to the old home that I used to know people on. And we arrived there. 

INTERVIEWER: And nobody stopped you or questioned you? 

SUBJECT: We were on the road, it was-- at that time, it was in the fall. It was the fall. And we was eating grapes and apples from the farm. You know, we stole-- stole. We took it from the farm houses, you know? And we arrived there. And when we arrived there, that place where I used to be was-- was a home for boys and girls. When I came back, it was only home for girls. There was only Jewish girls there. But they head, Mr. Aaron, he took us in. 

And he says we can sleep in the basement, if we would-- could cut wood, and if we would go out, and cut wood, and fire-- take care of the fire, and so on. So we did it for two months-- me and my friend. And then he said we can stay here, because it becomes too dangerous. And he gave me some money. And he says I should go to Limoge, France. And there would be somebody who is going to give me some false papers. 

This is where I got the papers that I showed you. False papers. And also, not only you needed papers, but you needed some book of stamps, so you can buy food. Otherwise, you couldn't get food or bread without stamps. So they gave us that book, too, in Limoge. From there, I went with my friend, Rudolph Katz, to Montpelier, France. And there, we was supposed-- there was about 14, 15 boys there with us. 

And was supposed to get from there-- a priest was supposed to take us from there, to the Pyrenees, to Spain, and then go, probably, to North Africa. But in the meantime, nothing was ready. So what did they do with us? They put us into a home for retarded children. And with us in that home for the retarded-- because it was the safest place. The Nazis wouldn't look for us there. 

It was terrible. It was absolutely-- that home was-- not only was it terrible to see the retarded children, but, also, it was very dirty and we couldn't sleep at night because there was lot of bugs. You know, at night they bite you. 

INTERVIEWER: Bed bugs. 

SUBJECT: Bed bugs and all this. And it was all over us. And stayed there for about a week. No. No, we stayed there two weeks. The only thing we ear there is jam on a little bread. We had-- that's all they have, because there was not enough food. But the whole city was occupied by the Germans. We saw German soldiers. In fact, I remember some-- I was out in the city, and some German soldiers came to me, and asked me for directions, in German, which I understood. 

But I never forget. I said, I don't understand-- je ne comprends pas. I did not want to understand what he was going to-- what he was going to ask me, you know? From there, we went to a small town in the Pyrenees. 

INTERVIEWER: This is just you and your friend? 

SUBJECT: Just me and my friend. 

INTERVIEWER: Because you said 15 boys. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. It was-- me and my friend, but there was 15 other boys. And from there, we went to the Pyrenees, close to the border. And there, there was a priest that took care of us. We was in a Catholic church. We were sleeping under the table-- there were some tables, some benches. Under the table. It was very cold, by the way. The Pyrenees was very high and it was very cold. And we stayed there five, six days. 

And the priest came back to us and he told us, there's no way to go through because the last people that he got through was caught. And we better go back some place. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you able to keep in touch with your father, or your mother, or your sisters in any way during this time? 

SUBJECT: Well, actually, in August, 1942, is when the Nazis or the French gestapo was looking after me. But I was in touch with my parents. I told them what was going to happen. But they was only caught-- they was in-- I was in free, occupied France, while my parents and two sisters was in the occupied part of France. And they were still free while we was already wanted, which is very unusual. 

Because they was looked for a month later. In September, they came, and looked, and took my parents and my sisters. And they took them to Drancy. That was near Paris. And from there, I didn't hear from them anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Ever? 

SUBJECT: Not from my mother and my two sisters-- no. But my father was sick. He had-- he had a heart condition and a kidney condition. And because he was sick, they put him into-- that was in 1942. They put him into a Jewish hospital-- the Rothschild Hospital in Paris. And he got in touch with us through my uncle, and through my brother, and so we got in touch with each other. He wrote to me under a false name and so on. And I wrote to him under his real name. 

And he was there until January, 1944. That was almost the end of the war. Because the-- from January, '44-- from that point on, I didn't hear from him. Because the doctors tried to keep him there as long as he could. He was safer there, in the hospital, then being deported. 

INTERVIEWER: In 1944, though, he was deported? 

SUBJECT: He must have been. Because the last time I heard from him was January, 1944. 

INTERVIEWER: And your brother? 

SUBJECT: My brother-- he was walking in a-- in a bakery in France for a while. And then he was sent to near Lyon, France. And he worked by a farmer for about two, three years. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he hiding his true identity. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. He had-- I guess he had false papers, too. 

INTERVIEWER: And you had false papers. 

SUBJECT: I had false papers, too. 

INTERVIEWER: That you got in Limoge. 

SUBJECT: Which I got in Limoge, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you join the underground? 

SUBJECT: By the end of civil war, not before. By-- I was already underground, but not joining it, because I was too young to join or something like that. I don't know. And I didn't know enough about it, you know? 

INTERVIEWER: You spent the whole war with you-- with your friend, hiding? 

SUBJECT: No. Then my friend separated from me. He knew somebody in Grenoble, France. He went there and, by his good luck, he went to Switzerland. I found out later, he went to Switzerland. But I-- going back from the Pyrenees, there was no hope for us to stay there. 

So they sent me to the town in [INAUDIBLE]. There was a Jewish doctor that belonged-- he was the ahead of the Boy Scouts in France. And he had placed many, many boys-- Jewish boys and girls-- all around, in a-- in an area there. And I was sent there and-- 

INTERVIEWER: By whom? Whom sent you? The priest? 

SUBJECT: Not the police-- the French-- the Jewish French underground sent me there, to that place. And I was put to a-- to a farmer. And I stayed with that farmer. I was working at that farm there for about eight or nine months. He was very good to me. And in this whole area, there was-- I would say there must have been 40, 50 Jewish boys and girls, working at different farmers. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the farmer know you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: He did know. He did know. 

INTERVIEWER: But he hid you? 

SUBJECT: He his me, yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Or he didn't betray you. 

SUBJECT: He did not betray me. In fact, he died to the Germans. It's-- the French underground tried to bomb, you know, the railroads. 

And what did the Germans do? They forced the French people, every night, to go and guard the French railroad tracks. That man-- that farmer of mine-- went one night. He had to do it twice every-- twice a week, he had to do it, for the whole night. He went there and somebody shot him there. He was shot, guarding the railroad tracks for the Germans, which was-- he was forced to do it. 

INTERVIEWER: You stayed at his farm after? 

SUBJECT: I stayed-- after that, I couldn't stay at his farm. I was sent about 20 miles from there. And there, we was assembled there. Because of what happened there-- the head-- that was a Jewish man-- a doctor-- a Jewish doctor from Hungary-- he was caught with his family and he was deported. So we was in danger that-- he would not-- he did not talk-- but that he would talk. And so they told us to get out of that area. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: They told me-- they gave me some paper-- they gave me some-- a newspaper. And they told me I should be, in two days, in Toulouse, France, at a certain bridge. And I should have a certain newspaper under the arm. And on that bridge, at that and that time, somebody would meet me there and would give me more information. 

INTERVIEWER: You were all alone? 

SUBJECT: I was alone. Yeah. Well, I went to the railroad station. And when I got to the railroad station, I could-- for some reason, I could smell the gestapo. They was Germans, they was tall, they usually had white rain coats, and so on. And when I got to the railroad station, these two tall fellows was asking many questions to different people. When I saw them, I said, if they ask me questions, that's it. 

So instead of going to the railroad-- to the railroad station, I turned around. And I-- I had-- I always walked around-- I looked very young. I always had short pants. And I had a rucksack. I walked out and I walked out of town. And when I walked out of town, what do I see? The two gentlemen that I know-- I never met them, but I know they was Germans. They walked after me. And I walked faster and faster. 

And there was a big curve on the highway. And I was hiding there and I saw them passing. I run back-- it was just luck, it was just luck. I run back to the railroad station, the train arrives, I jump on the train to go to Limoge-- to Toulouse. And that train was awfully crowded. It was very, very crowded. People-- there was only standing room there. 

On that train, there was many people-- there was people that came and asked for your paper-- for your passport or papers. And not only they asked for the papers, but they also asked for, say, I was born in France, in this and this town, do you know this and this part? Do you know the opera there? Where was the opera? In what city? What is the name of the high school? And things like that. 

They-- I was standing on the window of the-- of the train. And I saw them asking questions to people next to me. I was shaking all over. I said, what should I do? Should I stay here? But if I walk away from this point, they will come after me and they will realize something must be wrong with me, because why-- why did I walk away from it. But they could not ask everyone because the train-- there was thousands and thousands of people on the train. 

They could not ask everybody. They passed me and asked two, three people after me the same question again. I almost left when I saw them. I was going to go to the bathroom, just to not be asked these questions. But thank god, I did what I did. Well, anyway, I got to Toulouse, France. And that man was there. He gave me papers, he gave me money, and he told me I should go to Lyons, France, where my brother was-- to join my brother. 

And when I get to the-- to the railroad station in Lyons, somebody would meet me there and son. When I got there, they told me there is no room. Everything is taken. I can't-- I couldn't even see my brother. My body was not in-- he was on the outskirts of Lyons. He gave me more money. And I should go to Limoge, France. When I got to Limoge, France-- no, no, no, no. That wasn't that. That wasn't that. 

I was going to go back to-- to the town on [INAUDIBLE]. I was going to go to Argens-- Argens, France. When I got to Argens, somebody told me I should go and see that woman. I got-- I went to see that woman and she was hiding me. Also, she was hiding another Austrian woman with her son. And I stayed with her for two, three days. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was this woman? 

SUBJECT: She was an Austrian Jewish woman. 

INTERVIEWER: No, who was the woman who was hiding you? 

SUBJECT: She was a French woman. She was hiding us in Argens, France. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you know her? How did they-- 

SUBJECT: I was told to go to that apartment, you know? And that house-- it was a big apartment, house that had several other offices-- doctors offices, and lawyers, and so on, and so forth. And I walked in the city. And I was supposed to be told, from there, where to go from there. So one day, I was out in the city and I come back. And when I come to the door of that apartment where I was living, I see two men knock to get in that apartment. That apartment was locked. 

And when I see them-- the two men there-- I said to myself, this is-- this is the police. There's something wrong. I'm not going to try to get in. But I didn't want to walk. I did the same thing I did on the train. If I would have-- instead of walking-- after I saw them walking back out, back downstairs-- there was a stairway-- I kept on going upstairs, because upstairs, I know there was some doctors offices. 

So the men saw me. And they come to me and they said, where are you going? I said, I'm going upstairs to see a doctor. What's the matter with you? I said, I have a cold and I have to see a doctor. So they said, do you have papers? I said, yes. So I showed them the papers, which was the false papers. They said, you was born in [INAUDIBLE], France. And they asked me questions. And I said, yes. 

They said, you know, you better come with us. So they took me down and-- they took me down, out in the street. And I had a coat-- winter coat-- on. And they walked with me. And one of the men was holding me on the coat, like that. And I said, if they take me to the police and they find out-- they could check with the town, if I was born there or not-- that's end of me. 

So I run out of the coat. I run out. I left the coat. I left the coat and I run out. 

INTERVIEWER: You-- you slipped out of your own-- 

SUBJECT: I slipped out of the coat. 

INTERVIEWER: While they were holding the sleeve of your coat. 

SUBJECT: The sleeve. You know, the old coats had long sleeves and so. 

INTERVIEWER: Wide slides, you mean. 

SUBJECT: Wide sleeves, yeah. I-- 

INTERVIEWER: And they didn't chase you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, they chased me. They chased me and they run after me. And the people in the street was holding me back, because they thought I was a thief of some kind. So they got me back. And as they kept on walking with me, holding-- I put my coat back on. And I run out a second time. And, again, they called, un voleur! Un voleur! That means a thief, in French. And they caught me again. And then they start beating me up. That was the French police beating me up. 

Then they took me to the chief of police. Which I did not know that one of the men that was holding my arm was the chief of police of that town. That town was about 80,000 people-- Argens, France. He took me in his-- the home and he start beating me like anything. He says, you know, I'm the chief of police here and there's nobody ever run away from me. 

And by that time already, he says we checked your papers and they're false papers. He says your name is Walter. I said, no, my name is not Walter. My name is not Walter. My name is Paul Keene and so on. I deny it. He says, we checked with [INAUDIBLE], France, and we checked with the city of Montpelier. That paper was never put out in Montpelier. It's false. 

So then I said, no. There was no hope. And that was already in 1944. So I said to him-- I said, you know, the war is going to end soon. I said my name-- I said, my name is Walter [? Karliner. ?] I was the-- the German-- if the German-- if I come back here, I said, you're going to get it. I tried to scare him with things like that. And he put me in jail. I was in jail for about three or four hours. 

INTERVIEWER: You admitted to him that you were German and you're name was-- 

SUBJECT: That I was German Jewish and that-- well, there was no hope. What should I-- but I also told him-- I said, you're a Frenchmen. I said, you're working for the French gestapo, and this, and that, and if you get out-- if I get out of it, I'm-- I'm going to make good for you. I told him that. 

INTERVIEWER: You threatened him. 

SUBJECT: I threatened him. Yes, I did. I also tried to buy him out a little bit. I had some money. I had some money hidden in the shoes-- some American-- not American-- some French money in the soles. And I told him. I just said, I do have some money, some place. I didn't tell him with me. But I said, if you want, I give you something. But it didn't. 

INTERVIEWER: But his fear that you would later turn him in. 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I don't know. He put me into a jail cell. He took my shoelaces, he took my belt. I didn't know why, at that time. That I wouldn't commit suicide-- later on, I found out. And I was about three or four-- three hours in jail. That's the only time I was in jail in my life. And there was a little pothole. And all of a sudden, I see that woman-- that Austrian woman that was living with me there. She was bought in. 

So she was caught. Later on, the chief of police called me in and he told me-- he says that he had a list from the gestapo with peoples they're supposed to get. This is what he told me. He's supposed to get this woman and her son. Her son's name was Walter, too, by the way. But then I forgot the name-- the second name. And he thought I was this woman-- he thought this woman was my mother. 

By the way, this woman and her son run away from a camp-- not from a camp, from jail. She run away from jail and this is why the French police was after her-- because she was running away from-- to save her life. 

INTERVIEWER: She was in jail because she was Jewish? 

SUBJECT: She was Jewish. And she was going to be deported and she knew about it, so she-- she and her son run away. So that policeman thought I was her son. He was about the same age as me. And he was also short and so on. And, well, anyway, he called him back. He says that I'm no more wanted. I'm not on the wanted anymore, because it was '44. I was wanted in 1942 and I'm not on the list that he was supposed to get. 

He says I'm going to give you back all the papers, including the false papers, including the Russian papers. And he says, I want you out, within six hours, of this city. I don't want you in my city. So I-- I left the city and I went to Limoge. In Limoge, I was living there, by some people that I know. 

And then somebody got in touch with me and they told me that there is a way out-- I mean, if I would join the French Youth Program as a French-- as a Frenchman-- it's a youth program, like the Hitler Youth, but it was a French-- it was organized by Vichy. If I would go there. I said, yes, I would go there. So I went there, which was about 18 kilometers out of the city of Limoge, in Saint Julien. 

And over there, it was a home for us. They had-- we got clothes, we got food. And I kept on loaning my trade, which was cabinet making. And I stayed there almost-- yeah-- almost to the end of the war. Almost to the liberation, I stayed there. Almost. Because before the liberation, that whole thing was dissolved. 

When I went back to Limoge-- and when I was in Limoge, I heard the good news that the Americans, and English, and French invaded France and I-- I was elated about it. But we were still under the occupation. 

And a day later, I saw a panzer division-- a division of the Nazis-- this was [? really ?] the Nazis-- going through that town, on the stop there, in Limoge. They stopped in Limoge. I remember they stopped under the trees, so the planes wouldn't be able to see them. 

And anyway, that panzer division, later on, did something-- they went to a town about 12 kilometers-- maybe 10 miles from that town-- because there was the French undergone was in that town, supposedly. And they destroyed that-- that whole town. Do you know what they did? They took the children-- mothers and children-- into the church and burned the church down. And they took all the men-- 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, wait a minute. Oh, we have to finish this story, so we have to change tape, but you must finish this. 