CREW: Oh, god. He's a real character, he is. 

CREW: OK. I'm confused. 

CREW: You're confused? 

CREW: Look in here. What is this? 

CREW: What if people treat her as if she's a person? Standard. I know. I mean that's what really gets to you. 

CREW: Mm-hmm. 

CREW: You can have it if you'd like it. 

CREW: Laurel, you've been down to Bloomingdale's. I can see that. 

CREW: Pardon me? 

CREW: You've been down to Bloomingdale's. 

CREW: Anytime you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. You are in a living room. I think I told you that before, right? It's just like a living room. You'll forget the cameras, tape recorders, everything. Right? 

EVA LIBITZKY: I'll try. 

INTERVIEWER: The only thing is, we have about an hour and ten minutes. We don't have longer. And, um-- 

EVA LIBITZKY: You want me to repeat more or less. 

INTERVIEWER: Hm? 

EVA LIBITZKY: You want me to repeat, more or less, the same thing. 

INTERVIEWER: Have you listened to the tapes? 

EVA LIBITZKY: I listened once. But, um. I don't know if I'll be able to repeat the same. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. 

EVA LIBITZKY: Well. 

INTERVIEWER: It doesn't, uh. But two things that begin. Are you ready? 

CREW: We're rolling. Yep. Yep. Go right ahead. 

INTERVIEWER: We are rolling right now? 

CREW: Yep. Go right ahead. 

CREW: We are now going to hear the experiences of Eva Libitzky. 

INTERVIEWER: Why don't you give your name, where you were born, and what year you were born. And then begin describing Lodz in your life, your early life in Lodz. 

EVA LIBITZKY: My name is Eva Libitzky. I was born in Lodz, Poland, in 1924. 

I come from a very orthodox family, a Hasidic family, a very well-known family in Lodz. My grandfather was very active in Jewish government in Lodz. And so was my father. And they were known as cream of the town of Lodz. 

I had one brother which was seven years older than me. Eh. My mother's family was four children, my mother's family. And there are four cousins left here. One child from each of my mother's sisters and brothers. 

My father's family was nine children. And there's nobody left. I'm the only one that survived. 

My brother was 21 when the war broke out. 

INTERVIEWER: What about growing up and your interests? 

EVA LIBITZKY: I was growing up in a very religious atmosphere, a very Hasidic atmosphere. I myself had a very broad religious education. A very Hasidic. I was-- at a very young age I could even read the Talmud. I could study a little bit of the Talmud. I was praying three times a day and it was-- 

INTERVIEWER: As a girl? 

EVA LIBITZKY: As good girl, which was very unusual. And the whole family looked up to me like something unusual and something special. My-- my family came from an upper-- we were an upper middle class family. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they call you? 

EVA LIBITZKY: At home? 

INTERVIEWER: Mm-hmm. 

EVA LIBITZKY: Chavele. That was my Jewish name at home. 

INTERVIEWER: Was it something about a saint? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Yes. It was considered like a saint. Unusual saint, knowing all this Hebrew and, and-- really being into it. It was so important. And really I was into it. 

INTERVIEWER: So it was Chavele the heligan? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Yes. And then the war broke out. I was 15 years old. 

When the war broke out, we lived in a non-Jewish section. And the first thing, when the Germans came in, all the Poles, our neighbors, the best neighbors-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the day? What kind of day? 

EVA LIBITZKY: The war broke-- in 1939, September 3rd, 1939, the Germans occupied Lodz. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: You remember the marching in? 

EVA LIBITZKY: They marched in. And they started coming into Jewish home. Robbing. Beating up. Robbing of everything. 

Of course the Poles helped immediately. They-- they were the ones that showed where the Jews lived. And they were the ones to help the Germans. 

They came into our house. They beat up my father terribly. 

INTERVIEWER: Now what your pictures? What do you remember? The door opens. Somebody comes in. What do you remember? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Mm. Terrible banging and the door open up. They came and they broke through the doors. 

INTERVIEWER: Who came in? 

EVA LIBITZKY: The Ger-- the SS. The Brown Shirts. The SS. And the poles helped them. They were the ones that showed, here lives a Jew. Here lives a Jew. 

And then when they came in, the first thing, they stormed into the house. The Pole helped-- the Poles helped to rob of supplies, whatever we have, whatever we have had in the house. Whatever was handy. 

They beat up my father. Tear at his beard. And beat him. And then took him to labor. And my brother too. 

And they saved the women. At first. But this was going on. And we had constantly we had to-- and from then on, we had to hide. We had to hide the men. And hide. 

And then in September-- that was in September. In November they started liquidating Lodz. And they started forming the ghetto in Lodz. 

So they-- we were the first one to be evacuated to the ghetto. Because we lived-- since we lived in a non-Jewish area, we were the first to be chasen out. 

All we can take was what we had on. We couldn't take anything else out of the house. 

And when we came we were lucky that we were from the first ones because we got a little decent apartment. So my brother, my parents, and my grandfather. We all were together in that house, in that apartment. That one room, actually. One room. 

Before that, before we got to the-- to the-- eh-- ghetto, my brother got married. Eh, eh, in Jewish, eh, especially in the Hasidic religion. In the Hasidic law, it is, if there is a, a, marriage planned for a certain-- it's planned for a certain date, under no circumstances, you are allowed to put that marriage off. It has to be. Unless a mother or a father dies. Somebody immediate from the family. Other than that you're not allowed to postpone a marriage. 

So here we were, petrified, afraid. It was in the bride's house. They lived on a, on a, on, on the first floor. We all, we, we, uh, they went in. Somebody uh, bolted the door from the outside, climbed in through the window. And there was a minyan of 10 men. And there was even a fiddler that played. And there my-- 

INTERVIEWER: Des-- describe it. 

EVA LIBITZKY: A fiddler. And 10 men. And there was in a rabbi. And there was the chuppah. And the marriage was performed. And so his bride and my brother, we all lived in that room in the ghetto together. 

INTERVIEWER: Did the-- did the fiddler play? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Oh yes, to the-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did he play? 

EVA LIBITZKY: A marriage song, whatever there. A chuppah marriage song he played while my brother was getting married. 

And all this had to be very quietly. Because God forbid if somebody would hear outside that's going on something, a religious ceremony, or something, we would have all been-- something would terribly-- terrible could happen to all of us. So everything went down very quietly. And there my hu-- my brother was married. 

And then when we were all chasen out we-- chased out, we all went to the ghetto. And we all lived together in that one room. 

And we all had to work. Everybody had to get a job. Otherwise you were useless. If you worked you were useful. Then you were a little bit safe. You got carts. Food carts. And so on. Um. 

I got a job immediately because I was the granddaughter of Abraham Katz, my grandfather. I had special privileges. Because the president of the ghetto, Rumkowski, he also was in government in Lodz. 

My grandfather was from Agudath Achim which was the Hasidic sector. He was the-- active from the Zionist sector. And of course they always fought with each other, but had great, great respect for each other. 

And in the ghetto and Rumkowski became president. And any, all, ch-- the children of Abraham Katz, or grandchildren of Abraham Katz, as long, we got the word to him that we are such and such, we got a better job. And a better job wi-- was associated with food. 

If you-- it was associated with food, whether in the soup kitchen or whatever was associated with food. You were lucky. Because then you could steal a little bit more. You didn't care what went on that the other person wouldn't get. You were there-- you wanted to have a little bit more. You wanted to survive with your family together. And that was the most important thing. 

So I was lucky. I had a job in a kitchen. 

INTERVIEWER: Rumkowski was what part in the government before the war? 

EVA LIBITZKY: He wa-- he was um, um, a leader of the Zionist organization. 

INTERVIEWER: Rumkowski. 

EVA LIBITZKY: Rumkowski, yes. When my grandfather was the leader of Agudath Achim of the-- of the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Religious. 

EVA LIBITZKY: Religious. Of the Hasidic organization group. And so-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you know him in the ghetto? Rumkowski. Did you meet him? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Rumkowski. No. I did not. I never met him. I did not-- yes. I saw him. But I never met him personally. I saw him. If I-- we wanted to get word to him, who we were, it was through a secretary or whoever, another person. But not face to face. But he knew of us. And that was enough. 

Rumkowski was a high-strung and unpredictable-- a nut. Crazy man. That's what he was considered. And uh-- we got word to him. And he always replied with a good job. Good job was food. So I worked in the kitchen. And of-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was he cruel to people? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What do you know? 

EVA LIBITZKY: He could be very cruel. He did not care what happened to people. He uh, was known as a cruel man. People were petrified for him. He was con-- he was like-- he is the god. He has the hand over. He can-- uh, he can do whatever-- like god. Life or death. He was the one that could prescribe it to people. 

And that's how he was known. People were afraid of him. Petrified of him. 

And so I worked in the kitchen. And my brother used to come with a pail. And he was getting a little bit more soap. And my mother used to come. And she was getting-- 

And it became a big game for me. A game of survival. A game of trying to get for my family more and, and-- oh, I got more food. And it was just the beginning all fun and game. All play. 

But as time went on, it was no more play. It was no more game. In 1940 there was started being eliminations of the ghetto. 

The Germans had to eliminate the ghetto. And they-- they came in and made raids. Getted people unexpectedly. And took him away. Nobody know where. Nobody expected where. We thought that they taking them to maybe another ghetto. 

Because Lodz ghetto that-- it was like a concentration of all people from all over. From German people, from Hungary, from Czechoslovakia mainly. From all the small towns that surround it in Poland. Everything was concentrated, sent into-- into the Lodz ghetto. 

So we thought that maybe the people that they take, maybe they taking them someplace else for work, for hard labor. Nobody suspected that anything terrible is going on. 

But as time went on and the hunger was just absolutely impossible. It was less and less food. The rations were becoming less and lesser. People were just dying in the streets, laying there and dying. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you see? Pictures. 

EVA LIBITZKY: God. It was like a nightmare. Friends. Relatives. Just swelling up from hunger. First there was swelling. Then they were drying up. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember particular people? Can you describe them? 

EVA LIBITZKY: Very close friends of mine. 

INTERVIEWER: Like? 

EVA LIBITZKY: My father, too. He also died from hunger. He swell up like a balloon. 

And then they dry up. And then they lay like a vegetable. 

And people just step over them. It comes to a point that people just step over them. And they don't care anymore because everybody just cares for themselves. Everybody just thinks of themselves. 

My father lived til 1943. My brother was caught in 1940. He was deported. We never knew. We never heard from him again. 

But we thought, since he was young, with his wife-- he was only 22 years old. So we thought that maybe they took him to another camp. To another ghetto or someplace for work. But never heard from him again. 

INTERVIEWER: There was not the slightest notion about. 

EVA LIBITZKY: Not the slightest notion. Nobody knew. Nobody knew what's going on. Nobody. There wasn't the slightest-- 

INTERVIEWER: Rumors? 

EVA LIBITZKY: No rumors. Not the slightest suspicion what's going on. Otherwise people would commit suicide instead of going. 

But there were raids constantly. And usually we heard there's going to be a raid. We heard that there's a raid. So we were hiding. Either we're bolting doors or we were hiding. 

And especially my parents. I was always afraid for my parents. My parents were only in their forties at this time. And they were considered old. They looked like 90, of course. 

So we hid in the ghetto. A hole in the floor. It was covered with a blanket. And underneath was a cellar. A dirt cellar. 

And most of the time they spent their lives there. Because I was always afraid of them. But one time I had no time. By the time I heard is the raid, I had no time to hide them. They were caught too. 

And by unusual a miracle, that was 1942. By a miracle I got them out. It was-- til today, I cannot imagine how it was possible to get them back. But I did. 

And then I got sick. I got very sick after this. With typhoid. And dysentery. And pneumonia. And how I survived I don't know. Because there was no medicine. 

I had a doctor, which I knew. But there was no medicine. 

So my father sat with me for days and for nights, he said. And he pampered me. He was selling his ration to get some nourishment for me, maybe some medication on the black market. And to help me. 

But I was five weeks in a coma. And he was giving away his food for it. And I got better after three months. I came out of it by-- also, I cannot understand it. 

Apparently it was meant for me to live. Because under such circumstances nobody can survive. It was meant for me to live. And but he swell up. And he died. And I could not help him. I cannot do-- couldn't do anything for him to help him. 

So in 1943-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the time that he was-- you were coming home and noticing changes in him? Can you please-- 

EVA LIBITZKY: Yes. He was sick. First he swelled up. And-- then he was-- he got pneumonia. He got pneumonia because it was in February. I tried to wash him. I tried to make him a little bit comfortable. 

In the ghetto at this time, it was already so bad. There was absolutely nothing to eat. We lived on whatever there was. 

Grass. Or everything was eaten. Not a speck of grass you could find in the ghetto. Not a bird. Not a cat. Not a dog. Because everything in sight was eaten. 

People wanted to survive. That's what all to it. A human being changes into an animal. And an animal lives for survival. And that's what a human being is. 

And our rations is considered of a little burnt oats, which we-- we brewed to make coffee out of it. The rest what was on the bag. And we baked. We ate it. It was horrible, bitter and horrible, but it filled the stomach. 

We found a speck of grass. We can make the soup out of it. It filled the stomach. And from this we were living. 

So my father got sick. I tried to get some medication. My mother couldn't work. People-- bones disintegrated. My mother couldn't work. Her bones started disintegrating. 

So I remember there was, in the sonderkommando, there was a point-- one point that they were-- there was some medication that if you got to it, and you could get a little, some medication, like a vitamin or something, sometimes it helped for the people that couldn't walk. 

I remember staying in line for 48 hours, day and night to get there. Many times I got to it and it was no more. 

One time I got a little vitamin for my mother. It helped her walk a little bit better. And for my father I couldn't get anything. 

And while-- everything was-- to keep a little bit warm in the house, there was not a board in the floor or a door or, or anything that was burnable. It was used up already by then. Just to warm a little water or to keep a little bit warm. 

It was in February. My father was already so sick. And I wanted to wash him. Because the lice were terrible. 

You were sleeping in clothes. Poorly dressed. Sleeping like this. And had no ways of getting a little warm water to wash. 

Occasionally we washed. And of course the lice multiplied and eat and ate us. That was on top of other suffering. 

So I wanted to make him a little bit more comfortable. I tried to wash him up. And apparently it was too cold in the room when I washed him. And he caught pneumonia. And that was the end of him. 

I couldn't get any medication for him. So we had to go to work. Because if you didn't work, and the Germans came, uh, uh-- you just had to work. You had to be registered to work. Otherwise you were useless. 

And if not, if not the Germans-- so, the police, the Jewish police, they got you, because they always needed photos of people to send out. So they were looking for occasions too to send out. 

And those that didn't work, didn't show up for work, those were the first ones. They came at night. Took him out of bed. And send them away to work. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh. Tell me. You were several years in the ghetto. And there was great hunger in Lodz. 

CREW: Let's hold that question, OK? We have to change tapes. 

