SUBJECT: Maiden name? 

INTERVIEWER: Your maiden name, I'm sorry. I couldn't find the word. And I want to know who you were. 

SUBJECT: Am I sitting? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, that's fine. Whatever-- 

SUBJECT: Am I-- 

INTERVIEWER: OK. What-- no, just [INAUDIBLE]. No, that's what I was looking for. To see if you could handle the pictures, that's all. Just put them down on the floor next to you as you finish each one. 

SUBJECT: Oh, OK. 

INTERVIEWER: OK? OK. Just start. 

SUBJECT: My name is Ena Almoli, Lorant now. And I was born in Belgrade, Yugoslavia in October 29th, 1934. Just about the time that war started in Yugoslavia, I was 6 and 1/2 years old. I'm fortunate to have some pictures that show a little bit the life before the war. And here are some of the pictures that might be interesting. This is my grandmothers on my father's side. Mother. And this is my grandfather's mother. This is my father, when he was a little boy. Very small boy. And this is my father and mother when they got married. These are some other pictures in the family. And they're very special to me. And we're fortunate to have them. 

My father's family came originally from Spain. At least that's-- we could trace them to the times in Spain. And the names, some of the names in my family can sort of support that. For example, this-- my great-grandmother's name was Esther Deconorte. And the other grandmother's name was Esther Mandil. 

Just before the war started, we lived in Belgrade. And we were quite well off, I would say. My father and my uncle owned jointly a factory. Actually, a textile mill. And I remember the wonderful trips we used to take. Every summer, we used to go wonderful places. And here, it shows us in Évian-les-Bains, which was the summer just before the war, we went to France. My-- that's where we met my mother's brother and his new wife, who had come just after they had gotten married. My aunt was an American, a foreigner. And my father's-- my father's brother, one of my father's brothers, was Ivan Almoli. And he was in the army. 

INTERVIEWER: Just be careful. 

SUBJECT: In the cavalry. 

INTERVIEWER: Be careful not to brush the microphone with the pictures. 

SUBJECT: Oh yes. OK. Is that better? Just as the war started, I remember just before the war started, lively discussions in my grandmother's house. There were some rumors. A lot of friends of my father's and uncle's and family's had suggested that we should leave because things were getting pretty bad in Europe. However, that was not what my father and my uncle thought we should do. They wanted to remain. 

Because after all, we were very well respected in Belgrade, and there was a feeling that nobody would really touch any of us. However, just before the war, as I said, there were many, many discussions in my grandmother's. And they were also-- there was a feeling in the air that something unusual was happening. There were air raid rehearsals. And I know my little sister was a year and a half younger than I was, was equally upset as I was about the events. We couldn't sleep well anymore with the sirens going full blast. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was there unrest or a feeling that there was something in the air regarding being Jewish? Especially? 

SUBJECT: Not really about being Jewish. But just unrest in the air. I remember actually there were parades, people parading in the streets. And marching and saying bolje rat nego pakt, meaning that it was better to go to war than to make a pact with the Germans. 

INTERVIEWER: But you didn't know about what was happening to Jews in Germany? Or you never heard that? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think that my parents probably have heard. Had heard quite a lot about it. However, we're not really believing that that was happening. And also did not believe that that would happen to the rest of Europe, which indeed, it did happen. And so just the day before, the 6th of April, when the bombardment started, my father was called into the army to join his outfit. And my uncle, who was in the cavalry, was not called to arms. So, however, he decided that he was going to volunteer, because after all, he was going to help out too. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: This was the Yugoslav army? 

SUBJECT: This was the Yugoslav army, which my father was an officer. And here is my father in uniform. But that was already later when he was a prisoner of war. I don't know exactly how many days the resistance of the Yugoslav army actually lasted. But it wasn't very long. On the 6th of April, when we woke up very early with the Stukas zooming down into Belgrade and bombing everything in sight, it was, of course, an incredible shock for all of us. I remember waking up to that terrible noise and flashing lights, which were really bombs falling down. 

And I remember someone grabbing me and throwing some clothes on me and shaking, really. I was shaking from fear. And being grabbed and brought down into the cellar of the house, where we all huddled together and waited for the air raid to be over. And, at some point, my father appeared. And took the family group and brought us to the house next door, to the building next door, which was really much safer. It was a sturdier building. And our nanny went back with my mother and filled a suitcase with some things that she-- that they could find quickly for us to change into. And we spent a couple of nights-- a couple of days in this other basement, air shelter. Air raid shelter. 

And that's when my father kept on going, coming and going, for those two days. And finally he came with one of our two cars, and with a chauffeur. And with the idea that he was going to take us out of the city to wait till the end of that bombardment. And so we started out by car with that one suitcase filled with the most incredible things, like, I remember my mother telling me later on, there were some very few clothes for us children. And there was even a tablecloth in there, which made absolutely no sense. But that's what people do when they are under pressure. And we started out with the car. But very soon, we realized that any moving target was going to be bombed by the stukas. So my father decided we would be better off just walking. So we went-- we went out of the city walking. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did you go? 

SUBJECT: We went-- I don't know the name of the little country village. But it was a place where one of the maid's family lived. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't feel any special peril being Jewish? Even then? 

SUBJECT: No, not as yet. However, when we came back, that's when it really all became clear. Because first of all, when we came back to Belgrade, which was by then occupied, my father was already taken prisoner, and brought to Germany. The first thing that, of course, my mother did was to go to the apartment where we lived and to try to, you know, get re-established there. The first thing we found out that no Jew could go back to their apartment. That they were all taken over by the Nazis, by the Army, I suppose, German army. 

And also we were not allowed to take anything out of those apartments at that point. And, I guess going back down, she noticed that our janitor, the caretaker of the house, who was a member of the fifth column in Yugoslavia, which is a special army made up of people whose-- whose background was German, and who had some feelings for the German movement, he had taken most of us things, most of our personal possessions, and because my mother went down to protest, to complain. 

And she noticed that all of our things were down there in the closet. So the only apartment that was not taken over was my uncle Ivan's apartment. Because his wife was Turkish. Was a Turkish national. And they still could own their apartment. She was Jewish, but didn't seem to matter in this case. 

And so, our family went to live with my Aunt Anika. And also my grandmother went there, who found herself in the same situation. And my other two aunts and an uncle. And everybody almost, most of the members of our family went to live in this one apartment. And we lived there for a while. I don't remember exactly how long. 

But meanwhile, pretty awful things were happening daily in Belgrade. They were-- they were attempts by some of the partisans, some of the underground members, to undermine the Nazis and to drive them away this way. There were bombings and sabotage attempts. And as, almost any the smallest insult to any of the German nationals in Belgrade was returned, was counterattacked by the Nazis with some awful, incredible deeds. And one of them was 500 men-- there was a bombing again of one of the, 

I don't know what it was exactly. Some place where German I think high command was in Belgrade. And 500 Jewish men-- no first of all, what happened is that the Nazis said that all the Jewish men had to report to this one place. And then they chose 500 men to be hostages until the people who sabotaged this place would turn up. Well, what happened is nobody turned up. 

So they picked and they put these 500 men in a big square and picked every fifth, and to be held as hostages longer. My uncle, who, my uncle Ivan, who I had mentioned before, who had gone and joined as a volunteer the army, had-- I did not tell you that before-- he had come back very soon because he had been, while crossing a bridge from Belgrade to another little town, he had been shelled by one of the planes, and he lost both of his legs. 

So he was in the hospital for a while and then he returned to us on his crutches. And that time, my Aunt Anika, who was able to return to Turkey, urged him to go back with their little daughter, to go back to Turkey to her family, and wait the end of the war. However, my uncle, who had had a pact with my father that whoever would stay behind, would survive this, would take care of the rest of the family, said that he would not go without us. And so my aunt left with Lily and my uncle stayed with us. However, when this call came for all the Jewish men to report to this place, my uncle felt very proud to be a Jew. 

And felt that even though he was wounded, he would go up there. And he did go there. And he was one of the 100 men picked. And they were shot. And almost-- we don't know exactly when. But they were shot. They weren't kept hostages. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you at the square when t he picking was done? 

SUBJECT: No. No. I was at home. I remember someone coming and telling my grandmother that the despair and the disbelief. And I remember an aunt, my grandmother's-- actually my father's aunt, grabbing me by the hand and taking me shopping just to get us out of there, I guess. My sister was younger, so maybe she wasn't as involved with this. But. 

And I remember going to the market, which was opened only a certain few hours to the Jewish people. And I remember coming back with a basket of eggs. Maybe I remember it because my aunt tells me this story often. She is still living. And I guess there was so much horror in the house, in our house where we live now, in that confusion, I stepped in the basket of eggs and ruined that shopping. 

So that's when my uncle and other uncle who was a doctor and he was the head of the ambulatorium, which was sort of like a hospital in Yugoslavia for all the Jewish people. Decided that maybe there was-- we would have to get out and leave towards Italy, somehow make our way to Italy. Of course, I don't remember all of these details. Because we were not made part of this. We were very small children. However, I know my mother was wearing that awful yellow tag on her arm. And there were curfews and there were awful daily things that we went through. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have any pictures of that? 

SUBJECT: No I don't. I don't have any pictures of that. I have pictures before the war. 

INTERVIEWER: I just wondered what your next picture was. 

SUBJECT: Oh, my next picture is when we went to Italy. However, I could show you a picture of my family when we fled to Italy. This is the uncle I'm talking about. He's Ashkenazi, Dr. Isaac Ashkenazi. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- 

SUBJECT: OK. And that's his wife, Ella. This is my mother. This is my grandmother, my sister Elisa, and myself. 

INTERVIEWER: And you-- this was just before you left for Italy? 

SUBJECT: No. This is when we arrived in Italy. So was maybe a few months after what I'm just telling you now. However, OK? Shall I put it down? However, I remember my dear uncle being offered again to be taken out of the country somehow, smuggled out by an old lady who claimed that she knew him from their time, the time that they both studied in Vienna at the University. And he again, this uncle too said he would not go without the rest of the family. And in this picture, it doesn't show. But they had a daughter Vera, who was a teenager in those days, 10 years older than I was. And my Aunt Lea is not in this picture. However, when we finally fled from Yugoslavia, there were eight of us. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you travel? How did you-- 

SUBJECT: Well the first thing that happened is we divided into small groups. My mother and my sister and I formed one group. My uncle, aunt, and their daughter another group, and my Aunt Lea and my grandmother a third group. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you bring belongings with you? Were you able to bring some of your belongings? Because you look very well dressed in that picture. 

SUBJECT: Well, Those were the days that we still had what we had, you know, with us. No, we had just about a suitcase or so. Very little. I remember that, just like that, one evening, one afternoon, my mother told us that we were going to leave and that our new names were-- my sister's name was beba, which was very simple, baby. And mine was-- my nickname was seka, which was sister. 

And she gave us our new names to remember, and that we were going to leave. And we were not to mention our other names. And we were to pretend not to know grandmother and anyone else that we met along the way. So we went to some friends with this one suitcase after the curfew. My mother threw away her tag that she always wore, her armband. And she made an attempt to convince her mother and to leave. 

But my other grandmother would not leave because my uncle, which you probably can't see very well. But my other uncle, Leo, had been taken on the workforce by the Germans. And supposedly was going to be brought back-- was going to come back to Yugoslavia. So my grandmother, who is in this picture here in the carriage with my grandfather, decided to stay behind with my Aunt Edith and wait for Uncle Leo to come back. And of course, that was the last we heard of them. My uncle Max, who was my mother's other brother, had gone already to the United States because that's where he and his wife decided to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother had these pictures with her, however? 

SUBJECT: Yes. My mother had this-- these pictures with her. And all during the time that she was faking, that she was well brought up Yugoslav orthodox lady-- orthodox, by that I mean, Christian Orthodox, she was carrying this little prayer book that was my grandmother's. 

INTERVIEWER: And no one found it on her? That's a Jewish prayer book? 

SUBJECT: No. That's a Jewish-- we were so fortunate, you can't imagine. We also had letters that my father had sent to us from Germany. And I noticed this one, for example. No, actually, I'm making a mistake. This is the one we sent my father. And he brought them back with him and we made copies. You can't see it very well. But if you could, you could see that this is a stamp, a Yugoslav stamp of the King. 

And we had a lot of things that we shouldn't have had. Yes. When we escaped through that evening, we escaped from Yugoslavia and-- by train. We left Yugoslavia by train the next morning. We stayed at a friend's house. And we traveled by train through-- eventually, we went to Albania. And from Albania we took a truck. I know there was at some point, we had a cab that we had rented. We had very little money with us. But the rest of the money supposedly was waiting at the other end. However, the person who was supposed to give it to us never did give it to us. 

INTERVIEWER: How was your mother managing with paying for transportation and food? 

SUBJECT: Well my uncle was-- eventually we became a group again. And there was some money that she had with us. But that was it. And when-- when we finally came to Albania to a certain-- to one of the cities in Albania, which, by the way, was occupied by the Italian army, we were thrown in jail-- into jail because, we were found out. I mean they realized that we were Jewish refugees from Yugoslavia. And they were going to send us back to Yugoslavia. 

INTERVIEWER: How did they find out? 

SUBJECT: I don't know. I never really went through the details. Except that I know that there were several other people on that same route. And maybe they became suspicious of people traveling without any possessions really and fleeing in such a hurry. And however, the Italian soldiers, and that officer really-- they were very human. They decided not to send us back. And what they did instead was send us to Dalmatia, which was part of Yugoslavia, but also occupied by the Italian army. 

And so, again we were imprisoned, put into prison. And had to await a transport which took us into Trieste, where we took a train and went in to Vitorrio Veneto, which was a place in the Veneto, which is the northern part of Italy. And this is the questura. The questura is the police station, and also city hall, of the little, little place. 

INTERVIEWER: Who had the camera? Who was taking pictures? 

SUBJECT: Oh, this? This picture is my husband and I went back finally last year. So we took some of these pictures. These pictures were taken in those days. I think the photographer took the picture so we could send it to my father. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where was he? 

SUBJECT: He was in Germany at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Where? 

SUBJECT: They were moving them around. He was a prisoner-- prisoner of war. 

INTERVIEWER: He was not in a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: No, he was not in a concentration camp. He was just a regular-- in a regular officers prison. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't know he was Jewish? 

SUBJECT: They-- his fellow officers didn't give him up. You know, really protected him and said that, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER: And this was the year 19-- 

SUBJECT: Well we escaped from Yugoslavia in '41. So, there abouts from '41 to '45, we didn't see my father. And so this was the little village was, I said, was very small. From this, Vittorio Veneto, which was a larger center, there were many other families in similar situation. And we were distributed throughout small cities and villages in northern Italy. And Cison de Valmarino was where we ended up with about five other families. And-- 

This is another picture of my sister and myself in those days. We-- our family tried to have a very normal life for us, under those circumstances. It was difficult. But, there was even a young man who was a teacher. And my sister and I and two other-- three other children, a little boy and two other girls had school every day in our kitchen. And it was a K-1, because my sister was younger. And we were first grade material already, we were seven-year-old children, three of us. And so we learned-- we learned a lot. 

INTERVIEWER: You were living where? 

SUBJECT: We were living in Cison de Valmarino. 

INTERVIEWER: But somebody found a house for you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We lived-- it wasn't a house. It was a room and use of a kitchen. It was this house here. And it was on top of a bar. This-- the owner-- the lady that owned the house owned a bar in this little town. 

INTERVIEWER: You were not-- you were pretending you were not Jewish? 

SUBJECT: No, we were now definitely Jewish. Openly Jewish. And the interesting thing is that once we were in Italy, we were protected by the government. We were interned into this little villages, assured of a place to live, given coupons for food, tessera and a certain allowance to live on by Mussolini's' government. 

And that was really amazing when you think of it. And my uncle after a while, since this was such a little village, the only industry in the village was filanda which was a silk factory. And they were little silkworms. They were then taking the cocoons and making into silk. And this is what's remained-- what has remained of this. Alongside the filanda there was the river where the women washed the clothes. And I remember that very much. 

INTERVIEWER: Did your mother work? 

SUBJECT: My mother did not work. And the only one that eventually was allowed to work, but was not really allowed to work was my uncle, who was a doctor. And he was the only doctor in several villages around. So people were very happy to have him. Practice medicine, and help the local pharmacist. And this was the street behind our house. 

And, just to show you, have an idea how it looks. This used to once be our garden, and a vegetable garden. And I remember that fondly because part of our curriculum, quote, unquote, in that first grade, I remember that one of my favorite things was the spring and summer season when we used to grow things. And we used to, each one of us, have a little place in this garden. And we used to grow a pea plant, which was so dear to us. 

INTERVIEWER: You were not fearful of being discovered? Of the Germans coming in? Of anything-- 

SUBJECT: Well, we were protected by the Italian government at that time. So, at that point, there was no fear. However, at some point, when Mussolini's government fell, even though we had established ourselves in this little town, and we were very well liked, and the count, who lived up in this castle, Conte Brandolini, offered to take us in and to hide us in one of his many places he owned. We decided that just wouldn't be safe for us to remain there. Wouldn't be safe for our friends to have us there. 

So we just left. We got some more false papers. And testifying that we were Catholic refugees from the Veneto. And we decided-- my uncle decided the best thing to do is to start going south towards the allies that are now pushing north. 

So, again, with very few resources, because we didn't get that money at the end of that threat that we were supposed to. We just took various means of transportation, starting out with the corriera, which is the bus. And then we took-- we took a ship for a while and a small boat. Went through Venice and down the Adriatic coast. Little by little, we made our way into the Marche, which is a-- well, if I had a map, I would tell you. Ancona would be the capital of the Marche. 

And we took finally this little train. And stopped at this station. Which doesn't look like a station now. But I wanted to show some of the holes that are American airplanes made at the end, you know, just before they finally liberated that part of Italy. However, we stopped there, at that station. And for whatever reason, I guess mainly was just plain being tired of running, decided to stay there and see whether we could stay, remain, in that little town. And indeed, first the station master came and talked to my family. 

And when they heard-- my uncle didn't tell them the whole story that he just told them very little. One thing he didn't tell them was that we were Jewish. However, they heard enough that-- I remember a lot of tears going from the eyes of Mrs. Bruti, which was the station master's wife. And they just took us up into the home. And she prepared the most wonderful meal we had in a long time. And we-- we stayed there. They put us off for a few days. We slept on mattresses. And my grandmother was given Mrs. Bruti's bedroom. And we stayed there for a few days. 

And then Mr. Bruti brought the priest of the town. And the doctor in the town to talk to my uncle, and to decide what to do next. And when they heard most of the story, I think the priest immediately guessed what we were. But he never really said it openly. They decided to find us a place to live, to give us clothing, food, and everything else. And we stayed in Amandola, which was the second place where we lived. 

The first place where we lived was this little house. It was very, very old and very small. And the center of the little house was a kitchen with a very smoky fireplace. And I remember that about that little place more than anything else. I remember going down those steps and getting the water, which there was no water in the apartment, and no cooking, no stove. My aunt and mother, whoever did the cooking, they did it in the fire place. 

Anyway, we lived in Amandola for about, I'd say, two years at least. And we made many, many friends. The people were just incredibly wonderful, warm. With all the horror of not being in touch with my father now, because we couldn't give ourselves away by writing to the last address where he was. 

So we still managed to, as children, I remember having some wonderful moments, a warm human little episodes. And I became, at that point, we went first, the first half of the year, we tried to learn Italian well enough to go to school. Naturally, we were telling everybody we were refugees-- Italian refugees from the north. So supposedly we were speaking perfect Italian dialect, Venetian dialect. My grandmother got away with that because, in our family, since we are Sephardic Jews, there was Spanish spoken, alongside with Serbian. So that if you know, there was Italian spoken with a Spanish lilt, that sounded enough like Venetian to get away with. 

However, in very little time, my sister and I forgot all the Yugoslav because there was no word-- not one word spoken in Serbian in Yugoslav in those days. And, in the next school year, we were able to enter the regular third grade for me, and second grade for my sister, and make it in the school. And, I guess this was the soccer field that we use to go to for amusement to watch the soccer games where our friends played and their big brothers. And that was one of my fond memories. 

INTERVIEWER: You had lost contact with your father. When you were finally reunited with him, where were you? 

SUBJECT: That was after the war. We were in a relocation-- in an UNRRA camp in the south of Italy, near Bari. 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you go there? 

SUBJECT: Camp. Because we had decided that we wanted to wait for my father to reappear. And that was the best place to wait. Plus, my uncle had felt that we would not go back to Yugoslavia. We had heard about the communist regime. And that we would not go back there unless we were sure that that's what we wanted to do. 

So, however, another little thing that happened. Well, of course, while I was in Amandola, I was going to church faithfully every day with my friends. This is one of the churches. And I became, quite honestly, a devout Catholic, I suppose. And my fondest wish in those days to undergo the ceremony of first communion. 

So, the priest, who was-- there were two priests actually that were become very dear friends of ours. And one of them, Don Quinto, that we went to visit last year when we were in Italy-- here's Don Quinto Roscioli. When we were in hiding up in the mountains in his place just before we were liberated, it became necessary for us to go up in the mountains to be safer. He said, look, I'm going to teach you everything there is to know about you know, all the catechism. However, I will not, under these circumstances, baptize you or go through the ceremony that you wish to undergo. 

But some day in the future, when the war is over, if you should still feel this way, come to me and I'll be the happiest man this earth to do this for you. And indeed, you know, that takes a very special person to say that. And all of these friends were just incredible people. They really risked their lives to save us, to hide us. Because the Germans were right in that little town the whole time. And all, you know there was, all anybody had to say was one word. And everybody was going to be killed. In fact, there was one atrocity that was committed. 

There was at some point, I guess, there were a lot of young men that was-- that were called to join the army, quote, unquote. And there were quite a few of them that just went into the hills and did not show up. This one young man was caught carrying a rusty pistol that obviously wasn't working. However, to make an example of him, the Germans caught him and brought him into the center, into in the piazza, into the square. And they tortured him right in front of the people in the town-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you there? 

SUBJECT: --for quite a while. I was in a building right overlooking the square. I, you know, wanted to look. I didn't dare to look. And I wanted to look. And that went on, and I think, I don't know what of this was what I recollect and what part of this is just what I was told. But this is the plaque that commemorates that killing. Finally, they dunk his head for quite a while in-- in one of those throws, throughs. How do you call them, where animals drank? 

INTERVIEWER: Troughs. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. And after they though that he was sufficiently tortured, then they shot him right there in the square. And the people were just beside themselves. But that was just as they were retreating. They were doing all sorts of horrendous things, even in Italy. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father must have also been protected much as you were. Because if they never found out in a POW camp in Germany that he was Jewish, his fellow soldiers must have been very careful with him. 

SUBJECT: They were very careful and very supportive and wonderful. They were some people that I guess that he knew from before the war. He was very well respected and loved in Belgrade. And really, it's-- it's incredible when you think that there is-- here's a group of people that were-- that could have maybe gotten an extra loaf of bread. They were that desperate that they would have wanted an extra loaf of bread. But they would not, you know, tell anyone about his background. Or if, I don't know how these things happen. But there is absolutely-- that's one thing that you see, along with the most inhumane and horrendous things that happened in this war, you also saw alongside, the most wonderful and human people that you would ever want to meet. 

INTERVIEWER: When your father rejoined you, he found you in the UNRRA camp? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did he tell you? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was really quite a thing. He appeared, just appeared. He did not know where to begin to look for us. And first of all, he was told that he had to go back to Yugoslavia. That was, you know, that was, I guess, the agreement between the allies and the Yugoslavs and the Russians. The various members of the allied group. 

So, that he actually decided to flee that place where he was after he was liberated in order to go to Italy and look for us, and not to go to Yugoslavia at that point. So that's what he did. He, I think, bought a car, a second hand car, and a gun. And took off. And when he looked for us in north of Italy, nobody knew where we were. Then he heard that there was a whole group of displaced persons down in the UNRRA camp near Bari. 

And that's where he, you know, he pushed down south. And he finally went to a place in Bari, in a central office looking for us. And there was my other uncle, his other brother, who had also escaped through to Italy and had finally been rejoined with us. And this other uncle, of course, took him right away to Santa Croce, where we were Cenote di Nardo. And that's-- all of a sudden, I saw my father walking up the steps. Actually, there was a woman that came before him and said, your father is coming. 

And it was such an emotional moment that my first response at age 12 and 1/2 or whatever I was was, you're lying. You horrible-- how can you make such-- how can you tell me such a lie? It's not possible. And I remember beating, you know, beating her with fists. Because I just couldn't stand to be disappointed, I guess. And-- and then I saw my father. An just was incredible. And then we had to break that slowly to my grandmother, who had a heart condition. 

So, I remember after he stayed with us for a little while, my aunt and my uncle went and told my grandmother that my father-- they just heard my father was alive. And that he might be able to come soon. So slowly, during perhaps a couple of hours, she was broken slowly into this whole, you know, news, accepting what was coming, the wonderful news of at least my father being still alive. 

INTERVIEWER: Yours is a most hopeful story. And I just thought in the last minute that we have on the tape you would just, I don't know, somehow put this hopeful and wonderful ending into some sort of perspective. 

SUBJECT: Some sort of perspective. 

INTERVIEWER: Amidst the tragedy that was all around you. 

SUBJECT: Well. I suppose the most incredible thing, the most beautiful thing was to see how people, under the worst kind of conditions, can find the strength to see good things in other people. And I think that's what the people that helped us, you know, in spite of their own needs, they found it necessary to-- and they were compelled by their own feelings and their own beliefs in humanity and their own strong religious beliefs to support other people in their lives. And I think the overwhelming message for me is that we can find a way of helping people in the world. And that you can never repay the same people perhaps of the good they did for you. 

But you can help other people. You can help the people coming from Viet Nam, and people coming from-- that are undergoing great tragedies in their lives now. I'm going to be fortunate enough to have four Vietnamese children in my program that I'm going to be working in next year, in bilingual nursery school. And I just hope that, somehow, the good in this world can perpetuate itself. And we can put behind those awful, inhumane things that happen that nobody can really understand. And should not dwell on. That's it. 

INTERVIEWER: Wish I had you when I did the film for school children. 