[LONG BEEP] SUBJECT: The accusation? 

INTERVIEWER: Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, just until they give you a roll cue. 

SUBJECT: Oh. 

CREW: So you're rolling. 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: I'm David Clement a physician in New Haven, Connecticut, and I've been asked to speak in connection with the concentration camps of World War II. I've done this only once before, a year ago, actually, and was inclined not to do that, but it does seem to me that those of us who were there have a responsibility to make sure that this experience in all its horror never be forgotten. Now, we owe a little debt to-- in that regard. Also, I'd just like to comment on what an extraordinary experience it was to have been in that setting as a physician, to really be able to help people. 

The background of this is that the war ended in Europe on May 8, 1945. This camp had fallen on May 1st, essentially maybe April 30th, and that, uh, I went into the Dachau concentration camp in Germany on the 10th, 48 hours after it fell. And obviously everyone was there. 

It was quarantined, among other things, for 4,000 cases of typhus fever. And I went in to set up a research ward of 60 beds in this camp with a colleague of mine, Dr. Andrew Yeomans from Cairo, who had been working there were the Typhus Commission. And we attempted to evaluate two agents-- now they look rather primitive-- which we felt were helpful, uh, to typhus fever. 

Uh, the Dachau camp was the first Nazi concentration camp. In the 10 years before the war, it had been a, uh, camp for Germany's worst criminals, but in 1933, the police commissioner of Munich, one Heinrich Himmler, announced that this, uh, would be a concentration camp, sort of a new word, at this place. 

And uh, older people, uh, in this audience would remember Himmler as a name that will live in infamy. He had uh, headed the SS troops, the Gestapo, and finally, the combined police system. He was a violent racist, and the camp was dedicated for the enemies of, uh, National Socialism. 

The total number of prisoners that went through Dachau and its satellite camps is variously estimated up to perhaps 250,000, and the number that died there and in the satellite camps is given as perhaps 40,000 to 50,000. It was a relatively small camp, and it was not regarded primarily as an extermination center. 

They had a small gas chamber there, uh, which I actually saw. The men entering that thought they were going into a delousing operation. They took all their clothes off, put them in a bin, and went into a large room studded with shower heads. The shower heads were dummies, and the door was closed. If they happened to notice, it was one of those doors with many latches around the side, and it was airtight, and this is where the, uh, cyanide gas was, uh, put in, and, uh, they were watched through a window until the last of them had died. 

Uh, the, uh, other point about, uh-- that I was going to mention is the crematorium was right on the other side. It was designed for extermination in a very efficient way. The blueprints of Dachau are very similar to those of Auschwitz and Buchenwald. This was no accident. This was planned from the highest level of the German command. 

Um, Dachau mirrored the uh, diverse elements that Hitler hated. It was not a Jewish camp, primarily. It was, uh, uh, for all kinds of offenders, and I think that's a very good lesson for those of us who are not Jewish to remember, that Hitler was prepared to do in every-- anyone who stood in his way. 

It had mainly political prisoners, some professional criminals, some antisocials. It had resistance fighters from other countries where they had been captured, and it had a number of Catholic, uh, Polish priests. One of these men was my interpreter. 

Had a few distinguished, uh, prisoners. Martin Niemuller, a Protestant, uh, preacher, who some people have heard in this country. Uh, the Austrian chancellor, French premier, and then a prominent Italian general, Garibaldi. Dachau was a training ground for men who went on to administer other camps and the notorious-- notorious Auschwitz camp was headed by a man who had his training here. But it had formerly, in World War I, been an explosives factory, and in the last century, it had been a lovely little, uh, Bavarian town and artists' colony. 

Various nationalities were there, particularly Poles and Russians and Hungarians. They had Germans and French, Italians, Lithuanians, and really no women. The reasons for imprisonment were sometimes rather minor. Uh, the particular ones that I heard myself were listening to an enemy broadcast, uh, helping print an underground newspaper, or failing to salute a Nazi officer. 

The camp conditions, uh, were really unspeakable and very difficult to describe as we found it in, uh, May of 1945. It had been built for a crowded 10,000 prisoners. They'd had as many as 50,000 there, and when we arrived, there were over 32,000 there. And actually, in the last day or two, as the Germans were losing the war, uh, uh, large, uh, train loads of dead and dying would arrive. 10,000 came in from Buchenwald. 

The men lay in uh, four-decker bunks, uh, up high, uh, up against a low ceiling. Uh, they were extremely crowded. They could not all be in the building at the same time, which made it very cruel in the winter. They often had to lie on their sides to get as many people in as possible. They lay on burlap-covered slats. 

They slept in shifts, as I have indicated. Uh, the conditions don't need to be dealt with in great detail, but you can imagine the cond-- uh, situation when men in their last day or two of life, losing consciousness and control of their sphincters, uh, the excreta dripping down, uh, below. The stench of Dachau is something I will never forget. In the six weeks I was there, I had difficulty eating. 

The ration at Dachau is, um, really non-existent. In the morning they had some coffee, an ersatz coffee, and at midday they had a very thin soup and uh, a quarter of a loaf of black bread. Later, uh, seven men to a black loaf. And in the evening, this thin soup. 

The diseases uh, uh, impressed me, being a physician. Of course, scabies was rampant. Scabies thrives on filth and failure to wash. Unfortunately, we've had some uh, in Connecticut in recent years. Uh, but they had a huge epidemic of scabies in the, uh-- in '41. Uh, the Germans' response to this was to reduce the ration. They felt that possibly the parasites-- well, it was a rationalization, of course-- uh, to starve the men further, to open the windows-- and these were unheated buildings, of course, so pneumonia, diarrhea took its toll. 

Typhoid fever broke out in December '42 to February '43. A large epidemic, and took an enormous toll. Typhoid, of course, is spread by contaminated food and water and has no relation to typhus. All the prisoners had been vaccinated against typhoid, interestingly enough. 

Um, there-- they could not vaccinate against typhus fever. Uh, the, uh, big-- they didn't have enough vaccine. Tuberculosis, of course, was the biggest killer. Tuberculosis is notorious wherever people are starving to death, as resistance is lowered. It's an opportunistic organism. 

Typhus fever, for which we were there-- 4,000 cases in the camp, as I said. It's spread by body lice. And, uh, the Germans had feared it from the very beginning. And they had tried to avoid it. They knew that it would spread to their SS troops guarding the camp and that they would share its toll. 

Uh, it did not, strangely enough, come until just the last free-- few months of the war. In December of '44 is when typhus broke out. And then, of course, it spread like wildfire. It peaked in April of '45, just before we arrived. 

Um, the Army program, the US Army program was very effective in controlling it. Number one was the DDT, uh, powder dusting once a week. Uh, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, and this is death to lice. It always hurt me in subsequent years to see the bumper stickers shooting down DDT, which I felt really helped save my life at Dachau. 

The prisoners there also got the Cox vaccine that we had, and we had an adequate supply. , Of course it did no good if they were already incubating the disease. And then strict quarantine was the third measure. They were kept out of circulation for 14 days after they'd been cleaned up. 

Our ward had 60 beds, and it was preferably early cases, before the rash. Uh, typhus fever runs about a 14-day fever, and a rash coming on the fourth or fifth day. 

Um, the problems of interpretation were great. We don't need to dwell on that. I'd have to occasionally take a history through two interpreters. Um, we were dealing with all sorts and conditions of men, as a religious phrase grow-- goes. And it was a microcosm of the world. It was an extraordinary experience. 

The treatment we have now seems very, uh, medieval. We gave para-aminobenzoic acid, and this today is what you'll find is the active ingredient of sunscreen, such as pre-sun. It hurts me again to find this is merely skin deep and only a cosmetic. And a second agent was a hyperimmune rabbit serum that we gave. 

We also gave-- did everything else we could for these people, including intravenous fluids. Um, it was-- it's a difficult thing to describe to you. It was indeed a privilege to be there as a-- as a physician. 

These men, uh, were obviously in negative nitrogen balance, obviously in negative caloric balance, and they were headed for certain death, and they could not possibly escape the knowledge that they were on their way to the grave. They were resigned, uh, to extinction. They were depressed, withdrawn, skin and bones, uh, filthy dirty. 

And then suddenly, their world turned around. Suddenly there was a chance of survival, uh, and, uh, with-- mainly because of food. Of course, it was only K-rations that-- in the beginning, which was very good that we didn't-- we couldn't flood them with a lot of food. 

The lines of communication had just been established. They would sit there with their mess kits scraping off little bit of liquid gravy kind of stuff, on some of the later rations came. And they suddenly realized that they were going to live-- not for just an hour, not for just a day, not for just a year, but always, as uh, one of your great men, Irving Berlin, once said. 

To be able to minister to them on this occasion was an unspeakable privilege, as I've said, to see the expressions on their faces and their excitement and their joy, and to see them startly-- start to weakly uh, eat, uh, or be fed. Many of them were unable to feed themselves. 

We could not save them all, of course. Many of them had gone uh, too far. But it um, it was a, uh, a heightening of the doctor-patient relationship that defies description. I think the movies have doctors saving their lives right and left, and in those days, particularly, that was not the case. Many more lives are saved today. 

These men identified so closely with us and confused us with their salvation that they sort of, I think, uh, seemed to uh, think of us as missionaries from Almighty God. It was unlike anything that would ever happen in a civilian experience. Uh, we still hear from a Belgian textile executive, now in his 80s, living in southern France, and from a young architect-- [LAUGHING] a young architect then-- in France. 

Well, in closing, then, I would really like to make the points once more that this thing really did happen in all its horror, uh, that it was no accident, that this was planned strategy from the German high command, and secondly, that it was uh, for a physician, an extraordinary experience to be there. If any of you are in Germany as tourists, I would urge you to uh, visit Dachau, a suburb of Munich, and there's a lovely memorial there, which says in a number of lang-- languages, "Never again." 

INTERVIEWER: Dr. Clement, that was an extraordinary, uh, factual account of what you did and what you saw. Perhaps, however, we could go back a bit and-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: --in an impressionistic way-- what you saw and what you felt the first moment you encountered Dachau. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. So, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you saw? The-- the first-- Can you relive again that first moment that you walked into Dachau and saw those-- whatever-- if you could call-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Perhaps we could go back even a little further to when you first were told, when you received your orders that you were going to go to Dachau. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you stationed then? You were-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: --already in Germany, you were in England, or-- 

SUBJECT: I was in France. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK, you were in France. And how did you feel when-- 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I could say-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: --you got that order? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I had some of that on this other tape. Colonel Snyder in Paris, putting us together. Um, it-- so you'd like, uh-- Do you want to ask me the question? You want to feel? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. The question is, when you first received orders to go to Dachau, where were you? What did you think it was? What was your reaction to going? And then what did you see? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What thoughts did you have as you-- and then as you were briefed about what to expect to find, et cetera, in Paris? 

SUBJECT: Oh, and what did I expect to find? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Before-- in your own mind, what you thought was going to happen to you. How you felt about that. 

SUBJECT: Mm-hm. All right. Shall I start on it? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes, go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Please. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Please. 

INTERVIEWER 2: When did you first find out about that you were-- when did you receive your orders that you were to go to Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Um-- the war ended on May 8th. That was VE Day, Victory in Europe Day. And as I recall it, I got my orders, uh, within 24 hours of that. It was possible to pull individuals out of, uh, units once the war was ended. And I was there over in Vittel, a little town in the eastern France, in the Vosges mountains, uh, when I received my orders from Colonel Snyder, uh, whom I had known at medical school, who was high up in the Typhus Commission in Paris. And, uh, he, uh, ordered a second, Dr. Yeomans, to come up from the typhus station in Cairo. 

And when I heard that I was going to Dachau, we had heard something of the German camps, and we'd heard the name Dachau, and we'd heard some of the horrors. Uh, my initial reaction was that I expected certainly to see terrible things, and uh, B, my feeling was that uh, well, here's a, a chance for possibly a physician, uh, to really help people who need help as few people have needed help. So my reaction was one of amazement. It was completely unexpected, and I knew that we were going to a tremendous trouble spot, and I was optimistic about being able to help. 

As to what my reaction was, uh, we drove down-- a driver in a car, and all my possessions, a couple of duffel bags-- we drove down through a victorious France, uh, with children waving the tricolor and joy everywhere, and we crossed the Rhine at Strasbourg, and it was like going from brilliant sunshine into blackness, uh, where all the shutters were closed, very few people on the streets, uh, people would see an American vehicle and look away. 

And getting to Dachau, um, was-- the buildings looked like-- uh, from a distance, just looked like army barracks of some sort. It was a training ground for the SS troops. And the SS troops were in the camp. But when we got inside and saw what was going on and the conditions, it was, uh, just, uh, beyond belief. It seemed to me, uh, the ultimate inhumanity of man to man. I just didn't dream-- particularly, having gone into medicine with a positive view of hoping to help uh, people, it just didn't seem possible that this could be going on, and in this century. 

INTERVIEWER 2: May I ask-- as you drove through the gate at Dachau, can you describe for us what you saw as you looked around? What lingers with you? What remains? 

SUBJECT: As we drove through the gates at Dachau, uh, actually, uh, the corpses had been removed. There were dead dogs who had been used to actually, to attack uh, prisoners. That was one of the more vicious ways of killing them, having them chained on boards and have dogs attack them. 

Um-- We, uh-- the place was a very filthy, dirty gray. It wasn't really until I got inside these buildings and saw the conditions, how this uh, men just stacked up and uh, dying in various phases of disintegration, that I realized what was going on. And it was, uh, just indescribable, and I was shocked beyond expression. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was the first thing you did, then? 

SUBJECT: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: In terms of trying to fulfill your mission. 

SUBJECT: Dr. Yeomans-- uh, Dr. Yeomans and I first walked through the camp, through some of these barracks, to uh, select patients that were uh, suitable for our research ward. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How did you do that? 

SUBJECT: And uh-- We did it by deciding whether or not they were early or late. We knew that there was nothing could be-- a man that had typhus 10 days was probably going to get better on his own or die. Uh, or patients who looked very hopeless, you know, had irreversible pathology for various other reasons. 

As I said, tuberculosis was the big killer, perhaps, at all these camps. Uh, we, uh, then would have to neglect them. It was an awesome responsibility. This happens quite frequently in medicine. When new discoveries come up, you have to decide who's going to get the lifesaving medicine. 

But we then selected our-- our first 60 patients by seeing quite a few barracks. Obviously, we didn't walk through the whole camp. But we tried to pick out the people whom we felt we could help. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did the former prisoners-- did the people there, who were there, come to you and-- and try to make some sort of plea to you, some sort of demand, obviously in a language that you couldn't understand? But what was your experience with that? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Well, they're-- just seeing the American uniform meant a great deal to them, and I think they realized that this camp had indeed been liberated by the American army. And uh, I don't know whether they noticed that I was wearing a caduceus, whether they noticed I was a doctor, but we have never been so appreciated or more warmly welcomed, obviously. 

INTERVIEWER 2: How many American forces were there with you, an estimate? How many came to-- 

SUBJECT: I don't really know? But that's certainly a variable on its own. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Was it a small number, or was it a large number of Americans? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- I would say, uh, it-- it-- it was rather a relatively small number, uh, as far as we saw them. We were terribly busy, of course. We had a-- just saw a small area of the camp, and very quickly the International Red Cross was there. And once patients had been screened and were declared uh, no longer infectious-- or at least suitable for transport-- they would be taken off and flown to their countries and hospitalized further, if that seemed indicated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What sort of staff did you and Dr. Yeomans have as you were trying to work with these prisoners? 

SUBJECT: Well, we-- we had our enlisted men who were medically trained and who were really very able to work to-- in hospitals. They were not from our hospital, not from mine or his in Cairo, but came in with the troops. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of the things that Newton Schenk told me about in terms of your experiences-- uh-- was that you had a special perception as a result of this exposure to what hunger, uh, what deprivation of food does to people. And I thought perhaps you could talk about-- 

SUBJECT: Yes, I had really never given much thought to hunger until I saw it in its terminal state and uh, realized what the deprivation of food could mean to people. Uh-- it was, uh-- when we eventually got C-rations, uh, it was possible to see these men sit there-- this-- this would have a little gravy kind of stuff, and they would get the spoon going down until all the lines were gone on the mess kit, you know, and get the last drop, and uh, any, uh-- just eat anything, uh, that was at all suitable. Obviously, the hunger drive is a very primitive and a very powerful one, and this I had never really given much thought to. But this was the ultimate example. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of the things that had been pointed out by Mr. Schenk was that, uh, he was also deprived as a prisoner of war and found that he was unable to think of anything but food. We hear the, um, suggestion that these people in these camps should have resisted more, and I wonder what your assessment of the possibility of resistance is under such deprived conditions. 

SUBJECT: Yes, absolutely. I agree that-- would agree with that 100%. I mean, they just become completely demoralized, and I'm sure it may well have an organic basis. I mean that they-- their neurons, with which they think and resist and hope, uh, begin to lack, uh, nitrogen, glucose, amino acids, the various things, and I think that this, uh, complete demoralization, this giving up, this failure to try, this failure to resist, is a consequence of extreme hunger. 

Yes, Newt Schenk was a patient of mine. He wa-- he came out of the Battle of the Bulge and uh-- to us in Vitell over in eastern France, and uh, he was skin and bones. And I had never met him before, of course. Eventually I became his pediatrician in New Haven some years later. 

Uh, but uh, it was fun for me being in a general hospital. I could take pictures and develop these negatives in our X-ray department and make little prints, and I sent them to some of these families, who, uh-- I think it was probably a good thing. It was shocking for them to see their loved ones in such terrible shape, but at least they knew they were out the other side and uh, alive. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You mentioned that there were a couple of people-- a businessman, a Belgian businessman and an architect-- who corresponded with you since that time. Did you have an opportunity to become more friendly, more knowledgeable of them at that time, or was this just that they decided to continue to contact you? 

SUBJECT: Well, in the last days of their convalescence, I guess we had a chance to talk a little bit about their future. And an interest-- interesting thing about the Belgian textile executive is this extraordinary loyalty he has to us. And we've gotten to, uh, France-- and even to Belgium once-- a number of times in the years since, and uh, he has made every effort to come to wherever we were. And one time there was a general strike in Belgium, and he practically had to hitchhike across the country, but he got to France to see us. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What would-- do you remember when you were treating him in his convalescence? Did he stand out in your mind then as somebody who was different than perhaps some of the other survivors? Or-- 

SUBJECT: Well, he could speak English, which helped so much. I speak some French. The Hungarians presented the biggest problem, and we needed two interpreters for them. I had this Polish priest as my interpreter. But I think that helped a bit, you know. And I could-- And he was, uh, well educated and, uh, could communicate his feelings, but we uh, we certainly had a tremendous appreciation from all kinds of people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember any of the things that he told you about his experience back then? It's-- it's a long time back. 

SUBJECT: You mean the at the camp-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Or about, as well, at the time of his arrest? He was-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: When-- 

SUBJECT: He was involved, I think, in the, uh, production of some underground paper in, uh, in Belgium. I believe that was it. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he give you any insight into what his life had been like at Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Well, yes. He described this horrendous experience of filth and starvation and hunger. Incidentally, he was not Jewish. He was a banker in-- in, uh, Verviers, a city in Belgium. And, uh, he-- yes, I think he probably-- that kind of a patient would make it very clear to us about the way they had been mistreated. 

They, uh-- I might mention that there were misguided, pseudo-scientific medical experiments carried out at Dachau and perhaps in other camps. The, uh-- couple of them I remember distinctly. One was submerging a man to varying degrees in a big tank of ice water to varying lengths of time. And they found that when the back of the skull-- uh, the hindbrain, the cerebellar area-- became chilled, that often that was completely irreversible. 

And, uh, similarly, they gave malaria, of course, to prisoners. Uh-- And also they did-- created soft tissue infections, staphylococcal infections. And uh-- in those days, we uh-- you know, weren't very effective, oftentimes, in curing staphylococcal infections. They've-- They've-- 

Still, you may hear of staph infections around a hospital. It doesn't refer to the doctors. It's S-T-A-P-H. And uh-- they often-- these patients often died. I remember going over to the infirmary one day, and uh-- they-- the doctor that had taken over said that the uh-- or-- well, an orderly or somebody who had been there during the whole thing-- said that when prisoners in the hospital developed-- got to a state where they were probably not going to be able-- capable of productive work again, their charts would be marked with a big capital I, injection, and then they would be given I think intravenous phenol, carbolic acid, within 24 hours, and that would be the end of that. They just didn't want to waste time unless somebody is going to be able to work. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This experimentation you refer to-- um-- As a physician, you must have understood what the German authorities were trying to find out through this experimentation. Can you describe some of these experiments and what you-- what you understood their goal was? 

SUBJECT: I think their goal was really to increase the mortality at the camp. And I think they were poorly conceived. And it was-- if they were going to really do them, it would have been a real chance to learn a lot more than they did. It's my understanding not much ever came of these things, and uh, a great many of the experiments ended in the death of the patient. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But this business of submerging people in ice water-- what were they trying to find? 

SUBJECT: Well, that was supposedly done for the Luftwaffe, who might have their pilots landing in the sea, you know, in the North Sea or something like that. It might be helpful to-- theoretically-- know what to do, keep your head above water, or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We had-- one survivor mentioned a incident of undergoing surgery without anesthetic, and it appeared that it was some sort of a substernal incision. He didn't really know what they'd done to him. It was hard to tell, from a medical perspective, what was being done. Perhaps they were trying to reach the thymus gland or something like that. I just wondered if you had heard any reports or accounts of surgical experiments. 

SUBJECT: Yes, I-- I believe there were. Yes. I didn't mention that, but that's true. Yes, because at the um, at the uh, camp hospital in Dachau, they mentioned uh, surgical, experimental things, doing them on-- yeah, they would train-- well, I remember specifically appendectomies, for instance, training people just to do an appendectomy, that kind of thing. Uh, with, of course, not the consent of the patient. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean the person did not have an appendectomy, they just removed it? 

SUBJECT: Uh, well, appendectomy means remove it. Yes, they would have the appendectomy. They'd have the appendix removed, but it would be, um-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: It wasn't for disease. 

SUBJECT: --by unqualified people, and there-- yeah, the patient was not-- didn't have appendicitis. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-- anesthesia. Do you know if any anesthesias were used? 

SUBJECT: Uh, no, I can't comment on that. Don't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you know if they were looking for trauma? Or were they trying to-- I don't understand what-- perhaps you do-- what it is they were trying to determine by doing this unnecessary surgery. 

SUBJECT: Well, I think they-- in the appendectomy, and since maybe they were trying to train young paramedical people-- or maybe even doctors, I don't know. But some of these uh, deliberate infections of soft tissue, where it was well known that the patient we might-- they might not have been able to save the patient, you know. Many staphylococcal infections are resistant to penicillin. I mean, obviously, that is uh-- sort of an attempt to get rid of more people, it would seem. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You-- You describe something that I find very interesting in terms of the-- or perhaps it was on the audiotape-- in terms of the actual, physical building setup of Dachau. You indicated that you thought it was a permanent structure and that the Germans, the Nazis, had plans for other populations beyond the Jewish populations, and that that became evident to you by certain circumstances. Perhaps you could tell us. 

SUBJECT: Yes, well, the camp-- of course, the camp had existed 10 years before, from '23 to '33, and then-- uh, for bad criminals. And it was at that time that it became a concentration camp for the enemies of National Socialism. And then finding, of course, many people who were not Jewish, as I tried to indicate why this really sort of mirrored the makeup of all kinds of people who were trying to oppose National Socialism. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you surprised by that, to find priests, for interest-- for instance, in-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, I was. Yeah, very much. Yeah, I think it's a good reminder that Hitler and his gang, uh, were not a purely, not just simply anti-Semitic, that they were out to conquer the world, and that whoever of whatever faith or nationality stood in their way, they would have to go. A real message there, I think-- and Dachau mirrors that better than the all-Jewish camps. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One thing I did see in Dachau was that the section for the priests-- if you-- if it was that way then-- was separate and was toward the back of the camp in sort of a separate section. I wonder if you saw that, or if you knew that. 

SUBJECT: I can't comment, no. I met my man, [INAUDIBLE], every morning, and we went to work. I-- I didn't see where he was staying. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hm. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did he tell you about his experiences there? Do you remember about his experiences as a priest? 

SUBJECT: Well, not specifically, no. And he was, uh-- I don't think he'd been there very long, you know. You could, uh, tell pretty well by-- how long they'd been there by their state of nutrition, except possibly some collaborators who might have gotten some extra calories somewhere. And no, I don't recall anything very specific about his days there. I hope you-- well, you have talked with actual prisoners who have survived. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yes. By and large, the prisoners are vague on what was really going on. Uh-- You would be better qualified to explain that than I. Could you? 

SUBJECT: Yes, well, our J2 people, our uh, information service, as I understood it as we left Dachau, were pretty well convinced that not every-- not-- not-- not everyone in the little town there was really aware of what was going on in that camp-- that obviously, nobody ever returned from that camp in terms of the prisoners. It was known that on, I think it was Wednesday night, they often marched off a large contingent, and they never returned. They-- as I understand it, they may have had them dig a large pit, and then shot them and put them in there. 

I think that they-- you could say, well, how could you ever keep a secret of that sort? And I don't know. But it certainly, uh-- it-- this is possible, I think, that they didn't really under-- they-- nearby people didn't know. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, you opened up something I'd like to question you. Having seen Dachau, and seeing the road that runs by and the proximity to the town and the townspeople, if you ask them, where's that gedenkstatte or whatever-- knew where it was. How do you think it was possible that the townspeople could have seen these walls with the barbed wire on top and not questioned what was going on inside? 

SUBJECT: Well, it would look like any prison camp, you know. Prisoners of war are kept in behind a fence. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Screaming? Was-- was there noise, would you think-- screaming, moaning? Sounds that would have given a different impression than a prisoner of war camp? 

SUBJECT: Uh-- well, I-- I don't know. Yeah, it's quite possible. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said, doctor, that you were there about six weeks? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What sort of sense did you have in terms of your dealing with the typhus patients of the success of the methods that you were using? 

SUBJECT: Well, we were able to shorten the fever a bit and felt that we were getting somewhere. Of course, nowadays there are any number of drugs that are effective against the Rickettsial cell organisms that cause typhus fever. It may-- it was, uh, it was not a clean cut thing. It was not like giving penicillin to a streptococcal infection, you know? Uh, and we were doing other things too, as I said. We were obviously helping with their nutrition. We were giving intravenouses to the dehydrated. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now you were working approximately 10, 12 hours a day? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Where were you billeted? Were you billeted at Dachau, or-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yeah. We were billeted uh, in there. I suppose they'd been, uh, SS officers' quarters or something at the camp. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What sort of facilities did they have for you to live in then? What the officers-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, well, very simple, but perfectly, uh, adequate. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What did you do with your s-- free time, the time when you weren't working? 

SUBJECT: Well, I can't really remember any, um, uh, free time. The early days, of course. Um, uh, toward the end of our stay, uh, at, uh, Dachau, uh, we, uh, did get away on a Sunday, and, uh, went down to the, uh, castle, the Mad King of Bavaria, Neuschwanstein where I had ran into a man named, uh, Roma, I believe, who was, um, uh, he eventually became head of the Metropolitan Museum. 

And they had a lot of art, uh, secreted in that castle, down in its caves. And they were bringing it out. Uh, there was a whole, um, art monument section of the army, you know, that, uh, it was responsible for, uh, looking after art treasures that the Nazis had hidden various places. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have an opportunity while you were in Germany to speak to any of the German nationals who were not prisoners? 

SUBJECT: No. Did not. 

INTERVIEWER 2: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Um, I asked you about, uh, what went on in the camp. In other words, the prisoners say they had to work. What kind of work do you know that they did? And what would they have been capable of? 

SUBJECT: Uh, they were-- there was a, uh, a uniform factory. They were making uniforms, I believe, for the SS troops. That was one thing. And then they had to work details or they would, um, be, uh, taken out. And I don't know exactly what it was. I can't tell you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The-- one of the things that the survivors speak of so frequently and in such graphic detail was the appells, the roll calls. Having been in Dachau in November when it is bitter cold, I wondered about your assessment physic-- physiologically of these people in the condition that you found them to be able to withstand being counted hours and hours outside. 

SUBJECT: Yes, I think that, uh, undoubtedly accelerated the death of many. And also the fact they couldn't all really be in those buildings. Toward the end, they couldn't all get in. They sort of had to take turns being inside. And, uh, yes, if you were there in November, well, you know that it gets, uh, cold, and then there's a little snow around. And, uh, um, there, uh, the prisoners had obviously greatly, uh, lessened, uh, resistance to infection as they were dying and, uh, were very susceptible, particularly to pneumonia. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I've never heard this before, Dr. Clement, and this is, uh, one of the unique things of our project, the statements like you just make, uh, or reveal to us that they took turns to be in the barracks? 

SUBJECT: This is what I understood, yeah. Well, they were terribly overcrowded, you know. It was, uh, at least three or four-fold what they had, uh, been designed for. And they had been designed for very crowded living, just, uh, body to body. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How many people would you say that you saw in one barrack? What were-- what did you see in terms of crowded conditions? 

SUBJECT: Well, uh, of course we got there at-- 10 days after the camp had fallen, uh, eight days after the war ended. And, uh, they were still very crowded in these bunks. Um, and a lot of them, of course, were-- pretty much had to be fed there. They were really a lot of them, just too weak to walk. Uh, by that time, uh, some of the worst, uh, cases, uh, probably had been weeded out. But crowding and filth, of course, remained a tremendous problem. 

I spent, uh-- once we'd done that quick walk-through and selected our patients, well, I spent, uh, all my time really in this research ward we had set up, a 60-bed ward. And, uh, but I certainly had a great sense of the filth and crowding and-- and just inadequate, uh, air for everybody. And of course, you can imagine the sten-- stench of those barracks. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Had most of the people been moved to other kinds of facilities by the time you were leaving in six weeks? Or were they still in Dachau? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Uh, the-- the International Red Cross ambulances were there in droves, you know, toward the end, and taking people out. And so that, uh-- yeah, it had been greatly decompressed. 

And then in, uh, the second week of, uh, July, um, I flew to Paris, which was a, uh, culture shock in reverse, uh, really, but going from this, uh, stench hole, this blackness into a victorious paradise when no Frenchman could do enough for any American in uniform. They realized they had been saved by our country, and, uh, hard to believe there really was such a time. That was it. And then Le Quatorze Juillet, the, uh, 14th of July, their 4th of July with fireworks in the skies were extraordinary. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of the surprising things that you've just said was, um, your reference, your repeated reference to the filth and the stench. I was under the impression that the German military was very, um, assiduous in its determination to keep a standard of cleanliness so that they wouldn't catch it-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. They-- I mentioned that in connection with typhus fever. They were very eager to, uh, as I understood it, to avoid, um, uh, louse and-- and, uh, lice, you know, coming in. And the troops, uh, re-- the prisoners, um, uh, by December of '44, which was just four months before it was all over, um, uh, got into a big epidemic, and then it just spread like wildfire. But, uh, there was no way toward the end of the war where there's tremendous overcrowding that they could, uh, have any kind of hygiene. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Were you concerned about your personal safety in terms of contracting disease? 

SUBJECT: Yes. I really, uh, uh-- we knew that DDT was very effective, and we had at least a weekly dusting, uh, with it. And then we'd had the Cox vaccine, the typhus vaccine. The Germans didn't have, uh, they-- they were using a different kind. They had to give, uh, enemas to fleas, uh, with rickettsial organisms. And that was rather time-consuming. And then kill the fleas, and then make a vaccine out of killed rickettsia. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did any of the American personnel contract any of the diseases? 

SUBJECT: Not that I'm aware of. I'm not aware of. I think, uh, the US Army had a pretty good record on typhus. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The crowding, why was there more crowding toward the end than previously? Did-- did you find out? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was because as the lines were falling back, uh, tr-- prisoners were transferred from other camps. And, uh, to-- in the closing days, the, uh, Dachau record shows that 10,000 came in from Buchenwald. 

Uh, I wasn't aware of this, but I've read it since. Well, you know, this is tremendous. And these-- they came in open freight cars, you know. And obviously, many were dead on arrival. There are all kinds of pictures of these cars. And, uh, about that-- toward the end, uh, the, uh, population of the camp had skyrocket, I think especially for that reason. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the camp in terms of its relative size? I think it's difficult for people to understand what-- what these places, um, were like. 

SUBJECT: Well, there's, uh, two rows of barracks, you know. Uh, and, uh, it was built for 10,000 people, ending up with maybe as many as 50,000, uh, at one time. And when we were there, it was over 32,000. 

Uh, and, uh, they had a certain amount of space around them. Uh, and, uh, then there, uh, were administration buildings, a hospital building, this, uh, appell plots where they, uh, reported, uh, for, uh, roll call, that sort of thing. There were a few little areas for sort of parade ground kind of thing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were latrine conditions? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think they were really impossible. And of course, the sad thing is that so many of the terminal men never could get there. And it was just overcrowding of every kind of a facility. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mm-hmm. There were no women at Dachau? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Even at the end? 

SUBJECT: Well, now, one of the books, I said there were relatively few. And I wasn't aware of there-- any being there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I mean, Dachau was reserved for a male pop-- population of prisoners? 

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE] there was this possible exception. I don't know. All our, uh, the people we dealt with were, uh, all-- all males. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You had mentioned that you saw the-- the bodies, the corpses of the dead dogs that were used to attack the prisoners. Did you see the boards to which the prisoners were chained when the dogs were-- 

SUBJECT: Didn't see them, no. Just heard about this. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you see any signs of torture contrivances? Gallows, whatever? 

SUBJECT: Um, no, I did not. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The-- the dogs, why were they dead? 

SUBJECT: Well, they had been shot by the Americans. Those were one of the first things that the Americans did was shoot the dogs. They were especially Doberman Pinschers, I think, I think. And, uh, some, uh, German shepherd. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh-huh. Uh-- 

SUBJECT: They had been trained in this. Sort of an attack dog. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Sure. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You made the statement, and I wondered if you would elaborate on it. You made the statement that the Nazi plan, the Hitlerian plan, was to get rid of all enemies of his regime. And I was wondering if you could comment about what that implied to you, how it was evident to you, just to expand on that theme a bit. 

SUBJECT: Well, I-- I mentioned that in connection with the plan of this camp and the-- the blueprints of, uh, the, uh, gas chamber and the crematorium were, uh, struck off from a, uh, a common plan, you know. It was a very efficient, uh, assembly line. You left your, uh, clothes for delousing. There were some bins on the right. Then you faced this big door and went into this gas chamber. And then on the far side, another door right into the crematorium. Um, and, uh, I think that was, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember when you walked into that facility for the first time? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes, I do. And, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What was your impression as you were walking-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I was, uh-- well, I just, uh-- of course, I felt that it was obviously very cleverly contrived. I think these, uh, men probably thought they were going through a delousing operation. There were-- these bins were still full of, uh, uniforms there at the right. 

And, uh, then this did indeed look like a shower room. These were all dummy shower heads on the ceiling, as it turned out. And this door was indeed, uh, air tight with those locks around the periphery. And I just, uh, found it appalling. I just-- unbelievable that, you know-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: And you walked from the shower room back-- 

SUBJECT: Yes and then there were rear windows where the SS guards could, uh, look in. And after there was no more movement, they, uh, opened the door. Well, they blew away, you know, just shot air in, and all this gas went out through this, uh, chimney. Uh, pictures I've seen of other crematoria from the other camps were, re-- really very similar. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But when you walked into the crematoria where the ovens were, do you remember that? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I do. And there were some big hooks up on the side of these, uh, furnaces. And we were told that, uh, for some reason or other, the children, uh, sometimes, uh, were, uh, the last to die, and, uh, that these were called garroting hooks. And if they got some people out that still had some movement or a heart beating, they were hooked on to this thing and, uh, bled from the neck. 

There was still somebody stacked, uh, around the, uh, crematorium. And they got behind in their burning. There was no way. They ran out of fuel and there were too many dying. And, uh, uh, well, I'm sure you perhaps have seen pictures from, well, Life magazine at-- of the time. 

I felt terribly distressed when I came back, uh, to Buffalo, my hometown, and ran into a very bright, able man who had been involved in making marine engines. And I didn't resent the fact at all that he stayed in Buffalo. I'm sure he was making a bigger contribution doing that, uh, than, uh, lots of us, uh, were. 

But he somehow had the notion that this didn't happen. And he said to me, you know, I think the Americans would have done the same thing if they'd been losing the war. I think this is mostly propaganda. 

I met him at lunch. My wife and I were having our wedding anniversary October 7. And I just put down my fork. And, uh, I felt then, uh, certainly we have an obligation to make sure that everyone clearly understands the horror of what went on at these camps, and that it never be forgot. Neither of us could enjoy that luncheon, obviously. 

INTERVIEWER 1: The, um-- you-- you mentioned the efficiency, uh, of the killings. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I have heard that, the, uh, plan was to utilize the bodies for various purposes. Gold, the.., whatever. The-- the minerals of the body to be used for-- I-- I-- I wondered if you saw this or you heard about this, or there were evidences of this. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, I heard about it, you know? Next, they made lampshades out of human skin, and that sort of thing. And then certainly, the fillings, I believe, were saved. Uh, that was all beyond me. I-- I didn't have any first-hand witness of it. I guess, uh, it must have happened from the many witnesses who have mentioned it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you-- have you dealt beside that gentleman at lunch, the marine shipbuilder? Uh, that's redundant. But did-- did you-- have you met other people who-- who doubt that it really happened? 

SUBJECT: Uh, I, uh, don't really believe I have. No, I, uh, this was right after the war, which really shocked me. This was October '45. Very bright, able person who questioned. Um, now I think most people, I-- I-- of course, it doesn't come up. Most people don't know that I was at Dachau, and that's just great with me. I'd, uh, just rather forget the whole thing. 

Um, but uh, I as-- if it ever came up in a conversation, the camps or the war or something, well, I, uh-- I, uh, in general, I think people, uh, that I've met have believed that it happened and believed that it was terrible. And, uh, this is why I'm here today to make sure that the coming people, uh, realize that it happened. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But you said something that is-- that we've heard over and over again, that you would rather forget the whole thing. You're here because you know it can't be and must not be forgotten. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But what about that part of you that would rather forget the whole thing? 

SUBJECT: Yes, well, it was so, uh, completely, uh, revolting and distasteful, and obviously counter to my reasons for becoming a physician. I went into pediatrics because I was with the founder that had a facility with children. I've been coaching swimming this summer. And-- and the notion of helping people. And this just was obviously the opposite end of the spectrum of human relations. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you think that experience has affected you since then in any way? 

SUBJECT: Well, it, uh, might have helped me, uh, in the area of compassion and understanding, uh, suffering. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you have any conjecture-- you mentioned that this gentleman in Buffalo said the Americans would have done the same thing. Do you have any thoughts about why you think it would be unlikely that Americans or other people might have done this same thing? 

SUBJECT: Well, because I happen to think that we have the greatest system on Earth, uh, and, uh, and I wish young people would realize that. Uh, seems to me that in this country, uh, we have a system whereby, uh, competence in general and from the humblest, uh, sources is more likely to filter to the top of our society, uh, than any other system in the world. 

We've recently, uh, dismantled a president. Well, it seems to me that generally calls for blood in the streets. Uh, and, uh, blood in the streets happens all the time around the world with much less provocation than that. Uh, we do, uh, have, uh, some, uh, people failing to perform in high places. But in general, I think people are expected to perform. And we have, uh, mechanisms in our country for correcting wrongs, and we have a conscience. 

Uh, these, uh, Nazis, of course, long before they were losing the war, this was their policy to exterminate people who disagreed. This is a monolithic state, and no free voice can be heard. And I think, uh, we-- we're terribly handicapped, I think, by our free speech in many ways. Uh, we have-- before we can reach a conclusion, everybody has to say something. 

Uh, but in general, I've had the feeling, uh, just working around hospitals, for example, that, uh, committee decisions are often much better than the decision I went to the meeting with. That there's an input of people and a joint, uh, uh, discussion of the entire problem. And I really, uh, think, uh, that, uh, we should be reminded as Americans how privileged we are, how fortunate we are to have been born in this place. 

All you need to do is look at the-- well, today's headlines. I don't know. We're taking 5,000 in from Cuba today. Uh, people, uh, crossing the Berlin Wall are willing to risk their lives to, uh, get out of these, uh, monolithic states. And we are so, uh, privileged to be here. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you have any thoughts on how so many of the German nationals got swept up by Hitler and his gang, as you called them-- 

SUBJECT: How many? 

INTERVIEWER 2: No. How so many people got swept up in this thing. 

SUBJECT: Ah, well, I don't know. I gather he was a very, uh, persuasive, uh, propagandist. And I guess, uh, when Jesse Owens died last week, uh, fortunately they showed quite a bit of videotape from, uh, the 1936 Olympics. And I was thrilled to have our daughter see that. 

Um, the, uh, the propaganda, there's thousands of-- thousands of people in the stadium with the heil Hitler. Just this spell and this unemployed, uh, painter. That-- it's just extraordinary what a-- what a wreck he has in terms of the academic ladder, and how he just had them spellbound. Now I'm not really equipped to comment on that. I think that's political science, maybe. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, a last question, because I know that time is-- is precious to you. I just wanted to go back for just one brief moment on the condition from a physician's perspective, the condition that, uh, is inflicted on people as a result of not being fed. Hunger. 

SUBJECT: Hunger? Well, uh, you want to-- me to talk some more that the consequences of hunger. Yeah. Well, I think, uh, it's very difficult to describe. And of course, none of us have ever been that hungry. Obviously, the entire physiology of the body is affected by hunger. 

Acidosis, as we know, is an early consequence of, uh, hunger. Acetone and abnormal chemicals start to accumulate in the body. And they certainly can't think straight or, uh, walk straight or, uh, perform. 

In addition, these people had that awful, uh, knowledge that, uh, their hunger would never be reversed. Uh, I think people who were deprived of food when they were captured temporarily as prisoners of war or something assume they're going to live. 

Uh, this was, uh, a very special case where these men were being done to death by fellow men, and with no uncertainty. They, uh-- it was perfectly apparent, just looking around them that this was a one-way trip, and that they were, uh, destined to inevitable death. And, uh, that was, uh, our, uh, great, uh, privil-- privilege to share in the reversal. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you. OK. Dr. Clement uh, this was a very unusual session. We do have a-- 

[AUDIO OUT] 

