INTERVIEWER 1: --involved with them. 

SUBJECT: How, how the what? 

INTERVIEWER 1: How Jew-- how people in the ghetto thought of you. 

SUBJECT: Of [INAUDIBLE] yeah. Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You can go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 3: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] 

SUBJECT: Yeah, [NON-ENGLISH]. The, the, the, the set up in the ghetto was such that it was it was, by starving people, giving someone else a little extra food, they were setting Jew against Jew. Eh, they formed a government of, of Jews, and the head of the government was-- they called him-- his name was Rumkowksi He happened to be a a-- before the war, as I, as I was told, I never knew of him. 

He was head of a old age home. He was an old, senile person who didn't know the difference that what's wrong and right, but he looked very distinguished. He had a white head of hair, and white beard if I think, and this impressed the Germans very much, and they said, you're going to be the head of all the Jews here. 

Now, no, no, eh, qualifications or no special education. The man was absolutely-- he was just a puppet, naturally. And then he formed a organization of policemen. There was a police state within, within the ghetto, and it was set up in such a manner that, that the it was all to the point where, if you did something wrong, first you had to answer to your own people. There were just a few, selected few, who were in charge, naturally, and then you were turned over to the Gestapo. 

To go on eh everyday life in the ghetto, it would be-- I probably could stay here for, for 24 hours and about little incidents, what's, what was happening. But to get the life was-- the only-- eh, with all the hungry-- I was saying, all the hunger, and all the, the, the,the, the, uh, the, uh, you know uh stealing because stealing was the-- to survive, you had to steal. It got to a point, like I said, you had to steal from your own. You're not, you're not thinking you're doing wrong because you always made excuses, huh? Maybe I'm young, I, I, you know. It won't hurt my parents if I steal a piece of bread from them. 

And after a while, you know, it got, it got, even if it bothered you, and plenty of times I, I, would just say-- it, it wasn't to a point where I would hurt him. I don't mean I stole from them, that I, that I, you know, I made them starve, but it's-- I thought a slice of bread, or a slice of butter, would wouldn't hurt them, but it'd make me feel better. You asked me how it happened? Now I, I, I couldn't honestly say why I did it, though I loved my parents, and I, and I probably just the thought that if they ever go and disappear, or die, or be killed scared me. 

It almost, it almost, especially in, in a Jew-- in a Jewish home, for a young Jewish boy or girl, somebody, talking about death of their parents was like, like uh-- you never even mentioned it. You never could even think of it. Well, that's why, at any time when the Gestapo would come and pick people, I always hope nobody, I hoped nobody from my family would be taken away. And for some reason, until 1944, we escaped every Aussiedlung they called it. 

In fact, I was the first one to be taken away from my family. When I left the ghetto, the way it happened-- in fact, let me track back. In 1942 it was the worst time in the ghetto as far as Aussiedlung. At that time, we had a, a children's hospital eh across the street from us where we lived, and I seen young infants just born being thrown out of the windows on trucks. 

Now, at that time we knew that we had just-- it was just a matter of, of, of, of days, eh or days, or weeks where something is going to happen to us. Then, from then on, until 1942, we had somehow clear mind. Things were going. At then it was downhill already. Nothing somehow mattered. It was just day-to-day existence, and, uh, your f-- your family, your relations, your uncles, your aunts, started to disappear. 

And every morning you will find out this one was taken away, this one left the ghetto-- not left, I mean was taken away. This one died. And the family I've had there, I mean, it's-- it was a big family, a lot of uncles, and aunts, and cousins. It was getting smaller and smaller. 

In 1944-- I think was in March-- uh, there was a knock at our door. They came looking for me. Why? Uh, it was just picked it at random. I was still young, healthy to be taken to a labor camp, and that's the last time I seen my parents and my, my sisters. Uh, I was taken from the lager ghetto-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you say goodbye? 

SUBJECT: I didn't say goodbye. I said goodbye-- the only one I seen, just before I was leaving the, the uh-- because when I left the house, I wasn't pos-- I wasn't sure what's going to happen because I thought they had just taken me out maybe just to a local jail where I spent some time before because I was caught stealing some bread in the place I worked at. So that, I, that put me on a list of being selected to be sent away to labor camp. 

I, I left my, uh-- from a railroad station. We spent about a week at a, at a close guarded camp, and that's when I seen my father for the last time. He came to say goodbye to me, and I remember there was another fellow with me who was his friends, and he said to him, take care of my son. And that's the last time I seen my family. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What were-- what was his words to you? Um 

SUBJECT: Hm You know, when I left-- when I left-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Last words-- 

SUBJECT: --uh I don't-- you know, to describe the feelings-- I can see when things happen to me now I'm a normal human being, and I know, well, how do you feel about it. I don't remember this. There was just no feelings. I had no feelings, so it was just an empty-- it was just-- I couldn't describe it. And we'd just go on from day to day not even thinking what's going to happen, not knowing. 

Because at that time I was-- in 1944 I was 19 years old, so I wasn't a child anymore, but I wasn't sure. I didn't know. We heard rumors what's going on. We seen what happened here, and we always-- I must be like most of our other, all our Jews are, we are-- there's-- we always hope that nothing's going to happen to me. It's happening to somebody else, and somehow we going to survive. And I probably lived with that hope when-- wherever I went or where I was taken. I never thought of death. 

That's something that I was scared occasionally. I was scared when I was taken to work in the ghetto when they caught me on the streets, or they were beating me up, which happened plenty times, which is countless times I was surrounded by, by, Polish Nazi youths. Uh, I was scared but never thought of of of being killed or-- I've, I, until that time I, I did not know about any, uh, crematoriums. I didn't know about Auschwitz. I didn't know. 

We heard-- all we knew was about labor camps. We thought all the people who had left the ghetto went to labor camps. And that's the last time I, I seen my parents, my father, and I was taken with a group of about, I think it was, 700 people to, to the town of, uh, Czestochowa, which was about, uh, oh, I would say, about 60 or 70 miles away from Lodz. And there I was put to work in a building, a German factory, which belonged to the, uh, uh, the, what's called the Reinhart's Sonnenburg of Germany. They built, uh, uh, gears for the airplanes, and I spent-- 

There was a Polish, a Polish-- there was a, a camp run by, by Germans, naturally, in a Polish city. There was no Jews at that time left in Czestochowa, except in these huge stalags, and I spent about three to four months working on buildings where we had a, a pretty-- it's gotten a little better for us for that four months. We were fed a little better than we were at the ghetto. In fact, we were exposed-- we had a communication with the Polish people who helped us a little bit. 

And the only-- there was no letters or no news from home. The only letter-- I received one, which I still have as a postcard sent in German, written-- a very official card-- written by my sister that everything is fine. But I know at that time I think the ghetto was just being liquidated from the news I have now. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Did you go to a concentration camp? 

SUBJECT: Yeah, and at the end of 1940, uh, 4-- that was '44. As the Russians approached Poland, that was the, the Russian war when the, the Russian front was moving closer. Uh, the Germans evacuated the whole factory, naturally, with us, and we were put, all of us-- there was-- that group I was with was about 350. We were put on a cattle train and sent to Germany. Now that must have been probably the worst trip in my life, or the worst experience I've ever had. 

We spent seven days and seven nights in a cattle train. There was 80 people in one, in one, in one wagon, which is one, uh, uh, train, in one wagon, actually. But they didn't get us all to them. 

The doors were open, and there was a, a, a, uh, wire fence on both side of the door. There were three guards in the door. There was 35 of us on one side, and 35 on the other side. We had standing room only all the way through, for seven days and seven nights, with one or two meals through the whole time. 

We took out at least 10 guys dead in that seven days traveling. We stopped. We went from Czestochowa, Poland. The whole trip didn't take that long, but we were left on the railroad tracks, on the side tracks, for all days. They were just pushing us back and forth, and seven days later we arrived in Buchenwald. 

All we could see is from the little windows look out there, standing up, no how to relieve yourself. Everything had to be done right there on the top of one of each other. When we slept, we had to somehow squeeze in, standing up, laying down, or just leaning on top of each other. 

Now that's got to be-- to think of it, I don't-- it was a nightmare. When we got to Buchenwald, it was, it was the end of 1944. It was kind of cold, and it's the first time I, I seen a concentration camp. I didn't know what a concentration camp was. And at that time, I think things started to dawn on us already, what, what we doing, where we're going. 

And we didn't know-- and then when rumors start flying about, uh, crematoriums, ovens, gas ovens, we didn't know if they had that, uh, in Buchenwald or none. And we got out of the train. We were led through the gates where a big sign, arbeit macht frei, and I remember waiting in front of a barrack where they took us in. They took our clothes and gave us these striped uniforms. And from then on, we were in Buchenwald where conditions are-- the conditions in Buchenwald were not as bad as the ghetto. 

There was no food, but at least we were just-- we did go out to do some work. They were taking us out every day to do some ditch digging. They were cleaning up some ruins there from bombardments around Buchenwald, and I spent-- I spent about two months in Buchenwald itself. 

And then the same people who came from that factory in Czestochowa, that all of us, the 350 of us, whatever was left from that group, were taken into a small town by Buchenwald-- about it was called Sonnenburg-- where we were put to work in a factory, but the same factory which we were building in back Poland. We were put into a-- to work, working-- that was already-- that was called the Reinhart's Sonnenburg We worked at different, uh, jobs, uh, at, uh, polishing wheels, or, or, or all mechanical work. 

It was very interesting work. The only problem there was if we were well fed it would have been nice work, but, uh, the treatment was very, very bad then. We were, had, about 11 or 12 Nazi, uh, guards, which were not Germans, by the way. They were Hungarian Nazis. They weren't even Germans. They were our guards. 

Those were, they're called, the Volksdeutschen. You know, they had them in Poland. They had them in Hungary. These were Hungarians. That were just as bad, even worse, and that that was a very, very bad time in my life. 

That was-- there were quite a few deaths every day because of starvation, of beatings, and, uh, uh, the, uh, only hope we had then we started hearing rumors about the war being close to an end. That was-- that was already in 1945, the beginning 1945. But after five years, from '39 till then, we didn't believe any rumors because we heard rumors all along that war was only going to last for one day, two day, two days, uh, one months, two months, three months, a year, two years, and then it dragged on. 

So at that time there was just no, no, no hope, and, and we didn't even c-- not that you didn't care, but there was just a, ah, if it comes, it comes. Otherwise, we'll just-- we'll go on like this for the rest of our lives, just being, being, wear our unif-- our striped uniforms, be, uh, work for the Germans, and just keep on dying. 

Finally-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you believe? Could you think of, uh, the Western Allies, or someone who would keep on fighting? 

SUBJECT: Not a-- not a thing. We didn't believe. In fact, when you-- I hadn't-- I didn't see a paper, or a radio, didn't hear to, listen to, radio for I don't know how many years. I didn't even believe the United States or England existed anymore because when you, when you, see what's happening to you, and you're five years isolated, and see how things are getting worse, I did not-- I thought that nobody cares what happened to us. And I didn't believe that anybody gives a who, what is happened to the Jews in Europe because you didn't see any sign. 

And all those rumors were just for nothing until I met a-- in Buchenwald I got friendly with a few American flyers who happened to be in Buchenwald. And they, when I met them, they were half-starved. They were young f-- young fellows who were caught. They're paratroopers, and by-- they were not supposed to be in Buchenwald because you don't put the, uh, uh, uh, prisoners of war, but they happened to be there. 

I don't think the Germans cared a lot. And they, whatever the little they could tell me-- I didn't speak English at that time-- we understood who they were. And they were really-- they, they were starving by the day because they were brought in from probably two days before they were in America, and then they were caught, and they were left. 

They were put with gypsies in one barracks, and that's how we met them. So, uh, that was in Buchenwald. But then when we were taken to Sonnenburg in that, in that factory, we had, uh-- we worked there for about two months, and then were the worst, probably, period of our life started, what they called the march when the Russians-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you want to change? 

INTERVIEWER 3: Are you gonna change? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah Yeah, 

INTERVIEWER 2: About one, one minute, so-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So let's change it out now. 

INTERVIEWER 3: Oh. 

