INTERVIEWER: Tell us when you are ready. 

SUBJECT: OK. Now to-- in - I must say - 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] coffee down. 

SUBJECT: Oh. We're not permitted to drink coffee. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, but-- 

CREW: Just won't work with-- 

SUBJECT: Won't work with-- 

CREW: Drink your coffee before. 

INTERVIEWER: The camera was not able to catch it. 

SUBJECT: OK. In about, I think, 1942 or '43, there came the knowledge in that something went wrong. It came up first in rumors, not only about the war, but at this time-- I think it must've been 1942, '43-- that we learned first from, in underground sort of communication, about concentration camps. 

I know one of my uncles who was working in the oil refinery in Schwechat, he got workers in who had to do something in Mauthausen. And there, they reported to him and that what we have seen, we didn't like that or-- 

INTERVIEWER: What were the reports? 

SUBJECT: What there were reports-- I think that they were actually sent in there to-- to build the cremation places for the people. And of course, when they reported it to somebody on the outside, the people first could not believe it and said, it's-- it's possible that something like that would be designed or anything like that. 

INTERVIEWER: And that was 1942-- 

SUBJECT: '42. 

INTERVIEWER: --that the reports came about the cremation-- crematorium. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, the underground reports, you know? I think the areas were very sealed so that you couldn't really find out what was going on for me, OK? Maybe somebody who was living in the vicinity would have another sort of idea. But I personally, and my mother, we heard-- learned about it in 1942, '43. At the same time also-- I think it was 19-- fall of 1942 when Stalingrad turned around? 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. Did you know for whom those-- the crematoria was reported specifically? 

SUBJECT: Yes, the-- the was not explicit-- explicit, but it was for Jewish people and people who would not agree with the regime of Hitler, OK? 

INTERVIEWER: That they were camps built them kill them? 

SUBJECT: To kill them. 

INTERVIEWER: In-- any sense about numbers, how many would be killed? 

SUBJECT: No. No. Again, probably if I would have been growing up in the-- in a more Jewish community, I might have been hearing about earlier about it or would have seen that this so and so many people disappeared, you know? I noticed that the Jewish tradespeople in the town disappeared. And somebody took their stores over. OK? 

I know that at this time, my parents would talk of how they have been waiting to take the store away from-- from some this people. They wanted to better themselves with somebody else's money or property. Hm? I might say probably-- and to my knowledge, there were about 10 or 15 Jewish stores in the main street in Modling, this is what I have-- what I can recall. Hm? 

I think at the time when this came in about the concentration camp, at same time, Stanlingrad happened. And then we heard that the-- the whole Russian front started collapsing. The news came in from soldiers which were on leave from the army, how badly it was really. Because through the general news, you wouldn't get it, OK? And through BBC, you only did know where the front moved, but not how the front did move, you know? Because this was only about five minutes that for the whole African front, the Western front, and the Eastern Front, huh? And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Were you ever afraid to listening to the BBC? 

SUBJECT: To tell you, I think I must have been extremely dumb. I was never afraid. It never occurred to me that I could get killed. I lived through 1945. I did float through a war. Only a dumb person can do that, I think, without ever being afraid of anything. Nothing could happen to me. I think it was a natural defense probably. 

I know my mother was horribly afraid. And I just always-- [LAUGHS] I thought her silly, you know? Because she was always continuously worried that about things, you know? And of course, things happened to her because she was worried already and that didn't happen to me, you know? I just was floating through really. I think self-defense-- why should I fear death? If it comes, it comes anyhow, you know, somehow, and this sort of a way. But I never consciously thought that it could hit me. 

For instance, in 1945, I thought that the war was beautiful. If you see the shooting at night, then there's a certain beauty, destructive beauty in it, which is unique, you know? I would be up on top of our house and from the-- on the roofs, I would watch it, you know? Because it was striking. Hm? Maybe I was a bit odd. Maybe I'm still a little bit odd, still possibility, huh? 

And to go back to the wars, then there came the news in that everything started to get worse. And you have heard it from the very dissatisfied soldiers on one side. You got the news from the BBC. And you got some news somehow from underground communication, how-- how this really was told from one person to another-- another one. I wouldn't know how it worked. 

In 1944, then there was the bombing starts-- started. These were Americans coming from over the Alps from Italian bases, I think, at this time. And then our whole school was transferred to the High Tatras. This was February 20th or something like that. And we took all the teachers with us. 

INTERVIEWER: That's in Czechoslovakia? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We took all the teachers with us. But the camp, which was in a big hotel there in the Tatras was run by, uh, a leader of the Bund Deutsche Madchen. She-- and I mean, but just on the way down here, we gave her the name Paradeisos, because she was fire-red hair, and that what we called her. 

Of course, there, we had to participate on Ausmarsche. But however, there-- that my heart is not very good, so I didn't have to participate on it. But then once in while, every six week, I had to be Madchen vom Dienst. I don't know what this would be in the translation. And I had to take the columns out of the girls. And I know at this time, I walked with them with my Austrian eagle on. It was my colored knee socks. And the one thing which bothered me then, I would have had to greet the male columns marching by. And I didn't do. So I had trouble then. 

INTERVIEWER: Greet with a heil? 

SUBJECT: With a heil to the-- to the boy leader, and I wouldn't do that. He has to-- to say it first to me, at least that sort of thing. So I just marched by with a very high, stuck-up nose. So they didn't keep-- use me very much as a Madchen vom Dienst because it was trouble in town, hm? 

I was then-- since I had also told them that I have a weak heart, that this bothered me, that I did not have to participate in their sports festivals and this sort of thing. And so I had a lot of time for myself. And then I met some people from native, from-- Slovaks from Tatra Lomnitz. Of course, these people were very educated, ones that kept me informed what was going on on the front. Because there, we did not have any opportunity to watch to any news from BBC or anything like that, because this was a-- run like a camp. But I could here get the information from Slovak friends. 

And um, uh, we stayed there up until the beginning of September, end of August. Then we could hear already the front coming by. And we were supposed to be transferred earlier, but the trains were captured by the Russian. But of course, during these days, was 1944, which we did not get informed at all. 

Later on, I read in my little notebook what I had what I was doing every day and so on. They showed us a lot of movies at this time, a lot of, um, old Wochenschaus. You know, this was the old news reel, and movies to-- to keep us, like, the somehow entertained. And I thought that later on, you know, when I thought back of it, thought this was a extremely smart sort of, uh, way to cover the whole thing up so that there was no nervousness in the whole camp. Probably the teachers and the leaders of the camp did know about it. And they must have-- or they must have gotten orders to keep us under this sort of subdued entertainment level. 

And I think the first to-- that I have heard about the putsch was in a letter from my mother, who wrote to me what I was thinking about it and if I have heard about it. And this must have been about four or five weeks later, because the mail took quite some time at this-- in this year of the war. And then-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother's question is what you thought about it? 

SUBJECT: What I-- what I thought about it. But I did not hear about it. So at this time, I couldn't have thought anything about it. And so at this time, then I started talking with the other girls, did you get some letters? And most of them got some letters from home with the same type of question. 

INTERVIEWER: And what-- 

SUBJECT: Did you hear about it, huh? It-- it failed. That was the-- the thing, my gosh, that was done. But it-- but it failed. Because it would have been so much better if it wouldn't have failed, you know? I think at this time, more not to-- to-- to kill Hitler, but to protect your own home country, you know, and your own families, I think. This was-- I think because at this time, the war has not been, uh, yet on-- on, let's say, Austrian soil or German soil or Czechoslovakian soil. It was still outside the country, except for the bombing, you know? 

But at this time, if-- if-- if-- if they would have killed him, that what-- what our thought was was then this would have been over, OK? This would be-- be a self-preservation. My gosh, this-- somehow, this madness is over. Because at this time, it was, I think, considered by everyone mad to-- to continue with it, uh, because there was no-- the meaning, no meaning. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT: Completely meaningless to fight, fight, fight, and you know-- and everyone comes closer and closer. And I have also to mention one thing. They started to protect-- is they tried to protect the younger generation, I think. Again, it must have been smart from their point of view. They also tried to protect the general population and to build big shelters into the mountains in Modling. 

I think in one of these shelter, you could put in about 20,000 people. Uh, this was these air raid shelters or shelters at the end of the war-- used at the end of the war. I only was in them once, uh, during an air raid. And I got-- I couldn't take such a thing, people sitting and lying all over. And they are being bad. And I preferred-- I said, I'm not going back there anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: How did it end for you? 

SUBJECT: How Did it end, the war? Then the second war started, if you may say. Because we were occupied then by the Russians. And of course-- so we had an occupation first of seven years of the German army and then of 10 years of the Russian army. And actually, when we were free, it was 1955. 

I think we had to share our house with Russian, uh, until in 1953, '54. There were Russian officers living in our house. We were out of the house completely in 1945, because there was a whole battalion of whatever this is. 60 Russians were living in there. We lost practically everything in 19-- you see, in-- we lost first money in 1938. Then in 1947-- I think it was '47 or '46, no-- it was summer of '47 that changed then from the German marks. There came an interim Schilling. And then there came the new Schilling. And I think at this time, you can only exchange 1,000 marks, 1,000 of of the interim Schillings, against 1,000 new ones. And all the money was declared-- nothing, huh? 

INTERVIEWER: OK. 

SUBJECT: So I think for us, it was really going on up until 1953, '55, especially in the Eastern District of Austria, if I can give you some-- 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: --other information, as me more questions? 

CREW: No, you have a very good memory for details. 

INTERVIEWER: I would like to-- 

CREW: You remembered a lot of names and a lot of details. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: Yeah, for instance, one-- one striking thing what I was thinking also about it today was that all the people who were Nazis, they actually left in the last week of March of 1945. And the people who did not leave from this group, they committed suicide. Amongst them, there was one family where the wife, she was a fanatic Nazi. Why? I cannot tell you. 

He was a Primarius at the hospital. He was the only surgeons there in the last years. And I went with his daughter to school. Uh, the daughter was not somehow as fanatic Why is the mother was so fanatic, I don't-- I do not know. 

They had four children. The smallest child was away. But the father decided-- I think it was on the 31st of March or 1st of April of 1945, when all the people had left. He called his family down to the hospital and killed them all in the operating room-- his wife and his three older children and himself. Because he said he didn't-- he knows that his wife disgraced him and his family. So he will take care of the family himself. 

And I know probably nothing would have happened to him, that nothing would have happened to the children. The oldest one was, at this time, 15. And the next one was 13. And the next one was 10. And the little one was five, maybe. But the little one wasn't there. The little one is loving somewhere now. 

INTERVIEWER: The Nazis live where? 

SUBJECT: They left Western Austria, because the Nazis were afraid of the Russians, OK? But they thought that they could deal with the French and with, um, Americans and British ones. And so far as I know, they could deal with them, too. 

I did know one guy who belonged to the SS. I met him later. But uh, he was an SS member, not in uniform. He was not allowed to wear the uniform because he was not the image. But he belonged to the SS, because he would have liked to look like them. But he was little short and fat, you know? 

And um, he, uh, escaped to-- to the west. And I think he lived someplace in near Bad Ischl. And then he heard that he has to register with the American forces, I think, in Glasenbach. And so he walked 45 kilometers to-- to show up there, hm, for his arrest. And the Americans laughed at him and said, oh, we would have come to pick you up with the car, you know? 

[LAUGHS] 

Uh. Uh. It depends what kind of personality you had. I think you had-- probably I would say like this sort of a Nazi. He was not a vicious one. He would not be able to kill a fly, you know? So he was not a nice fella. You had nice Russians. And it very much depends on the personality of the people, on the-- on what they want to get out of you-- power, greed, money, position. 

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. 

SUBJECT: Yep. 

