[TONE] INTERVIEWER: Would you start by giving your name and where and when you were born, if you don't mind? 

SUBJECT: My name is Gustav Ranis I was born in Darmstadt, Germany, in October 1929. 

INTERVIEWER: Your family, what was it like? 

SUBJECT: At the time I was born, I was the oldest son of a family. Later on, we had a-- I had a brother, who was born in 1935. At that time, his birth created a good deal of comment because already people were not having children in Germany. Several years after Hitler took over, but it was considered an act of courage by some to have a second child in 1935. 

INTERVIEWER: Jews were not having children or everyone was not having children? 

SUBJECT: No, I'm-- I'm talking about Jews. And there was a-- I think, statistically, you can find that borne out, a decline in the-- in the birth rate among German Jews at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Any sisters? 

SUBJECT: I have-- no, just the two of us. No- no others after that. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there any reason why your family didn't leave-- didn't leave before? 

SUBJECT: Yes, some good reasons. My father had been a-- a World War I "hero," in quotes. And he always told me about it. And he showed me the medals. 

He had fought in both the West and Eastern front. He had been a front line fighter, which is a special designation. He had gotten an Iron Cross and several other medals, which he kept in a special drawer as one of his prized possessions. 

He was very German. And I remember, even though I was only a little boy at the time, he used to always remind me that Hitler was a passing fancy. A passing problem. That he needed to-- to awaken nationalism through a lot of devices, including hatred of the Jews, mainly to mobilize people. But that it would pass, and he would realize he needed the Jews, since they were an important contributor to the economy and to the culture of the system. 

And that's one of the reasons I think that he delayed and delayed. It's also true that when the Nuremberg Laws came out, as you may know, they had exceptions in them which reinforced this feeling he had. There were exceptions for people who distinguished themselves in World War I. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Explain the Nuremberg laws, would you? 

SUBJECT: The Nuremberg Laws were the racial laws which-- well, there are large numbers of them. But basically, they converted Hitler's Mein Kampf into law. Into specific acts, discrimination against-- against the Jews, in terms of who could marry whom, who could not marry whom. The whole litany of racial discrimination was placed not in-- in-- from the street into the law courts by the ravage of the Nuremberg Laws. 

And they were a clear indication to many people that this was not a passing fancy. This was going to be the law of the land, not just a pogrom which was later on to be-- to be forgotten and to be, in fact, oppressed by the-- by the-- by the authorities. But in fact, the authorities were going to, in fact, implement legislation which would discriminate against a racial minority. 

INTERVIEWER: I'd like to press you a little bit on the Nuremberg Laws. What was the year? Do you remember any discussion in your home? Were you too young? How was it explained, racial laws against you? How was it explained by your parents, by your friends? 

SUBJECT: Well, as I said, our home was not a typical for a-- a German-Jewish home, especially because my father was a professional person, which was not typical either. He was a lawyer. He had become a judge, which was unusual. 

He had been a Second Lieutenant in World War I, which was, again, unusual. I think the highest rank a Jew could reach in the Kaiser's army was first lieutenant, as far as I know. In fact, they had a Jewish count, which Ludendorff and Hindenburg undertook in 1917, I think it was, to try to prove-- of course, there was anti-Semitism then, too. To try to prove that the Jews would be in the back lines, not in the front lines, and they would be sitting in the rear and not doing the combat. That Jew-- Jew count, as it was called, didn't turn out the way they expected, and so they didn't publish it. 

My father always cited that as, you know, there-- there had been other antisemites, especially Ludendorff, not Hindenburg himself, but Ludendorff, who was his number two. And that was sort of a thing it gave him, the feeling that if you do your job for your fatherland, as he used to put it, you will be-- you will be compensated in time, and that these vagaries shouldn't be taken so seriously. 

So he was really, in as sense, the kind of intellectual leader of our family. My mother was not very highly educated. And She didn't argue with him about it. If she had-- if she did feel differently, I didn't hear about it. So I was, in a sense, very much under the-- under that kind of a-- a over teaching of my father and really didn't get too many contrary opinions, except what I could pick up myself, in terms of the realities of life as they began to impact on me. 

For example, when I was six years old, which was '35, that year, one of the laws passed was that Jewish children could no longer go to the public schools. And so they had to-- they had to fashion a new, special school for Jewish children, which was sort of put together by-- overnight by Jewish wives, some-- some Jewish specialists. But largely, wives who had some education of their own jumped in and began to teach both secular and non-secular education classes. 

So that then, what happened as time went on, even though I was only six or seven years old, we used to get the daily routine of being waited for by the Hitler Youth, who knew we were in that special school, which served the whole state. People had to be bussed in from the rural areas, because only the large city-- my-- my city, Darmstadt, was a capital of Hesse, about 115,000, 120,000 people. So it was the capital city of that state. 

And all the Jews would come in from the neighboring areas for these classes, which were basically the normal curriculum and a little bit of religious education, but mainly duplicating what you get in the-- in the school system in Germany. And so as I was saying, the Hitler Youth used to wait for us, I wouldn't say every day, but three out of five days and sort of beat up the Jewish kids as they left school. 

So I began to question, even, do I-- you know, we were in a German household, so I didn't question too vehemently, but I began to question my father's wisdom sometimes. But you know, a six-year-old kid doesn't do too much of that. And whether or not this really was going to pass. This really was a-- something that Hitler needed as a temporary measure. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever get hurt from these attacks? 

SUBJECT: Not-- not injured in the sense of, you know, permanently impaired, but I got beaten up pretty badly. It was-- it was an adventure to get home every day. And it was an adventure to go from my house to, you know, to do a little errand, sometimes. 

There was a-- we lived in-- in an area which was very close to a sort of major public building, where the SA used to have its-- the SA were the Brown Shirts. They used to have their festivals and major events. In fact, I remember-- I don't know how old I was, but I remember being very young, maybe three or four years old. But they used to have this martial music whenever they had these affairs, and very exciting music. 

And I remember, Hitler once visited that building, which was only two houses removed from ours, and we heard the music. And I remember my parents later told me that I had said, gee, I wish Hitler would come more often, because you know, such nice music. And at that time, one could see how, you know, how my father and others would have been quite willing to march to the same music, had he been allowed to. 

And you know, I'm-- I'm not-- in a sense, I-- I know he made a bad judgment. But I understand how he made it, in the sense that he was very patriotic. He-- he-- and the things that Hitler used on people were very-- like-- like a drug, you know, that the marching soldiers, the martial music, the excitement, and the fact that they had-- he was "rescuing them," in quotes, from you know, very serious conditions. And which my father thought would be the-- the heart of the matter, and that everything else would be put aside once he had accomplished his objective. 

So-- but as I said, my personal experiences in school and being able to, you know, make it around town, because in that neighborhood, there was little store which I was often asked to, you know, buy something. Buy-- buy a little something that my family needed. It became-- I had to run a gauntlet. And so I couldn't do that anymore after a while. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you live in a house, apartment? 

SUBJECT: We-- we-- yes. We had a house. We-- it was a two-family house, which we had both-- both floors. We were-- we were not wealthy, but we were, I would say, I would say upper middle class, by the standards of Darmstadt. Well off, I would say. 

INTERVIEWER: The fact that your father was a lawyer or a judge, these laws that-- I mean, you were so young, but what did you hear then or subsequently about the imposition of this-- the Nuremberg Laws? 

SUBJECT: Well, of course, I-- I know they affected other lawyers, and they affected him. Although he was permitted to-- to practice. Later on, I remember, it may have been-- I don't remember. A year. It may have been '36 or '37, there were only a small number of lawyers permitted to practice before the court, Jewish lawyers. They were appointed. 

And again, the majority were no longer allowed to practice, as I recall it. And a small number were permitted in each town. And I think he was one of those who was permitted. Now, I think he, again, because of his record, had-- was-- even though things were getting worse all the time, he kept getting some exemptions, and which, I think, encouraged him to keep hoping. Fed this illusion that he had. That's how I reconstruct it. 

INTERVIEWER: But he couldn't remain a judge, could he? 

SUBJECT: No. He could not remain a judge. But he-- he could appear-- continue to appear. 

INTERVIEWER: Besides what happened at school, what was happening in your home? What were-- were people coming into your home, talking about things? Was there any-- any fear that you felt within the confines of your family, or did you feel secure? What? 

SUBJECT: Well, in the home itself, until '38, Kristallnacht, which we'll talk about in a minute, I guess, I felt quite secure in the house. It was just a problem in the streets, when you couldn't really appeal with certainty to a-- well, a passing policeman. The policeman would turn the other way if-- if some-- if you were attacked. 

INTERVIEWER: How would-- how would they know on the street that you were a Jew? 

SUBJECT: Well, if the-- if-- if you are attacked leaving a Jewish school, for example, they knew it was a Jewish school, a Jewish Regional School. And the SA, the Hitler Youth knew it, and the police did not, as you would expect, try to intervene. I think if they had been-- if they had to really-- at that point, anyway, in '35, I don't think they would have permitted someone to be seriously injured, but I don't know. It wasn't-- didn't come to the test. 

But to come back to the question about what was going on in the home, I remember one thing which I think is significant. I'm not very proud of it. But I remember, at that time, there had been-- I remember that there-- there were-- at that time, there were pogroms in Poland. And Polish Jews were coming to Germany from the east. And they were very Jewish as opposed to German Jews, who were trying to assimilate and be German. And German than Germans, in some respects. 

My father, I think, was, you know, in many ways. I have a very high respect for him. But in-- in that regard, I think it-- it shows the weakness of trying to assimilate unduly. He was very worried about the-- the coming of the Polish Jews, because they, of course, turned to the German Jews for help. 

They were lower class than, at least, we were. They were very typically Jewish. And I think he-- he would have loved to be able to ignore them, because they drew attention to us as being Jewish rather than German. And I remember that was discussed, and there was a difference of view on that. My mother, I think, felt they were-- they were Jewish, and they needed help. And my father was more concerned about his own status and his own, you know, his-- his own status in-- in-- in the city. 

I remember that discussion. I am-- looking back on that now, I know who was right and who was wrong. But that certainly, looking back on it, was something that's very convenient for any of us, in any situation, I think, to-- if we are favored, or if we are in a status situation that avoids a contamination with others who may be less favored, to try to avoid that problem. 

But I think it's a very deceptive, it's a very deceptive device, and it's not likely to work very well. But my father tried. And I think that's something, looking back on it now, which I think was a-- you know, human error, as well as a strategic error. 

INTERVIEWER: The Polish Jews, as I understood, as I remember hearing about it, couldn't get food. Do you remember that at all? They couldn't cash in their ration coupons. 

SUBJECT: Well, ration coupons, that came later. Because at that time, we didn't have a rationing system, it didn't come till the war. But in, I think, the first wave of-- of Polish Jews and Eastern European Jews came in the mid '30s, I remember. And of course, they stayed. Some of them stayed. 

But my memory is not that they couldn't-- they were just poor, they were-- they were often peddlers, going from house to house, trying to sell household items and so on. It's just a difference of attitude. My mother wanted to help them, my father wanted to keep his distance. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they look like? What did they behave like that-- that-- that singled them out as more Jewish or different or-- 

SUBJECT: Well, I mean, you-- you can think of New York City. You can find parts of New York City where you know exactly you're in a Jewish area. And you-- you go to the silk stocking district, and you're not so sure who's Jewish. And it's that kind of difference. I think we were in a situation where you wouldn't necessarily pick us out in a crowd as Jewish, but these-- these people, you wouldn't have any doubt about it. And that's what I think-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did they speak German? 

SUBJECT: They spoke Yiddish. So we could understand each other, even though we didn't speak Yiddish, and they didn't speak German. 

INTERVIEWER: Where did they live? 

SUBJECT: I don't really know. I assume they lived in the-- in the poorer parts of town. But I never saw their home. I just had, you know, the kind of contact that I just mentioned. 

INTERVIEWER: So before-- before the Nazis came to Poland, there was anti-Semitism to a degree that would make Polish Jews flee to Germany-- 

SUBJECT: Right. 

INTERVIEWER: --which already had, I know, a record of anti-Semitic behavior. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I-- I-- 

INTERVIEWER: That's strange. 

SUBJECT: I haven't studied that part, but I think it's true that there were-- there were pogroms in the East, which made people move to Germany, as the lesser of two evils. 

INTERVIEWER: Was this the pogroms in Silesia? 

SUBJECT: It may well-- 

INTERVIEWER: Which would be near the border. 

SUBJECT: In-- it might have been in-- in Sudetenland. It might have been in-- in Czechoslovakia. But I think some-- mainly it was Polish Jews. I do remember that. And they-- so I-- you know, I may be wrong on my historical facts here, but I think they were pogroms in the East. 

INTERVIEWER: No, I've heard this several times before. But I-- I find it strange that the Polish Jews would flee to Germany, which by that time-- when the Nuremberg Laws? 1934? 

SUBJECT: I thought they were '35. 

INTERVIEWER: '35? By that time, it was known that Germany had this anti-Semitic policy. I wondered if there was ever any discussion in your home about why they went from one hostile situation to another hostile situation. 

SUBJECT: Well, it's the lesser of-- I don't know what their opportunities were elsewhere. The lesser of-- of two evils. I assume that's why they came. I don't know. They probably couldn't go east to the-- to the Soviet Union, and the other-- the only other place they could come, I guess, was west, which was Germany. 

INTERVIEWER: Mhm. Until 1938, things really didn't change very much? Or did they get progressively worse year by year, month by month, and what did you observe? 

SUBJECT: Well, I think they got worse in the sense of, you know, both the-- my father's practice as a lawyer, I think, came under pressure. More and more people were urged to either informally or formally boycott Jews. So he-- he felt economic pressure. And of course, the incidents that I had with the Hitler Youth and difficulties of that kind became more-- more serious. 

I remember, our family used to like to-- every Sunday, we used to go into the woods. It was a very-- we lived in an area which is very beautiful, geographically speaking. And we used to take these hikes every Sunday. And that became difficult because the Hitler Youth used to like to go on these treks, you know, 15 or 20 Hitler Youths used to go out and-- and-- and-- and do hiking themselves, and there was a danger that you could meet up with one of those groups and be in trouble. 

So we had to curtail that. So there was an incrementally worsening situation, but not fear for one's life as yet. Just increasingly unpleasant and increasingly risky. 

INTERVIEWER: Your family was assimilated. I wonder what of the friends of the family, or you own friends, were they Jewish or not Jewish or both, and how-- how that changed with the years. 

SUBJECT: Well, we had-- most of our friends were Jewish, in spite of the extent of our assimilation. But most of the friends were also assimilated Jews. I-- my-- we-- we-- my-- my parents came from somewhat different backgrounds, in terms of the strength of the religious ties. My mother's family was quite orthodox. My father's family only somewhat reformed. 

So I remember they were on the same street. There were two synagogues, one which was my grandfather's on my mother's side, synagogue, and one was my-- on my father's side. And we-- I used to sort of go to both to make everybody happy. 

And we were, you know, not-- you know, we were Jews. It's not-- when I say assimilated, I don't mean to say we'd given up Judaism. We were conscious Jews. My father, in fact, was president of the reform synagogue. But he was German. 

That's what I mean by saying assimilation. Not trying to lose Judaism, but trying to be a German Jew, with the emphasis on the German. I think that's how I would characterize him. 

And as I say, the-- the people in the orthodox synagogue on my grandfather's side, I think were less assimilated. had less assimilationist tendencies. They had not penetrated as far into the German society. Had not been as successful. 

And my father's side, which was the more affluent, what we would call here a suburban synagogue, there, I think most of our friends were drawn from that group because of my father's strong influence and my mother's in the family. And I would say that we had a few non-Jewish acquaintances, but I would not call them friends. There was one exception to that, but even there, later on, she proved she was a very good friend. She was a lady of nobility. In-- in German terms, Fraeulein von Winkel. 

She happened to be the owner of the office building which my father had his law-- law practice. And-- but that's how we got to know her. I don't think we socially-- I don't think my parents went to her house for dinner, and vise versa. I don't think that there was much of that. But we were friendly. 

I remember when it was no longer possible to get a book out of the public library, which was one of those little incremental losses I incurred. I used to like to read Karl May,  who was sort of the famous-- you know, the Western-- the Western story teller. And I couldn't get the books out anymore, and she got them out for me throughout this period. 

And later on, when things got very tough, and when people we knew would avoid us on the street and cross the street, she made a point of saying hello and-- and-- you know, and-- and-- and clearly was not willing to be risk averse on this score. I'm talking now about the '38, '39, '40 period. 

INTERVIEWER: Did anything happen to her for-- 

SUBJECT: No. In fact, I visited her after the war. I made a big point of trying to find her. And she was-- she had been-- she had been-- she had been badly hurt in a-- an air attack. Had been burned pretty badly. But she was there, living in the top floor of the same building which she had owned. And I was able to show her some small kindness. 

But she was not hurt. Partly because, I suppose, of her-- she didn't do anything, you know, she didn't do anything that they would put her in jail for, basically, but she just didn't kowtow. A lot of people kowtowed out of the fear of something might happen to them. And I don't think that-- actually, if there had been enough people taking their courage in their hands, the whole story might have been very different. Very few people tested that. 

INTERVIEWER: You talk about kowtow. First of all, I'd like to ask you, what does SA stand for? Second of all, you talk about kowtow because of fear. And I guess what we would like to understand is the atmosphere that prevailed that made people so concerned, so frightened. Frightened to befriend people. Frightened to help people that were being discriminated against. Frightened to speak out. 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't know whether that's a particularly German feeling. It certainly was a feeling that one could notice in Germany. That you know, people are risk averse. They are-- people don't look for trouble. 

And when the official policy is to discriminate against a particular group, it's very convenient to look the other way. And-- and maybe kowtowing is too strong an act-- an act-- an act. It's just simply easier to-- to avert your eyes. And that's what we saw most of. With a few exceptions, people would not make an effort to say, what's going on. Why is this happening. 

When-- when-- as we get a little bit later on, and the events of the Kristallnacht, again, the-- there was very little support, active support, where one would say, how can this happen? How can we permit this to happen? People just sort of turned away. 

Now, that shows a lack of courage, if you like, lack of integrity. But I wish I could say it's a very peculiar German characteristic. I wish I had that faith. But it seems to me, without being too pessimistic about mankind, that that kind of reaction is, I'm afraid, not monopolized by Germany, I'm afraid. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you think that it was because it was official policy, government policy? Do you think had it been just a political point of view, that people might have stood up, but because it was incorporated into the law of the land, that-- 

SUBJECT: I don't really believe that. I think that anti-Semitism, you know, had been in Germany for a long time. It didn't start with Hitler. It was re-awakened with Hitler. And he utilized it very effectively. 

I-- I do believe that whether it was in the law or not in the law, it was a convenient scapegoat, just as the Bolsheviks were a convenient scapegoat. The Jews were a convenient scapegoat. And you know, I'm not-- I wouldn't say that it would be equally easy to awaken antisemitism anywhere in the world, but I think that the preconditions exist elsewhere. 

I don't look for that thing happening every day of the week under the bed. But I-- I do think we should recognize the fact this was not, in my opinion, a completely unique thing attributed to Germany and because the Germans passed some laws. 

INTERVIEWER: But it was acceptable, apparently, to be anti-Semitic. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: It was unacceptable-- there was an acceptable level of antisemitism. 

SUBJECT: Well, I don't know about that. I think that if you look back in German history it was not a new-- a new feature. The Jews had been used by-- even before Germans United, by the various princes of Germany for their own purposes. For their financial and cultural support. But when times were tough, they often would be squeezed, discriminated against, and so on. 

So as I said, in kaiser's Germany, there was anti-Semitism. It had never been as virulent in going to the extreme, of course, as Hitler did. 

INTERVIEWER: I know, but what I'm leading up to is your father's attitude. The educated German Jew. His attitude about accepting a certain amount of anti-Semitism and living with that. Did you ever have an opportunity to discuss that with him after? 

SUBJECT: Well, I suppose it's true that we didn't expect full equality in the sense that maybe an American Catholic would or an American Protestant would, just as his birthright. There was always a feeling that we were conscious of the fact, in spite of all our assimilations that I have mentioned, we were conscious of the fact we were Jewish. 

We were conscious of the fact that we had been accepted. It was not, it was our birthright to be accepted. We had been accepted, and we were proud of that. We were conscious of it, however. It wasn't something we had sort of accepted as being-- being a natural phenomenon. 

So when that was beginning to be taken away, it was not something that we said, well, gee, this is a first. You know, we are German citizens of Jewish faith. How come they're doing this to us? We said, well, that's one of the reasons my father thought it would pass. You know, we're having one of our little episodes which we've had before. And it will pass, like it passed in 1880, or whenever it was. 1890. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that your mother and father didn't have quite the same attitude, and that it showed in her-- in both, they belong to different synagogues, and showed in-- 

SUBJECT: Well, they belonged to the same synagogue, but we had-- my mother used to visit my grandfather in his synagogue as well. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there any discussions at home? Do you remember? Or did you for-? 

SUBJECT: Well, as I say, my mother was not going to do battle. Extended battle. But I know there were nuances which I picked up. And she was-- I guess I-- she was probably somewhat more sympathetic to being Jewish and having-- and the fact that there were kindred Jews or non-German Jews who were suffering. 

INTERVIEWER: I was thinking of the other piece of it. What we talked before... 

SUBJECT: Well, I-- I think that-- as I said, she didn't feel that she could do combat with my father on intellectual grounds. He was a-- he was exotic in the family. He-- he-- he gave the word of what was right and what was wrong and which way we were supposed to move. He was quite authoritarian, I am sure, by any sort of modern standard. 

And he was considered, in the-- in our congregation, not just in the family, as a-- one of the, you know, intellectual leaders of the congregation. He was highly-- you know, he'd gone to Heidelberg. He had gone to Goettingen. And he was just not-- not just a normal lawyer, he'd studied a lot of philosophy. And he was considered authoritative. 

So my mother wasn't going to challenge him on questions about Hitler's policy towards the Jews and things of this sort. So what I picked up was really more sort of nuances that she didn't always fully agree, but she wasn't going to challenge him on anything. 

INTERVIEWER: I wanted to ask you about the SA and what it meant. And after all, in 1935, your mother had another child, and what was the atmosphere in the house as a result of that? As you referred to it, it was a courageous act. 

SUBJECT: Well, the SA, I think stood for sturmabteilung But they were basically the-- there was the SS and the SA. The SA wore brown shirts, and they were a part of the Nazi system. And the SS wore black shirts. They were actually uniformed elite groups. 

The SA, as you remember, were Hitler's first, closest group when he first organized himself, before he took over. He had this group of SA, who later on, there was a putsch in which he, in fact, tried to destroy the SA, or at least its leadership. 

Ernst Rohm, you may remember the putsch, which-- in which some of these, the SA, were annihilated, because Hitler felt that they were a threat to him. Then he elevated the SS, which were the black shirts, and they became his real sort of basic bodyguard and elite guard. The SA were much more numerous, as I recall, but were not as-- not as important. 

In terms of our sort of ranking of fear, if you like, if you saw some uniform, a uniform, the gestapo, who you couldn't really know who they were, but they always wore these-- as you see in movies-- they usually wore these raincoats. And then the SS, the black-- black shirts. 

Then the SA, and then the Hitler Youth. And then even the BDM, which was the female version of the Hitler Youth, Bund Deutshe Madel, BDM. They were the girls. Girls and boys were in separate Hitler Youth organizations. And so that was kind of the hierarchy of people to avoid if you can, if you meet them on the street as well. 

INTERVIEWER: Uniforms. Were you are accustomed to seeing uniforms, wearing uniforms? 

SUBJECT: You mean ourselves? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. 

SUBJECT: No. Although in the public schools, they wore uniforms, but not in the-- not in the Jewish school which I attended. 

INTERVIEWER: When you went to public school, did you wear a uniform? 

SUBJECT: Well, I-- I never did go to public school. They changed the law at that time. I couldn't go to public school. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh-huh. Do you remember, though, seeing many people-- were you accustomed to seeing people in uniform? 

SUBJECT: Yes. Uniforms were a very big thing. And you know, Germans are very high on uniforms. And you begin to, you know, respect uniforms. And I think I haven't shaken that today, until this day. I respect a uniform a lot more than I know I should. Because inside the uniform is just another guy doing his job or not doing his job, depending on the situation. 

INTERVIEWER: But their uniforms had skulls and crossbones, and I wondered when you saw those uniforms, whether there was a difference. 

SUBJECT: Well, skull and crossbones were-- I think the SS had that, nobody else. And then maybe also in the-- they had special Einsatzgruppen in the army who had them. Special-- special groups of the Army. They were the ones who were the-- later on, the people who did most of the murdering in the-- in the occupied territories in Eastern Europe. So they were-- I think the-- I think the skull and bones were both SS and the Einsatzgruppen, which was sort of a branch of the-- of the-- of the Army. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever ask your parents or your father about a skull and crossbones on a uniform? That's pretty terrifying. Did you say anything-- 

SUBJECT: That was the-- the insignia was really-- really unimportant to us. What was happening to us and what, you know, people in uniform were doing, yes. But I don't know. I don't think we got too-- too much involved in specifics of that kind. 

I mean, even the-- the friendly corner cop became a source of terror. And he was usually, you know, a friendly image. Had been a friendly image. Because he would, at a minimum, ignore us, and at a maximum, later on, assist what used to be, initially, just rowdyism and later on became more than that. 

I guess sooner or later I have to mention, a sort of watershed within the family, within Germany, certainly within our family, which was Kristallnacht, November 1938. Because that was quite late in terms of what had been happening gradually. But this too, that finally convinced my father to actively try to-- to leave the country. You probably know what Kristallnacht was all about. 

INTERVIEWER: What are your memories of it? 

SUBJECT: My memories are quite vivid. I remember my father being woken up early in the morning, a phone call saying the synagogue was burning, because he was president of it. He said, well, there must be-- there must be something I can do to stop that. He was reacting in the normal citizen fashion. 

And he rushed out to-- to try to-- to the synagogue. And I remember, he returned two hours later with two gestapo men, dressed as you would expect them to. And they said-- they gave him a half an hour to pack belongings and-- and took him to the concentration camp. So that was 1938. 

At that time, as you know, as you may know, Kristallnacht was a-- an organized-- organized, spontaneous pogrom throughout Germany, in which-- in which in every major city, A, synagogues were burned, B, Jewish stores were looted, and Jewish men were picked up and put into camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Why was it called Kristallnacht? 

SUBJECT: Kristallnacht because of the broken glass that resulted from the smashing of the stores. The Jewish windows and so on. 

INTERVIEWER: This was in the morning that they-- that he left and came back with the gestapo? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. As I recall it, I can't be sure. But I think he went there maybe at 7 o'clock in the morning and came back maybe around 9:00. I remember I was sitting at the table. I think we may have been having breakfast. And-- when they came in, and-- 

I'm sure we were having a meal. It must have been breakfast. When they came in, and my mother started crying. They said-- asked him to pack his clothing and then took him away. And he went-- he was in Buchenwald. 

Now, at that time, a lot of people don't realize that that particular pogrom was-- was prior to the shift from discriminating against Jews and pushing them out, prior to the change of policy towards killing Jews. And it actually had been a consistent policy to-- the final solution hadn't been decided upon yet. 

So many of those people who were put into concentration camps at that time were beaten up. Some were killed. But there was not a policy of extermination as yet, in 1938. So many of those people who were picked up as part of this major organized pogrom were released again several months later, and that's what happened to my father. 

INTERVIEWER: The morning that he came back, you were sitting at the table, eating breakfast or what. The baby was with your mother, or-- can you describe the scene and what you thought, what you felt, what your father said? 

SUBJECT: I-- I-- I was-- let's see. I must have been nine years old. All I remember is he came in with two men in black raincoats, who posted themselves at the door. And they were-- they were-- they were polite, I guess, in terms of the situation we're talking about. They didn't-- you know, in some-- I know in some homes, they had even gone into homes and smashed furniture and ripped opened pillowcases and things of this sort. They did not do that here. 

In fact, the gestapo itself didn't do that. They let-- they-- they had other people do that. Mobs of-- of-- of SA and other people. They said, you have a half an hour, and they did not-- 

INTERVIEWER: In German, they said that? 

SUBJECT: Oh yeah. 

INTERVIEWER: They said that. How did it sound to you? Do you remember? Can you repeat it? 

SUBJECT: I-- I-- I'm not sure I remember exactly, but it was pretty rough. Terrifying. And they-- I think that-- that I remember, they didn't want to-- didn't want to have my parents have any private moments before he had to go. But one of them finally relented, and they were able to spend a couple of minutes by themselves. 

And I didn't know-- I wasn't there. I had left the room. But beyond that, they just let my father go out and pack his bag, a suitcase. 

I don't remember my brother being there, and anyway, he would have been two years old, probably, and not conscious of what was going on. I remember my grandfather, who lived with us at that time, being very terrified and my mother crying. But those are the only images that-- the-- the main image was my father, pale, very shaken, and these men leaning up against the wall. And refusing to let him out of-- out of their sight, except for the few moments that I've mentioned. 

I think that-- it seems incredible, but that was really the first time, I think, definitively, my father felt that his theory wasn't going to work out, and-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did he say anything to you? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember anything? 

SUBJECT: No. Well he did say, don't worry, I'll be back. He did say, don't worry, I'll be back. They-- they never made it clear why they were picking up people, they just said, well, it was part of a-- it was called something called Schutzhaft. Schutzhaft is you-- you put somebody in prison in order to protect him. That's a famous German expression. The Schutzhaft which means that don't-- you know, we're really trying to protect him from the mob. 

And so-- so that-- that was the euphemism that was used a lot. And then we-- we didn't know that he was, you know, going far away. We though he might be picked up for a day or two. And my mother went down to the police several days, not knowing where he was, what has happened. 

Because they'd simply say, we have to ask him a few questions. We have to take him away for a few days. And partly to investigate the fire, you know, with all kind of-- it was not very explicit as to what was happening. There had been the fire in the synagogue. He was the president of the synagogue. 

So they want to protect him from bodily harm. That was the sort of official explanation. We didn't quite believe that. But that was really what was said at the time. I think it took-- I remember my mother going every day to the police. She was thrown out a couple of times. 

They said, we don't know where he is, and we-- we're-- we're tired of you asking us. Until finally, we heard that he was in Buchenwald. And I remember a couple of uncles of mine were too. Had been picked up at the same time. And they got-- they were beaten up during-- during that period, I heard later. But some of the worst excesses of the later period were not as yet in vogue at that time. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember what you did the rest of that day? And do remember also what you thought-- when you finally found out he was in Buchenwald, did you know what Buchenwald was? 

SUBJECT: Yeah. I knew something about Buchenwald, because my father had-- had talked to me once about-- we knew about the existence of Buchenwald. And Buchenwald happens to be close-- very close geographically to Weimar. My father had been-- you know, had had great hopes for the Weimar Republic, which was when he was a Social Democrat. 

And you know, and one of the early presidents of the Weimar Republic was a Jew, one of the reasons my father was so optimistic all the time. I think his name was Ehrhardt but I'm not positive. So that the-- he in his-- less optimistic, the one which I talked about writing a book, From Weimar to Buchenwald. 

And so that name, Buchenwald, had meant something to me earlier. Understanding that, you know, these are very close, these two towns. How could we, you know, move from Weimar, which was a period of, you know, in a sense, in spite of the fact that the Weimar Republic was a very weak kind of government, it had been a real democratic government, and in Germany, that's a kind they hadn't had for a long time. And which was-- roused a lot of enthusiasm, but it wasn't able to pull itself together and solve some of the economic problems of Germany, and thus made it easier for Hitler to take over. 

So when I realized, after some time, that my father was in Buchenwald, I remember-- I was remembering the discussion about that book, and thinking that in fact he had moved from Weimar to Buchenwald, and worse than he had expected. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the rest of that day, after they took him? Do you remember what you did or how you felt, or what you discussed with your mother? 

SUBJECT: Well, all I remember is what you would expect, which is that we talked to other people in the family who had the same thing happen to them. We tried to console each other. We tried to-- we try to exchange experiences. 

We heard, for example, that there were certain German-Jewish men who had not gone out, in a sense, looking to see what was happening, who had not been picked up, which gave us some courage that it was not a systematic search for named people to put them into camps or to take them away, for whatever purpose. 

It was apparently haphazard, to the extent that if you happened to be not home-- in some cases, they went to your home-- or if you happened to be not where the synagogue was burning, you-- you were not going to be picked up. And that became clear after, you know, even that day, but certainly later, that they-- they said after the first swoop, which was both at the synagogue and various homes, they did not continue to pick up men. 

So we tried to-- we talked to others. We tried to find out what was happening. And you know, it was a very sad day, I remember. But people are always looking for signs that it isn't as bad as it may seem. And we did find such signs. 

It was not-- the German official line, as you remember, was this was a spontaneous outburst in response to the murder of a German diplomat in Paris. I think his name was Ernst vom Rath. And they-- the news-- the news was full of that. 

And the official story was that this had been an uprising against the-- this murder by a-- by a Jewish immigrant in Paris of a German. Somebody in the German embassy, I think. And that the German authorities were-- could understand this spontaneous uprising, and that they would now restore order. 

And so it was clearly controlled. An organized and controlled apparatus. But after a couple of days, we-- we began to feel that in fact, it had-- it was not going to be the beginning of an immediate more severe steps. And you know, one of the things about the human condition, I know that's true of all people who had much worse experiences, is that you begin to adjust to that and try to see, well, what's the-- what are the ways out? What are the-- what are the optimistic sides of things. 

And one of the things we then concentrated on is to get my father a permit to leave the country, which had previously been, still, even as late as '38 not a front-burner item in our family. As I said before, we had thought about migrating, but it had not been done early enough and vigorously enough in our family. Many of our friends had either left or certainly were in the process of trying to leave. 

So then we did-- not that day, necessarily, but as I recall, pushed very vigorously to try to get a permit, as they called the British visa, to go to England, for my father. And since we had some relatives in the United States, we were able to obtain such a permit. And three months later, I think it was, my father was able to come out and go immediately to England. 

INTERVIEWER: And That's of the family? 

SUBJECT: We had to stay. It was able-- we were be able to-- to get this permit, I don't know why, but only for him. Apparently, as I recall, and I could be wrong about it. I was too young. There was a policy of permitting people in concentration camps to leave if they were able to leave the country immediately. This was still part of the forced migration phase of the-- of the German policy. 

So we put all our resources into getting a permit for him, and we did achieve that. And he left, let's see. November was the time he was-- went to Buchenwald, and I think he left maybe in February or March. 

INTERVIEWER: Did he tell you what happened to him in Buchenwald? 

SUBJECT: He told us only that-- and he was worried about saying too much, as I remember. He told us only that-- that-- you know, they had been fed all right. And it was my uncle who was a little more open and less cautious who told us that they had been beaten up. 

And especially if you spoke up. You know, if you asked why-- why are you doing this to us. And you know, if you-- if you showed any slightest sign of questioning why you were there or why you were being held, they get beaten up. If you-- if you give no trouble, I guess you-- you have a better chance of not getting hurt. 

INTERVIEWER: What did they do while they were there? 

SUBJECT: I think they had work gangs. They sat around a lot. I think it was different from-- from what I understand, what happened later in the camps. It was a different regime. They weren't-- they were treated more or less like other political prisoners, who, you know, they had these concentration camps had been initiated some time back as part of the effort to put left-wing people and political questioning people, as well as Jews, in these camps. 

INTERVIEWER: In addition to the anxiety which you all must have felt when he was gone, were there other hardships as a result of being singled out, having the head of the family taken? Were there other hardships? Getting food, necessities, that you remember or experienced? 

SUBJECT: No. I don't remember. Except being excited that we knew where he was, which was about 10 days, as I recall. Probably knew where he was. That was the worst period. 

I don't remember any-- no, there's no deprivation in that sense, because we were not poor. And I think the loss of his income couldn't have made that much difference during that short period of time. Maybe just the fear of what will be next. What would happen to him where he was, or what would happen to him. And then the renewed effort to try to get him out. 

INTERVIEWER: How do you feel when you saw your father back out? How was that day? 

SUBJECT: That was very happy day. 

INTERVIEWER: Was he changed? 

SUBJECT: He was very changed. He was shaken. I think all his faith in-- in you know, in being able to stay in Germany and keep his family there and make a life for us was shattered. And he was a different man. 

He had always been very sure of himself, and as I say, he was sort of the oracle of this-- of the-- of the congregation. People would come to him for advice. And I'm afraid he gave some people some bad advice, especially on this issue. 

He was very shaken, and I think he-- he also, perhaps, although he never said that, I assume he felt some guilt that he had not had a better nose, as we used to say. A better nose about-- about Germany. We always-- we always criticized those who left very early as being-- having been rattled too quickly. 

And clearly, he-- he never said it in so many words, but I think he was a man of some ego and a man of some, you know, standing in the community. I-- I think he was hurt twice. Once by the facts, and the very serious facts which he had to contend with and which we all had to contend with now, also because he had taken a very strong stand on these matters and was proven wrong. 

He had also been in a KC, which is a German fraternity. Which he-- he joined in Heidelberg, which was a big thing in his life. He in the B'nai B'rith. He was present of the B'nai B'rith Lodge. But he also was a member of the KC, which was a German schlagende Verbindung, which is a German fraternity, which was anti-Zionist. 

German Jews were divided about the question of Israel at that time, because it was Palestine at that time. And he had been-- as part of that package, he had been-- he always felt that the idea for migration to Israel was a bad one because it would enable some enemy of-- of Jewry to annihilate Jewry by having them all congregate in one place. 

And I remember there was a cousin of ours who was a Zionist, and my father and he always argued about the pros and cons of moving to Israel or not moving to Israel. And I remember, when he came back from-- from Buchenwald, saying his-- all his convictions were not so clear anymore, both about Germany, and that was clearly shaken-- in fact, had been changed. And about the question of where to go. But he still felt it was preferable to try to go to England or the United States than to Israel. But he was no longer combative about Israel, as he had been previously. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember him saying anything special to you when he came back? Talking to you? You were the next man in the family. 

SUBJECT: I don't remember anything-- anything of that sort. It It was all very hurried, because he was-- he had been released unconditionally to go to England. And I-- my memory is that he spent very little time at home. He left and almost immediately went to England. 

So I think a lot of time was spent in getting everything-- getting all the papers in order. The amount of red tape that was required before you could leave was quite substantial. And I think that's what most of the energy went into. I-- I don't remember any sort of where we just sat around and sort of looked at the situation saying .... Except that by his actions and by his words and by his face, I knew that he was not the same man that had been picked up on November 10, 1938. 

INTERVIEWER: You said that there was an uncle who was more open. What happened to him? 

SUBJECT: There was a cousin. Well, there were-- there was also an uncle who was in-- who was released that time, but did not-- could not leave the country. That uncle was picked up a few months later again. This time he was asked-- in Darmstadt itself-- and was asked to work on snow removal. 

And he worked doing that, worked on snow removal. I know that very well because this was after my father had left. My mother saw him once, you know, in one of these scoops details, snow removal details, and she-- unlike my father, she was less cautious. She was-- she used her heart more, where he used his head too much. 

And she gave him some bread, and the gestapo saw her do that. And that was in the winter of '39, I think. And they picked my mother up and said we want you to come to report to the-- to prison, to the police, tomorrow morning, with warm underwear. And warm underwear always was the-- the way they told you you were going to be-- you were going to be imprisoned. 

And-- and so my mother went-- was in jail. My father had left for England. My mother was in jail because of this incident for about a month. 

To come back to my uncle, he never was released again from that snow detail. And he was killed, we learned later, in Dachau, I think. Many years later. 