DORI LAUB: And the women were separated from-- 

ARNOLD ROTH: Right, the women-- this way, then this way. Then, then they used to take the, the healthy ones-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Wait. I know, I know the history. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I want your impression. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, well, that's what-- what I remember is, they told us, this way, this way, and this way. That's all-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you remember of the separation from mother, from grandmother-- 

SUBJECT 1: It was very fast. Very fast. We didn't-- we didn't have time to say goodbye. We didn't have time to say anything, we just-- because they were pushing, just like cattle. Everything cattle. Cattle go to the slaughterhouse. 

SUBJECT 2: But we didn't even know we were separated, for a while. We had no idea we were separated. There was so many people. We had no idea we were separated, until-- 

SUBJECT 1: It was-- 

SUBJECT 2: --we we walking already this direction, and we see the women walking the other direction. And there was our mother, and she was holding her-- 

SUBJECT 1: Grandmother. 

SUBJECT 2: --mother-in-law, which was my father's mother. She was holding her on her arms, because she couldn't walk. 

SUBJECT 1: She couldn't walk. 

SUBJECT 2: So she would have let her go. Chances are, this is my opinion, after we heard what happened, that she would have survived, because she was a strong woman. But she wouldn't let go of her mother-in-law. She had no idea where she was walking, so she walked her right into the gas chamber. 

But, with us, we went to a-- we went to a different camp, which was fenced off from the woman. And we sat in Auschwitz also for about 10 days. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Could you signal to each other, when you-- 

SUBJECT 2: No. 

SUBJECT 1: No, we didn't see any-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, we didn't see it. 

SUBJECT 1: The only-- we saw our-- our sister, after we went through, when we took-- they took all our clothes off. They gave us the striped clothes, and they cut our hair, and they made the, the-- 

SUBJECT 2: They cut it. 

SUBJECT 1: --cut in the, cut-- cut in the-- 

SUBJECT 2: In Auschwitz they cut it complete. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, but they also-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was only in the camps. In the camps. 

SUBJECT 1: --the camp, they cut our hair off, and they gave us the clothes, with the wooden shoes, with everything else. So-- then they took us back into a big-- big barracks. And half of them, that's when we saw our sister, for-- for a half a minute. We said goodbye to her. 

SUBJECT 2: I remember standing in line, there. We were standing in line, I think, for the showers, that time. We were completely naked. And, uh, I saw, like, maybe a block away, I saw people that I-- I knew as a child, I know it was bodies. I had no idea-- 

SUBJECT 1: Because the odor was terrible. The stench was just unbearable. 

SUBJECT 2: At that time, we were still either too naive-- I mean, we seen bodies all over. And I seen, a block away, there was a fire going. I seen two men just, you know, take a body and throw it in there. And I'm looking and I'm looking. 

And I said to my father, gee, that looked to me like they were throwing these bodies into the fire or something. So Pop says, no, that was probably a tree limb or something. You know, he didn't want us to-- either-- either he didn't know, himself-- 

SUBJECT 1: He didn't know, either. 

SUBJECT 2: --or he didn't want us to know what's going on. Because you seen bodies all over. Everybody was carting bodies, here, back and forth. Something is going on over here. 

SUBJECT 1: No, the stench was awful. 

SUBJECT 2: So then, finally, they gave us showers, and they gave us clothes, and they shoved us into a barrack that was raining in. It was worse inside than it was outside. And we sat there for about 10 days, I think. And then they-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: All three of you. 

SUBJECT 2: All three of us. Yeah. There was no work for us, in Auschwitz, right? No, what did-- 

SUBJECT 1: Auschwitz was-- Auschwitz was-- that place that we were was strictly the camp that the-- 

SUBJECT 2: The camp. Transporting. 

SUBJECT 1: Transport coming in and going out, and the separation, the gas chambers, and that's all there was. Birkenau was the camp next to it, which they worked in there. But-- 

SUBJECT 2: So then we-- we-- they took us-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said you remember seeing your sister there. 

SUBJECT 2: He did. I don't remember seeing her after-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: After we came through with the-- with the clothes, all dressed up, she had her-- her dress on, the hair cut off. So we saw a, uh, one of the girls from, uh, from the, from the area. She said, that's where is our daughter Esther? She says, she's right-- 

So they called her. She came up, up front. That's-- at least I remember seeing her the last time. And that's it. 

SUBJECT 2: No, this-- --we asked about our mother, and nobody seen her. Nobody seen her. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Did you suspect it? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, we-- we didn't-- 

SUBJECT 1: Believe it or not, we didn't know-- 

SUBJECT 2: We didn't know what was going on. 

SUBJECT 1: If I were to tell you that we didn't know what went on in Auschwitz, till after-- when they evacuated, after the front, the Russians came closer, they evacuated people. And some of the people we met at the-- we were evacuated from our camp, we were in Austria, to another camp in Austria. And they came there and said-- we met there. They told us then what was happening in Auschwitz. 

SUBJECT 2: See, what happened-- what happened-- 

SUBJECT 1: That's how secret it was, that nobody knew about it. People who were working there, the one that-- those kapos, some of them were Jewish, some of them were Polish, some of them were German. And they had special uniforms, different hats. They had the same uniform, but they were clean always, pressed, and-- 

SUBJECT 2: Because the reason-- they were there already. Like, they took us in '44. They took us away. When we came to Auschwitz, some of the people from Poland were already there since '39. They were-- 

SUBJECT 1: Like hardened criminals, by that time. They were, they were-- 

SUBJECT 2: I mean, you know, they were there already for-- since '39 is, what, five years? They were ready already hardened. They knew that they're never going anywheres. were so mean to us. They were shearing our hair and everything else. Everything they said. They used to tell us, you stupid idiot, you're going to go into the fire, anyway. But it didn't penetrate. It didn't penetrate. 

SUBJECT 1: Didn't mean anything. It just, uh-- we saw the fires burning. There were the flames, the smoke-- there was so much-- so much-- we thought it was fog. It actually wasn't fog, it was all the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Smog. 

SUBJECT 1: --the smog was. It was-- Well, it was surrounded by woods. So it's-- was just-- everything was just settling down. And that's why the odor was so bad, and the fog. It was constant mist. 

The weather was just like the atmosphere in the camp-- very depressing, very sad, and very quiet. And it's, it's, uh-- but we didn't know what went on there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: "Quiet"? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, in a sense. Nobody talked, between each other, because we didn't know-- you couldn't talk to-- if you said somebody, they will, they will hit you. 

SUBJECT 2: People with the experience were afraid to tell us-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: Nobody would tell us anything. 

SUBJECT 2: They were afraid to talk to us. 

SUBJECT 1: And we, for example, when they-- we went in, when they took us into a barracks to take our clothes off, they take everything off. And they gave us-- 

We walked in the barn, was I don't know how big it was, with the clothes-- clothes piled to the sky high. 

SUBJECT 2: They locked the doors, in the back-- 

SUBJECT 1: Right. 

SUBJECT 2: --and we walked out through the other end. 

SUBJECT 1: And we had-- we had so much clothes. And you know, so we were so either naive, blind, or stupid. We didn't know. We saw all the clothes and we-- we didn't-- well, we couldn't question. There's nobody to ask a question. We can only talk to ourself, what is it? 

SUBJECT 2: Those people who took care of us didn't even-- they didn't say nothing. They did say, you're stupid. What do you need it? You're going to go to the fire, anyway. That's-- that's the only thing you are-- you were not allowed-- you didn't have time to question, because, one, two, three-- 

SUBJECT 1: See, everything was push, push, push-- 

SUBJECT 2: --move up, move up, move up. 

--move, move, move, move, move. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you talk each other? 

SUBJECT 1: We held onto-- we held down to each other. We hold on to our-- for our life. That's-- well, what-- what-- 

SUBJECT 2: You know, 14, 15 years old, we just came out of-- not even finished school. What can be talk? I mean, we were hungry. We were cold. In the 10 days, I don't think they gave us a decent meal. All we had-- 

SUBJECT 1: Decent meal. All we had is soup! Potato peel, potato-peel soup. 

SUBJECT 2: Potato peels. We were lucky if you find a potato peel. 

SUBJECT 1: You couldn't eat it, because-- 

SUBJECT 2: --most of the time, you got to the line, there was nothing left. And we were young kids. You know, for-- if you didn't know how to fight for it, you didn't eat! In 10 days, I don't think we ate one decent meal. A decent meal, forget it. A soup-- 

SUBJECT 1: No decent meal, no, we had nothing but soup, soup and a slice of bread. 

SUBJECT 2: We were cold. There was no sanitary facilities, nothing. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right, so I understand those 10 days in Auschwitz was something that's basically confusion. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. 

SUBJECT 2: To us, to us, was probably the worst-- 

SUBJECT 1: Shock-- was shock, confusion and shock. 

SUBJECT 2: --part of the whole-- of the whole year, believe it or not. Even though we worked in the concentration camp, but that-- the 10 days. In Mauthausen, we-- they took us to Mauthausen. It was also-- we were just totally-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's it's-- --Auschwitz, what is the-- what was so terrible, in Auschwitz? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, first of all, the atmosphere itself. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, you have to remember-- let me just-- let me say something. 

INTERVIEWER 1: One of you at a time. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. You have to remember one thing, that we came from home. I said before, we were sheltered. We'd never traveled anyplace. We haven't been further than a town which is about 10, 12 kilometers away. 

Here they took us into a ghetto that was... but we were still together with family. Mother used to cook-- used to get food-- was cooked-- the food was cooked by our people, was the same type of food. Whatever it was in there, you were able to get something. 

Over there, they took us into Auschwitz. They separated. We lost our mother, we lost our sister, we lost our gran-- we lost all the whole family. We didn't know-- 

Now, we didn't lose them in the sense that they were killed, we lost them. We didn't know where they were. We haven't seen. All we were left is three of us. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: We were young. We were-- for our age, at 17, I considered myself, I wasn't older than 15. That's how immature we were, at that time. And here we were, separate. 

They throw-- they-- the-- well, we went through, the way they handled us, we were scared to breathe. We were literally scared with-- they were always around you. Every time, they were hitting you, pushing you. If you-- if you didn't move fast, you got hit with a butt or they had sticks. No matter what you-- you got hit. And many people were bleeding. You didn't know-- 

So then they threw us into barracks. Uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: Mud. 

SUBJECT 1: Ah yea on the bed of hay-- triple-decker, I think, one, two, three, or four-deckered bunks made out of wood. They're about the width for maybe two people can lay on the side. We were laying there, five or six. Head-- some head this way, 

SUBJECT 2: --have to sleep four or five. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

--head this way, head this way. Somebody's feet in your face. Now, you picture this-- have young kids go through this. Clean, we were not. Because everybody was, after going through the ghetto, traveling for how many days in the cattle cars, here they throw you in with people in a bunk on just on hay. No-- forget about blankets. Forget about sheets. 

And there, head to toe, head to feet. And this is how we stayed for a, for a few hours and we lay down there. They constant came and picking people out, for some reason. Picked-- you don't know who-- who they going to pick at night, to get out. And we didn't know what-- where they went, what happened to them. 

And then, every morning, had to go outside on the-- 

SUBJECT 2: Zahlappell. 

SUBJECT 1: --Zahlappell, to be counted. The weather was miserable, was cold. We were freezing. And we were-- we were literally animals, scared animals. 

SUBJECT 2: Just imagine, here we were-- he was 17, I was, about-- not eve 15. We never saw a dead body before. There were funerals in our town, but, just as kids, we never saw a dead body. 

Here, we come in, you go to bed with four or five people, and, in the morning, you wake up with two people. You never saw a dead body before. And this was the atmosphere, itself. 

There was something-- we sensed something, but we just were afraid to talk about it, because we were hoping it's going to go away. Because we're here. There's dead people all over you. And, you know, it's curious We were always-- go looking for-- 

SUBJECT 1: We were-- we were-- 

SUBJECT 2: --a dead person. And there were so many of them, you didn't have to go look far. 

SUBJECT 1: We were starving. They gave us the soup. Mainly it was potato soup with a peel soup with a little bread. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Eh, from what you-- you were frightened but what you said before, death was not something really that penetrated. 

SUBJECT 1: No, we didn't know-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is that correct? 

SUBJECT 2: How is that? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Dead was-- death was not something you-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, it was not penetrated. We sensed something was going on. People are dying, but then we seen what they're feeding us, day after day, no food, no clothes-- 

The shelter that we had itself, a person could lay down and just die, during the night, because it got very, very cold. We had no covers. And, if you had a cover, they were saturated from the rain. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But you were-- so if I want to understand you, were you afraid to be killed, or not? 

SUBJECT 2: We had no-- we had no sense for that. We-- we were young, and we were hoping that whatever it is, we're going to start working soon, and we're going to be OK. That's the only thing you could think of. Nobody-- 

Our father certainly is not going to tell us, I think we're going to die. He wasn't going to tell it to us. All he said is, we have to fight. 

In fact, he kept on encouraging people that you have to encourage, whatever it is, wherever they're going to take us, eventually we're going to start working. If you've got a trade, you're healthy, you're going to-- they're going to give you food. Working people always have to eat. That was his philosophy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm? 

SUBJECT 2: And this is what went through our mind. But we look around ourselves, there's too many dead people, you know, too many fires. And, regardless of what Pop told me, I knew that was a person that they were throwing into the fire. 

So, it-- something started to be suspicious, I would call it this way. Then, in Mauthausen, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Oh, wait a minute here-- still in Auschwitz, 10 days, what happened? 

SUBJECT 2: Well-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Because you call them the "worst days," and I still want to understand, was it the dread, the fear of the unknown, or-- 

SUBJECT 1: Well, just-- all we had to do is look at each other, and look at the people that came with us, to see what had happened to them, from the time that we got off the train. 

SUBJECT 2: Some of them went away and never came back. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: --time that we got back together, after we went through the clothing change. The shaving of the heads. The, the supposedly showers. Which were in and out. One second, you're in, and that wa-- they turn the water on, and out you go. 

And there they sprayed us with the powder-- "delicing," they used to call it. 

SUBJECT 2: "Delousing." 

SUBJECT 1: "Delousing." Sprayed with powder and that's it, you were out. The-- the transformation from-- in such a short period of time, to us, as youngsters, was the shock, was-- what we saw, we were imagining things. We really didn't know-- we couldn't imagine, because we were-- 

We never saw it. We didn't we were not familiar with politics. The only politics we knew that we are occupied by Hungary in Czechoslovakia. 

So that's the part we were-- we were interested in. Everything else didn't concern us. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Right, so what happened? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, then they took us away. They-- they didn't tell us where they're taking us, but they, uh-- 

SUBJECT 1: Another transport. That same-- 

SUBJECT 2: Another transport. We went to Mauthausen. I don't remember how long it took us, but I know we were also in cattle cars. We were going-- 

SUBJECT 1: Slow train, on the, on the choo-choo train. We got to Mauthausen, same thing-- out-- 

SUBJECT 2: So the first thing, we walked in, and we walked from the train to Mauthausen to the camp. We walked through the camp. They had a gate, a big iron gate. "Arbeit macht das Leben Suess" was written on it. 

SUBJECT 1: So actually Mauthausen. 

SUBJECT 2: Right when you walk in. There we walk in, we saw about 10 people, hanging. Remember that? On the side, on the left side, as we were walking in, there were about 10 people hanging from the gallows. Every time they hung people, they left them there, so for other people, for an example. 

They did the same thing to the German soldiers that run-- ran away, you know, defected. They shot them on the spot and left them with a sign, there, "a lesson for another German soldier." This is the way we found Mauthausen. 

SUBJECT 1: But Mauthausen was basic a, uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: A transp-- transfer. Transfer camp. 

SUBJECT 1: --a transfer point that they from there, they, they send people in there. And then they did more selection and they send them to different labor camps, assigned to actually to labor camps where they were working. So we were lucky. We-- we went through-- we-- 

There, we had the real fight now because they wouldn't believe us, there, that we were carpenters, cabinetmakers. They actually tried to take us away from our father. 

SUBJECT 2: They did. We were separated-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Separated, separated. 

SUBJECT 2: --once. So they-- finally, we were lucky, and they got us back together. And we were sent to a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you get together? 

SUBJECT 2: I don't remember exactly how it was. It seems to me-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: Now, Dad pleaded with a-- with an officer, a German. 

SUBJECT 2: That was one time. And he got-- he got beaten up for that. But another time I wound up in another barrack, which that barrack was full of children. See? And each time a truck came and took these children away, but I had no idea where they were going. Right? 

Then in-- with him and my father, there was another boy that had a brother what I was. And I think it was once, during an air raid. It's like a vague-- you know, I can remember something. 

And he picked up the wire, and I crawled over to their side, and he crawled over to-- to his brother's side. And, after that, they didn't question us anymore. Once they gave us-- 

After this, soon, the raid was over, they gave us numbers. 

SUBJECT 1: Numbers. I-- we did-- So we don't have the numbers, here. 

SUBJECT 2: Once you have the number, they didn't question us no more. In Mauthausen, they didn't question us no more. I don't know what happened to that boy or to his brother, from the-- the kids from the barrack. 

But what I heard afterwards that what they call-- they had black trucks. The way they were explained to me about the black trucks, that they took the kids-- 15, 20, whatever-- on the truck, and they started to take them straight to the crematory. They were in closed trucks. And, by the time they got to the crematory, they were dead. There was some kind of a gas that they used, from the exhaust or something. 

And this was the last time we were separated. Because, After that, we got the numbers. They assigned us-- even the numbers, we were three numbers apart. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, we were the same-- 

SUBJECT 2: I had 68720. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, this is my number. 

SUBJECT 2: I had 68720, Pop had 23, and you had 24. 

SUBJECT 1: 24. That's the numbers we had in the-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: So 1 and 2 is-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: --not right. Somehow I squeezed in, you know, in the line, ahead of them. And somebody was between us, and they got the numbers, the numbers I had later. 

INTERVIEWER 1: So, from-- 

SUBJECT 1: So this is the sister that, uh-- the one, here. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mauthausen-- 

SUBJECT 2: --was a transfer camp. And I think there we also spent, like, about 10 days. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, at least. At least 10, or maybe two weeks. 

SUBJECT 2: But there was already, the weather was nice. And we spent most of the time-- 

SUBJECT 1: But Mauthausen was in Austria. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah. Yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: The weather was nicer, but it was also very miserable. Every-- 

SUBJECT 2: It was warm-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: They were selecting people. We didn't know what was happening, that-- we didn't rest, constant, out, back into the barracks, another barracks, back out to the field, selecting, back and forth. We really didn't know what it was. Constant, constant confusion. 

And the same-- the sleeping quarters were the same-- barracks, with hay and head-- head-to-feet sleeping. Finally till we-- till they shipped up. 

SUBJECT 2: We did have an advantage, during the day. The weather was much nicer. And we were able to warm our bodies a little bit, during the day. But, as far as the food goes, it was next to nothing. Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened next? 

SUBJECT 2: From Mauthausen? 

SUBJECT 1: We went-- we were shipped to-- 

SUBJECT 2: From Mauthausen, they shipped us to, uh-- 

SUBJECT 1: Melk. 

SUBJECT 2: --Melk, a working camp. 

SUBJECT 1: That's what you call wha-- like in the army, you would go to basic, to a station, to a camp. And there they assign you to a basic training. From basic training, you are assigned to a-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: How about yourself? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. That's why-- that's how it worked. Auschwitz to Mauthausen, Mauthausen to Melk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: This we know, because we want to know you. 

SUBJECT 2: We went to Melk, and, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But your own experience. 

SUBJECT 2: We went to-- they took us to Melk. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: --train, cars-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, by train. All by-- always by train. Always by cattle car. 

INTERVIEWER 2: And your father was with you. 

SUBJECT 1: With us. We were lucky. That's where we were separate-- finally got together. And from there on we were together, because we were assigned as cabinetmakers. So where they-- they sent us to Melk, and-- 

SUBJECT 2: But we worked there before we-- before we got to work as cabinetmakers, we worked in Schachtbau. Remember Schachtbau? They were building, uh, tunnels in the mountains. 

SUBJECT 1: That was 

SUBJECT 2: Remember Schachtbau? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, that's right. 

SUBJECT 2: We worked in Schachtbau, for about-- 

SUBJECT 1: I remember the name. 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah? 

SUBJECT 1: Under tunnels. 

SUBJECT 2: I'm surprised, myself, because I haven't talked about these things, believe it or not, for at least 30 years. I never talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And you-- 

SUBJECT 2: But it comes back, you know? 

SUBJECT 1: We were together. 

SUBJECT 2: We worked together. We were-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: You haven't talked about the mine? 

SUBJECT 1: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: It's very interesting that memories from the age 17 are completely gone. 

SUBJECT 1: They are. 

INTERVIEWER 1: They're completely gone. 

SUBJECT 1: They are so-- I'm sorry, when I spoke-- they are so fuzzy. I can sit down and, and try to restructure the life when we were younger. I can tell you a story about, when we were younger, how-- what we used to do as children. But-- but the last few days, everything was so-- the shock that we were-- that was caused by the whole transformation. 

And I will just st-- how naive we were, we were so-- as I said before, my father took me-- I'll go back to the-- to back home, for second. In-- back in-- to go back home, before they took us to the-- to the ghetto. He took me-- 

I wanted to be a cabinetmaker, but I wanted to be a better-- made better furniture than he was making, like the more modern. So he took me to Budapest. Because, myself, I wouldn't go to-- He set me-- found me a job there in a plant to be an apprentice. Find me a place to live, all the arrangement for food and everything else, and the man, how much he's going to pay me, and so. 

And I stayed. He left me. Everything was fine. Set up. I stayed there for one week. I got on the train, and I came home. 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 1: I was-- I couldn't stay away from-- I was just not used to it. It just, it was, all of a sudden, here I'm alone-- no family, no parents, in a big city, coming from a little village, to Budapest. It's like-- like a different world. So I was there for one week, and I came right back home. 

Now, imagine what this did to us, what we, all of a sudden, from home took us to the ghetto, from the ghetto to Auschwitz, and Auschwitz, and then, all of a sudden, here we are in a camp, responsible for ourself, for our own survival, actually. It was very hard to cope. 

INTERVIEWER 1: You were working in Schachtbau. 

SUBJECT 2: We were working-- they were building-- I don't know the place. I know we were going from-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your experience. Yeah 

SUBJECT 2: Yeah, well, we were all together. So, anyway, in the morning, we used to leave very early, in a cattle car. 

SUBJECT 1: They had-- they had-- no, they had, like, other stations, they had, like, the railroad, like the railroad stations here have platform, and there we used to wait for a train, for our train to come, the work train, which was called-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] take us into the station by the factor-- was un-- was un-- they used to build underground factories under mountains. That's where we worked for a little while. I don't remember exactly how long. 

SUBJECT 2: I think for about a month, it was, there, because I remember we used to have, like, blisters. We had never had shovels and picks in our hands, you know? And here, you couldn't stop for a minute, because the kapo was there, on top of you, all the time. 

SUBJECT 1: The Germans, the guards, 

SUBJECT 2: The first day, I came home, I had blisters, here. The next day, they all opened up. Right? But, you know, Pop's hand worked hard. He didn't care what he worked with. 

Him, I-- he didn't do so good, either, but we were crying. We were children! You know, let's face it. 

But somehow, when we came-- one night, we came to the camp, they finally started to select tischlers, cabinetmakers. 

SUBJECT 1: Cabinetmakers. 

SUBJECT 2: So Pop was the first one, and-- come on, you are cabinetmakers. We had problems! The guy was selecting, you are a tischler? He tells me, he says, you couldn't be a tischler. How could you be a tischler? 

I am a tischler. How old are you? So I used to tell him, I'm 19, but he didn't believe me, because I-- we happened to be small. We're not big now, either. But-- 

So we got rapped a few times over our head. And my father and him. By the time we got ourselves-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, we tried to push ourselves, you know, to get-- to get into this. 

SUBJECT 2: --5,000 people in one camp, you can imagine that there must have at least 5,000 cabinetmakers. Everybody wants to be working inside. It so happened we were lucky. We were selected. And the next day, the next day, lo and behold, they put us into a-- 

SUBJECT 1: Passenger car. 

SUBJECT 2: --passenger car, and they take us out to, uh-- I think we traveled about an hour, an hour and 15 minutes, to a factory. Which they were making prefabricated homes. You know-- 

SUBJECT 1: Barracks, barracks, for when they bombed out the-- 

SUBJECT 2: So they set up a two-bedroom house in a matter of an hour. And we made the parts that-- everything was engineered to a T. 

SUBJECT 1: So that was our salvation. That-- actually, that saved us for the time maybe because we worked in there, the morning that we were traveled. There were the trains were. We had, like-- we had one or two cars, we had-- was a regular passenger train. 

SUBJECT 2: For the [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: For the-- and we had one or two cars that were for us, with guards, separated from the civilian passengers. But the train was heated. So we used to-- as we were the youngest, practically, in the group there, we used to always find a place under the seat, close to the floor, where the heaters were. 

So we used to lay there till we got to the job. We were-- we were resting and sleeping. Because at night you couldn't sleep in the barracks, so we slept there. We rested, and we got there. 

We worked there all day. We got-- and we also had a little bit better food than the one-- because-- 

SUBJECT 2: The lunches they served us in the factory-- 

SUBJECT 1: Because the factory was supplying us with lunch. So was a-- was better food than the people were getting in the camps or out in different and under the-- and out-- we were so-- we were treated as professional, more as profession, as tradespeople. And then coming home. 

They didn't bother us in the camp as much. If they needed something for some work at night, they never bothered us. For some reason, we were left as special, and they let us go. 

The whole group, there were about 50 of us, 100-- something. Whatever there was-- there two cars and-- 

SUBJECT 2: And there was another group, called Haufwerk [INAUDIBLE] Remember Haufwerk which was in there? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. Well, that's our company, too. That was our company. We worked in the same place. Haufwerk Amsterdam. That was the name of the company we worked-- 

SUBJECT 2: --group of 50 that worked there, but they were outside-- outside-- the lumber. 

SUBJECT 1: They were in the yard, the lumber yard. We were in the, in the factory. 

INTERVIEWER 2: You said when you had trouble with the work you helped each other. 

SUBJECT 1: Right. Well, what happened, this toe, I hit it with a hammer. We had-- what we had to do, they, we had piles of lumber, each precut. It was more of a, uh, like an assembly line. Preset, precut, and all we had to do was-- 

We had benches, and put the stuff together and nail it together. Put in the piece, the long piece, the short boards, and then nail each one. We were trained. We had to produce a certain amount of work, in order for us to stay there. Otherwise, you would not go. 

So we used to take the nails in our hands and put a nail down. With one shot, the nail had to go in. 

SUBJECT 2: The handle was long. 

SUBJECT 1: One day, the one day, we were-- with a hammer-- we were used with tools, because we grew up in a-- my fa-- our father was a cabinetmaker. But still, we had never worked with the tools. 

So, one day, I hit this nail-- this finger. And it swell up, like this. I had to hide it, because, if I had-- if I went on the sick call, that would have been the end of me. Once-- once I-- 

SUBJECT 2: Let me tell the story about this. What happened was-- 

SUBJECT 1: Once they left me they let me finish. 

SUBJECT 2: They had two or three people working on a bench. It was like production work. In sections-- 

SUBJECT 1: Assembly line, assembly line. 

SUBJECT 2: Sections-- assembly-- Each bench was producing something else. Our father was put on with another guy on one bench that they were making the parts for the roof, which was the heaviest part, section of the whole job, there. 

And my-- our father, he was a cabinetmaker. He was not one of those guys that takes a nail and, kaboom, right in. He took a hammer, a hammer-- you know, so slowly that it doesn't slip off the nail and doesn't damage the wood. Because he was a professional. So, naturally, he couldn't produce, because he was a little bit older and probably by then a little too weak already. So he couldn't produce. 

So we went over, ourselves, to one of the-- I don't remember if it was the Gestapo from the factory or our own-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, no, there was a German, a-- a foreman. A foreman. 

SUBJECT 2: Me and him were working on small parts, you know, that was really very light. And we felt that it's easy for us. So we talked to him, and we told him that we were afraid that Pop is going to get shoved out of the group. 

So we talked to him, and we told him, we want to change. Because this is a line of work-- we didn't tell him that-- but Pop is more professional, and he will do this job better, and we will do this job better. So they took Pop off from this heavy work, and they put him on the easy work. 

And me and him started-- they trained us, and it worked out won-- very nice, you know? Pop stayed in the group, and he was able to do his professional work better. And we were more like roughnecks, you know? And one, two, three, produce. 

We had to make, like, 15 parts a day. If you made 16 or 17, the next day we took it easy, because we were overproduced and we wouldn't give them in, even though they were ready in the warehouse. But they didn't know until we gave them the count. 

But if we gave them one extra piece, they used to give us an extra coupon for cigarettes. For cigarettes, on the black market you were able to buy shoes or-- you know, if you didn't smoke, Pop used to save the cigarettes. We were able to buy bread for it. Because there was always somebody who was selling his last piece of bread-- unfortunately, they were sick. 

SUBJECT 1: They were dying. 

SUBJECT 2: But this is the way-- this was the way of life. By then, we were already more or less seasoned in it. 

So anyway, one day he smacks his finger up. It was very cold, and he missed the nail. And the factory was cold when we came in, most of the time, you know? 

So he had to bandage his finger. In order for us to the quota, I had to run around three times and they shouldn't miss him. Even though he did work. He helped me to pick up. He put in one nail, and led the fingers like this, just so that he should do something. 

But I ran around three times, to get him off the hook he shouldn't have to go to the hospital. Because if he goes to the hospital, he would never come out. 

SUBJECT 1: So, once they take you out of the group for one thing-- 

SUBJECT 2: Forget it. Forget it. You never go back to that group. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you manage to do a double quota? 

SUBJECT 2: No, we didn't do a double quota. We just made, like-- well, we were young, and-- that time, we-- I felt, you know, a little better than we were in Auschwitz and Mauthausen, because we had this food-- 

SUBJECT 1: We were getting better food there. 

SUBJECT 2: We were-- we had clean clothes, and Sunday we were off. I wouldn't call it exactly a motel, but it was better living already, comparing to Auschwitz or Mauthausen. 

So I managed, for as long as it took him to heal the finger. And I managed to do-- you know, the table was long, like, from here to beyond the wall. About three feet wide, right? 

But they were heavy. They were miserably heavy. And we had to-- when we picked them up, we had to 

SUBJECT 1: Swinging. 

SUBJECT 2: --you know, start swinging, one in each hand, and up into the air, to put them on top of the pile. 

SUBJECT 1: To pile them up. 

SUBJECT 2: And we managed to keep the quota. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, we just had to produce-- 

SUBJECT 2: You have to produce at least 15, 16-- 

SUBJECT 1: I did some, but I had to-- do other work because I couldn't use my finger. I just was like this. 

SUBJECT 2: Just wouldn't let him go into the, to the sick house, what they call, uh, to the hospital, let's put it this way. Because, once they take them out of the group, and with his finger, forget it. So I worked harder, to keep him alive. And he worked harder, when we were together, to keep Pop alive. Because, if he wouldn't have been in that group, he would have never survived, never. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. Were you liberated from that camp? 

SUBJECT 1: No. 

SUBJECT 2: No, no, unfortunately, they moved us from there to, uh-- 

SUBJECT 1: Ebensee. 

SUBJECT 2: --Ebensee, which we also worked no more in factories. We worked on the railroad Bahn. 

SUBJECT 1: That was-- that was-- 

SUBJECT 2: That was-- 

SUBJECT 1: That was the worst part. 

SUBJECT 2: That was rough. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: It was towards the end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was that near Garmisch? 

SUBJECT 1: Pardon me? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Garmisch, Garmisch near-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, Ebensee is near-- well, it's near Linz. It's about-- it's about 50 miles or so from Linz, up in that area. It's-- There, we already were just like the other prisoners. We were no-- 

SUBJECT 2: Well, Melk was Austria, too, wasn't it? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. It was-- it was-- just a little bit further, closer, towards Linz. But there, we were treated just like everybody else. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --mountainous, near the-- 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. It's a lot of mountains, there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Zugspitze no? 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah. And there, already we were treated different. We were there like everybody else, and things were rough. Because the front was getting closer, and we were mistreated something awful. 

It was so bad that, the last few days, we couldn't walk by ourselves, we had to walk three of us together, hold on to each other, in order for us to be able to walk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: For the last few days before the liberation? 

SUBJECT 1: Liberation. Because, once-- in Melk, we were good, because we were treated-- we had food and the-- the train ride in the morning, and the train ride in the afternoon, it really gave us some-- rejuvenated us for the next day, because we warmed up, we felt a little bit better, and the food, the lunch-- 

The supper in the camp was just the same. The breakfast was the same as everybody else. But the lunch, that was better. 

So we had one meal that we ate, we were able to sit down, and we were-- it was warmer. At lunchtime, the place was warmer. So it really felt different. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In what months, approximately, were you transferred to-- 

SUBJECT 1: We were transf-- we were liberated in May. I would say we were transferred somewhere, I think, in March or April, something like-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: By train? 

SUBJECT 1: By train, always by train. 

INTERVIEWER 1: I think what is so important about you is the three together. 

SUBJECT 1: It was a miracle. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK, what-- how would-- would there be times that you would speak to each other, or that you would talk about the future, or about the fast? Aside from practic-- 

SUBJECT 1: No. No. 

INTERVIEWER 1: How did you relate-- what was-- 

SUBJECT 1: Just about the day, just about the day-- uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: Just survival. 

SUBJECT 1: Survival, period. 

SUBJECT 2: We were talking about, how much bread we going to get tonight, how much-- you know, if we get extra soup, who are we going to give it to? Because we had cousins, we had uncles in the camp-- 

SUBJECT 1: They used to come to us, to, uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: --where we were-- actually, where we lived, you know? And they knew already that we had the-- the dinner in the camp-- I mean, at work-- so that, we come into the camp, we don't eat, most of the time, because they gave us the dinner and the supper. So, most of the time, we didn't need the double portion, so we-- they-- 

SUBJECT 1: No, we didn't need it, but we save it-- somebody came-- 

SUBJECT 2: We saved it, yeah. 

SUBJECT 1: --gave him a little soup-- 

SUBJECT 2: This was our-- 

SUBJECT 1: --piece of bread, something. 

SUBJECT 2: This was our conversation. This was our conversation. The shoes are going bad, you know, and, uh, you need new shoes. So Pop used to go, like, for instance, OK, this week we're going to get two extra coupons, so there's going to be cigarettes, and we're going to have so much extra bread, and we're going to go out and see if we can buy shoes. 

Where the shoes came from, I'll never know. But there was always somebody who brought in a pair of new shoes-- you know, high shoes. And if you had shoes, that was survival. Because once your feet frozen cold, swollen, you were finished. 

SUBJECT 1: See, most of the-- the-- 

SUBJECT 2: That's what-- that was our topic of conversation. 

SUBJECT 1: It was never about what happened, what's going to happen, where are we going to-- what happened? How come we are here? What are we doing here? 

It was never a question. There is only-- only one thing that Pop used to tell us. It's only-- it's only a little while. It's not going to-- it's going to be-- not going to be long. It's going to-- it will be end. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the end, and then what? Did you think of-- talk of the future? 

SUBJECT 1: Well, the future was, we really-- we didn't-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: You didn't talk about it. 

SUBJECT 1: No, not-- not while we were there. See, what happened, we were liberated, we were sick. There was no-- we had nothing on our mind. We couldn't think of any-- we were-- we were this skinny. We were just-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: But did you talk-- when you said, Pop said it's only a short while. 

SUBJECT 1: We said-- we can-- until you'll make it. We said-- until you can make it. We are-- we-- we haven't-- we have-- we have no energy. We have no [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] We can't walk. We can-- 

We don't think we're going to make it. We don't think-- That was towards the end, when we-- we used to get, we used to get the, the-- 

We had some guards, there, that were older men. They used to talk to us, sort of-- 

SUBJECT 2: [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 1: --sneak in that this is happening. The Ger-- this is-- the Americans are winning. So here there are-- so we used to-- that used to give us-- not us, like, our father, it wouldn't be long. 

We're going to sur-- we're going to-- we're going to survive. We're going to be liberated. We're going to go home. 

SUBJECT 2: He understood politics. 

SUBJECT 1: He was a politician, from way back. We didn't. So he used to say, it wouldn't be long. And that's what kept us alive, until the last minute, even though he couldn't walk-- he couldn't walk-- worse than us. 

SUBJECT 2: He almost didn't make it. 

SUBJECT 1: He almost didn't make it, but he kept telling us it wouldn't be long. Just-- just hold on, another day, another day. And-- and that's how we survived. 

Because we were together, we survived because, we helped each other, just even walking. And, for example, the-- when we were-- when the camp opened, we were liberated by the Americans. When the Americans, the GIs, came in, and they saw the camp, the condition of the camp, the next day they brought in-- was it next-- yeah, the next day they brought-- they set up field kitchens, with soup and food and everything else. 

And, naturally, all we had to do is see food. So imagine what happened. So he told us, we all got in line, we got some soup, and we all want to go back for seconds. 

He says, no. He literally held us and says, you're not going back. He said, there'll be more tomorrow. And that's what saved us. Because there were thousands, literally 1,000 people, all over the place-- 

SUBJECT 2: Dying of diarrhea. 

SUBJECT 1: --just dying of diarrhea. They just died, because we couldn't digest fast-- fat food. I mean, our stomachs were, were-- we had no-- we had no stomachs. 

So everybody grabbed the food and ate it fast. Went back for seconds, and that was the end. And my friend that survived with us died the last-- after they were liberated. There were more people die that were liberated-- 

SUBJECT 2: In the camp. 

SUBJECT 1: --in the camp, than-- than during the time we were in camp, that we knew. 

The next day, the American, when they saw what was happening, they took the camp, the kitchens, off, away from the camp. And they brought-- they gave us a diet food-- 

SUBJECT 2: That was [INAUDIBLE]. 

SUBJECT 1: --crackers, crackers, with milk. We have-- we only got a couple of crackers with a little milk, piece of sugar. And little, every day, a little bit more. That's how they stopped the tragedy. There was a terrible tragedy what happened, after they were liberated. 

INTERVIEWER 1: All right. You are free. I'm and just-- Did you begin talking to each other. 

SUBJECT 1: About going back home. 

SUBJECT 2: Starting to make a plan-- 

SUBJECT 1: About going-- 

SUBJECT 2: --about going back home, but we had to stay, because Pop was bad. He was really-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: --couldn't move. He was a skeleton. 

SUBJECT 1: Worse than us. 

SUBJECT 2: So he was at that time... 

SUBJECT 1: We picked up. We got a hold of ourselves. 

SUBJECT 2: The Americans got him. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was there ever a time-- you're-- you're-- I would like to hear what-- more about thoughts and kind-- not to say about exactly what happened. Was there ever a time that you sat together and talked about the past? About the village, about-- 

SUBJECT 1: About going-- about going back home. We're going to go back home. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: No, we really didn't. We really didn't. It was something like, you did not want to talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Mmm-hm. 

SUBJECT 2: It was like-- like him or me would have had leprosy. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Including-- 

SUBJECT 2: You don't want to talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --even after the liberation. 

SUBJECT 2: We did not talk about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is that why, for 30 years, you're telling, me, it's the first time that you-- 

SUBJECT 2: Yes. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: We couldn't. We couldn't. 

SUBJECT 2: We'd never get together and discuss the past. We do, sometimes, we go out together on a job sometimes. Sometimes-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

INTERVIEWER 1: --working? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, he's an electrical contractor. I go, once in a while, I-- I help him out. But I'm not with him on work as a machinist. But, once in a while, I make a few extra dollars and help him on the job. But he has men working, so. 

Once in a blue moon we just happened to-- or you remember that little river we had in the back of the house, you know, we used to go fishing or ice-skating. That's about all the conversation takes place. As far as the camp goes, I don't know about him, but I am trying to not to talk about it, because we do-- I do have nightmares. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, we get very upset. 

SUBJECT 2: My wife has nightmares. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What are the nightmares? 

SUBJECT 2: The nightmares, all we have to see is there's going to be a picture about Nazis. 

SUBJECT 1: Nazis. 

SUBJECT 2: Bingo. The same night. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What is the nightmare? 

SUBJECT 2: It's just-- 

SUBJECT 1: All kind. 

SUBJECT 2: X 

SUBJECT 1: I wake up screaming. 

SUBJECT 2: Screaming, pushing, hollering. You know, and break out in a-- break out in a sweat. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Both have the same nightmares? How do you know? 

SUBJECT 1: I know I have nightmares. 

INTERVIEWER 1: But how do you-- you don't talk about it, so how would you-- 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 1: [INAUDIBLE] nightmares about the [INAUDIBLE] 

SUBJECT 2: Once in a while-- 

SUBJECT 1: --say, did you watch this-- did you watch this on television? I says, no, my kids wouldn't let me watch it, because I have nightmares. I say he also has nightmares. He says he watches it, but he knows he has nightmares. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What in your nightmares, that you are-- a lot of commotion and-- 

SUBJECT 1: The Nazis, the Nazis, [INAUDIBLE] Nazis. 

SUBJECT 2: Nazis. It's a repetition. 

SUBJECT 1: SS, SS. 

SUBJECT 2: It's actually a repetition. The nightmare is a repetition. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you get events or-- 

SUBJECT 2: Exactly. How many times I scream, I wake up screaming, and my wife wakes me up, you know. I don't wake up by myself, she, you know, shakes me up. I go back to sleep. 

And then, the next day, she says, what was the nightmare about? I says, you wouldn't believe it. I says, you just, you wouldn't believe it. The same thing. They-- I was in the concentration camp. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In where? In which one? 

SUBJECT 2: I can't. It's a dull picture. You can't see it. I know they took me away, and-- and I knew-- and somehow I kept on sha-- I even tell her, I kept on shaking my head. I-- it's a-- it's a nightmare! It couldn't-- it's a dream. It cannot be real. 

And she says, well, you were screaming. I says, I know I was screaming. I woke up, I was breathless. Well, the same thing happens to her! 

INTERVIEWER 1: She's a survivor, too? 

SUBJECT 2: She's a survivor. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And your nightmares? 

SUBJECT 1: The same, just mainly about the, the SS, and the-- can-- nothing in particular. Nothing in-- the, just, just, just, it's all there-- scary, scary. And I wake up. Actually my wife has to wake me up too. I don't wake up. And I wake up wet, shaking. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And I assume then there is also not much talk in the family about it. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, our son, my son, he likes to-- he asks questions. He-- I should tell him about the past, I tell him what happened. But it's hard to-- I just feel, by telling it to him, I don't think he can-- 

I don't want to tell him the atrocity that we went through. How can I tell him that, one day, our father something and I-- we had to stay there and watch when a, a kapo took him, if you remember. They put him, his head, into a barrel of water and held him there. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Your father. 

SUBJECT 1: My father. And we had to stay there, watch it, helpless, and, and, and crying. That's it then-- then-- 

SUBJECT 2: The time when he got 24 with a rubber hose, because we got separated and he wouldn't-- and he would not allow us to get separated. 

SUBJECT 1: With a rubber-- with a big rubber hose, he was giving I don't know how-- 

SUBJECT 2: You can't tell-- 

SUBJECT 1: --how many-- 

SUBJECT 2: You can tell to a kid, you know, you were hungry, cold, or you worked hard, but you can't tell him stories like this. I tell my son, I says, you know, when I was your age I was already experienced from the concentration camp. I don't want to know about that, he says, that's behind you. 

He says, I don't want to know about this. You were-- it's your nightmare, he says. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: You want to keep on having nightmares, he says, have nightmares. 

SUBJECT 1: It's hard for him to understand that this-- how can-- how can this happen? Even though he's a smart boy and everything else, but they just-- I can't talk about. It's very hard for me to talk, because I get very emotional and upset about it. 

INTERVIEWER 1: And that father with his head in the well was in which camp? 

SUBJECT 1: In Melk. 

INTERVIEWER 1: In Melk. 

SUBJECT 1: Melk. That was in the good camp. 

SUBJECT 2: I think that was because they found a louse on him. And that-- 

SUBJECT 1: Something-- something happened. 

SUBJECT 2: And that was totally impossible, because every night he had delousing. You couldn't-- you couldn't go one day without having lice, because they just did not disinfect you. It so happened, we happened to be clean, at that time when we worked in that camp, because we were, you know, every night they gave us clean clothes, or once a week or whatever it was, and they took our clothes, gave us new numbers. 

SUBJECT 1: But then you slept on the beds and slept on beds-- 

SUBJECT 2: --somebody else slept-- 

SUBJECT 1: --with straw in there, you know? It's so con-- con-- the thing are just multiplying. You just couldn't, uh-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Would you like to add anything? Because, otherwise-- 

SUBJECT 2: No, I guess we were liberated. That's it. We don't talk about it. As a matter of fact, I mentioned outside, before, that it's funny-- when we came to this country, everybody says, leave it behind the door. Forget it. It never happened. 

But now, 30 years, 35 years later, it's, you know, we have to talk about it. It brings back memories. . But I doubt if I'll be talking about it again, because I just don't want to remember it. 

SUBJECT 1: It's hard. It's hard, because, even for us, right now, it's hard to realize that actually things did happen the way it did happened, that people can do to people and-- As it started when our best friend turned against us. He was our first enemy. He was our first enemy, that he practically shoot me when I want to go out to-- beg him to let me go out to the store. . And so I-- 

SUBJECT 2: I can say-- well, I could say I'm glad I'm in this country, and I hope it never happens in this country, and I hope it never happens anywheres. Because when human-- when human-- how shall I say this? Human people did to humanity-- It's-- 

SUBJECT 1: Humans can do to to humanity. 

SUBJECT 2: It's not possible to describe, in a million years. I could sit here for 24 days, or 24 hours, and continue talking, and it's going to be-- 

SUBJECT 1: You have to remember, we were only there for one year. What we went through. Now, picture that people from Poland and different countries were in there for three, four years. If they survived, they are heroes. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, what happened to your father? 

SUBJECT 2: Well, he died. 

SUBJECT 1: Yeah, he came to this country, came with us, and he passed away, uh-- 

SUBJECT 2: In '69, '70. 

SUBJECT 1: '70. About 10, 11, 12 years-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Who did he live with, here? 

SUBJECT 1: He-- he married. He married a person, a woman, also from Europe. And they lived in the Bronx. And he passed away-- he was 70--? 

SUBJECT 2: 72. 

SUBJECT 1: --72, when he passed away. 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Thank you. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you very much. 

SUBJECT 2: OK. 

SUBJECT 1: Thank you. 

[INTERPOSING VOICES] 

SUBJECT 2: I hope our children and our grandchildren won't have to tell these stories. 

SUBJECT 1: Well, but they should be able to see it. They should be able to see it, to know-- I just-- they have to watch it shouldn't happen. That's-- 

