INTERVIEWER: And when you were born, OK? 

You need a voice level on me, Chris. 

SUBJECT: So you need my-- my birth date? 

INTERVIEWER: Well-- 

SUBJECT: I can say I was born in 1926. 

INTERVIEWER: That's fine. Fine, fine. 

CREW: OK, if you could speak at the level-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. I am speaking to Mr. Bouton And we're talking about his early life. If you want me to count, I'll count. 

CREW: You're going to have to talk louder. 

INTERVIEWER: I will have to talk a little louder? OK. I'd like to keep my level fairly, uh, unintrusive, as I said, so. 

CREW: OK. 

CREW: [INAUDIBLE] 

INTERVIEWER: OK, fine. Wonderful. I'll remember that. 

CREW: OK, well, we already got a level. 

INTERVIEWER: Are we rolling? 

CREW: Uh, yeah. We're rolling. Chris, we're rolling? 

CREW: Yeah. 

CREW: OK. Well, whenever you're ready. 

INTERVIEWER: All righty. All right, Mr. just give us your full name, the place you were born. 

SUBJECT: My name is Henri Bouton I-- born in 1926. I come from Paris, France. And-- 

INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 

SUBJECT: And my earliest recollection of childhood-- my first encounter with anti-Semitism and hatred and hurt beg-- began already at the age of six, when in school we Jews were a minority. One child out of 150 was Jewish. And in those young days of mine, we were made to feel ashamed of being Jewish. We were pointed by other children as those who killed Jesus Christ. 

And with this in mind, this is the type of upbringing that came. I used to be ashamed. I'm no longer ashamed. I'm kind of proud of it now. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember any incidents in that early time of being uncomfortable about being Jewish? Anything that you remember specifically-- someone said something that you remember, someone got into-- 

SUBJECT: Well, you know, it is well known that the cruelty of children is very harsh. And to be constantly pointed at, to be constantly mocked and ridiculed, to be constantly made aware that you were nothing, ended up to make us children feel very withdrawn and guilty. 

INTERVIEWER: What about your teachers? 

SUBJECT: The-- the teachers, the teachers made-- made as if nothing was ever happening. 

INTERVIEWER: They didn't? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. You see, French people, unfortunately, are very-- and always have been very anti-Semitic. And they still are today. Now, my earliest recollection of childhood, as I told you, hasn't changed. Then by the time I was 13, World War II broke out. I became an apprentice jockey in the outskirts of Paris. And it didn't take about one year when the law came out that Jews must wear a star 

INTERVIEWER: Was it unusual-- 

SUBJECT: With the word "Jew." 

INTERVIEWER: Was it unusual for a Jewish boy to become a jockey? 

SUBJECT: Well, yes. Yes, because you have to realize there were only about 375,000 Jews in a country of 42 million. So it made me the rare bird. The fact I was very small helped an awful lot. Until the age of 19, I was only 4' 9" and about 85 pounds. 

Now, at-- at work, the same thing came all over again. The biggest fun that the other employees-- jockeys, jockeys or exercise boys-- had was to grab me, pin me down, pull down my pants so they can laugh at my circumcision. 

Now, all this type of upbringing didn't help much to make you feel very secure. However, when I-- by the time I was 14, I went to visit my mother in Paris. And the French passed an order for all Jews to assemble at a big sports arena, the Palais des Sports, which is like the Madison Square Garden of Paris. 

INTERVIEWER: You were wearing-- you said-- 

SUBJECT: I was wearing the star. At first, being that I was only a kid-- to me, I felt almost like a sheriff's deputy. You know, it was kind of fun. But then little by little, the thoughts came to me. I'm like a marked piece of cattle. 

And when-- when the order came for all Jews to come to the Palais des Sports with three days' worth of food and some money, I was on my way to it. But somehow, the teachings of my Jewish upbringing came back. The teachings of the-- of-- of the Exodus, the teachings of the pogroms, the teachings of the Spanish Inquisition, those came back. And I started saying to myself, if you want me, you'll come and get me. 

Unfortunately, 22,000 French Jews went, like lambs to the slaughterhouse. And they have never been heard from since. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the order-- how it came, and how you saw it? 

SUBJECT: Oh, there's no doubt in my mind. The Germans did all the killing. But it's the French who delivered the Jews on a silver platter. 

INTERVIEWER: The order-- do you remember the order? Was it written? Did you hear it? How? 

SUBJECT: Uh, what-- what happened was the French police passed by in every single house and told the concierge, which is the-- the doorman or the housekeeper, to let all the Jews know. Nothing was written. It may have been in written. But you know, I was 13 years old, 14 years old. You know, you don't-- you can't really remember that much. 

But all I know is I was on my way to that Palais-- Palais des Sports. And I stopped myself. And I said, no. I said, I will not bend my backs in a way for the lashes, like in the pogroms. And I will not turn the other cheek to expect another slap. 

INTERVIEWER: Where you alone on your way to the Palais? 

SUBJECT: Yes. At that time, my father and my two other brothers were in the southern part of France, near the Spanish border. If you remember, France was separated in half with the Vichy government. And I went back to work and spoke with my employer. And at the time, he had a horse that had to be shipped into-- to pasture, to retirement. And the man accom-- that accompanied that horse was made aware of the fact that I will be hidden under the legs of that horse in order to go-- to pass that border that separated the two France. 

This was another horrible experience, because here I was, laying under the straw between the horse's legs. A horse will never step on anyone. And the Germans came in to check to see if nobody was hiding-- came with bayonets to stick in the straw. A bayonet came practically right in front of my face. German officer came to look at the horse-- they're horse lovers-- and wanting to pet the horse. My luck was, that horse was a very ticklish and nervous horse. And the minute he reached for the horse the horse went for him. And he said, oh, nobody could be there. 

And I know when that German officer looked in the straw, I could see his face. And I was sure he saw me. And I felt the blood drain off my face. But my luck was, he didn't see me. And I passed that border. 

I joined my parents. And it didn't take long before the Germans, as you know, took over all of France. And again, the same story started. And my mother and my three brothers were interned in a French camp. Yes, the French had camps also. 

INTERVIEWER: Wait, your-- if you don't mind, Sir-- your employer did-- who was not Jewish-- 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER: But was French, he did help save you? 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. There-- you know, there's always the exception to the rule. There-- there were many Frenchmen who saved Jews. 

INTERVIEWER: Um-hmm. 

SUBJECT: But when you speak about the vast majority-- when I say the French are anti-Semitic, it's because the majority is, not the minority. 

INTERVIEWER: But you were on your way to the Palais des Sports. You changed your mind. You ran back to the stables and you asked to be hidden. Is that how it happened? 

SUBJECT: Right. I asked him to be hidden. And that's when he told me, we have a horse that has to be shipped to the southern parts of France. And we will smuggle you through that way. 

INTERVIEWER: So now you went to southern France. And you rejoined your par-- your father? 

SUBJECT: My father and my mother and my two other brothers. And the gendarmes, the nice French gendarmes caught us. And at 14, I was led away in handcuffs-- so was my mother and my brothers-- to be taken to that camp in the southern parts of France. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name of the camp? 

SUBJECT: Yes, Rivesaltes. It was near the-- um-- going towards Toulon, which is a port. It was in-- in that area. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was guarding that-- who were the guards in that camp? 

SUBJECT: The French. The French-- very happily, very proudly. However, I must say there was one guard who spoke to my mother and said, look, you have three children with you. He probably knew that we will all be shipped to-- to Germany. 

And he said, look, make believe you're pregnant. Tell them you're pregnant. And somehow, he managed-- he pleaded for my mother, saying, look, the woman has three sons. Let her keep one. And they agreed. And this is how I managed out of that camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Uh-- can you tell us exactly what happened? You and your mother left together, or how did-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. My mother and-- and I left. And my two brothers were kept in that camp until they were shipped out to the German concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Your father was with the-- 

SUBJECT: No. My-- my father hid away. And the gendarmes only caught my mother and my three brothers. 

INTERVIEWER: All right. Now, the gendarmes allowed you and your mother to leave the camp. 

SUBJECT: Um-hmm. 

INTERVIEWER: How long were you in the camp? 

SUBJECT: We were in that camp about three months. 

INTERVIEWER: What were conditions? 

SUBJECT: We were just sitting and waiting and waiting. And every day big railroad train-- trains came-- you know, box cars. And people were shoved in. And it was all done by the French. 

INTERVIEWER: What year was this? 

SUBJECT: That was in-- about, I think, 1940. 

INTERVIEWER: What were the conditions in that camp? 

SUBJECT: They weren't pleasant. But I can't say they were any harsh or any mistreatment. The food, of course-- if you can call it food. But it-- it wasn't really harsh treatment. But-- 

INTERVIEWER: Well, then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Then I went to work for a gentleman farmer. I hid at a farm. It was extremely religious family-- Catholics. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother was with you? 

SUBJECT: No. I was alone. By then, my father and my mother went into hiding in another town. And I went to work for a gentleman farmer was breeding and racing horses. That was 19-- yes, in 1940 to '41. 

And then again, the Germans who had taken over the French started looking for Jews again. And even so nobody knew I was Jewish, I felt somewhat of an anger, if you want. I-- I was getting tired of being mocked. I was tired of the hiding. So I went and joined the French Forces of Interior, the FFI. 

INTERVIEWER: You had taken off your identification-- 

SUBJECT: Oh, yes-- 

INTERVIEWER: You had new papers? 

SUBJECT: Long ago, in Paris already. 

INTERVIEWER: You had new papers? 

SUBJECT: No, no. I had-- I had my papers. And because of my papers, I had to be careful to be hidden in a tiny little village where nobody knew I was-- I was Jewish. I had to make-- I had to make it my business to attend church every Sunday and every-- every occasion, just to-- to mingle. But I couldn't take it anymore. So I joined the-- the underground. 

At first they laughed at me, because even so I was almost 16, but at 16-- when you're 4' 9" and you look like a 10-, 11-year-old boy, they don't need you. But one of them said, yes, we can use him. And I got the training as-- for explosive. In other words, I was dressed like a school boy. And my school bag was loaded with plastic dynamite and mercury detonators. 

And my job was to-- in sabotage, and sabotage railroads, sabotage bridges. We were in direct contact with the British intelligence. And we were a form of-- we-- we did a form of guerrilla warfare. 

INTERVIEWER: What were the people-- the other people in the underground like? Can you describe some, give us their names? 

SUBJECT: Well, most of them were just young men that were afraid to be taken. Because you see, people don't realize that France was the only German-occupied country in Europe that provided Germany with two full divisions of Frenchmen dressed in German uniforms, fighting on the Russian front. And a lot of the young mens didn't care too much for that idea, to be forced to be taken in that kind of a draft. And they joined the Maquis. And of course, you had a lot of French patriots also. 

And it was a-- we were a group of about 150. We were under the command of Captain Mauri which most likely was also a -- a nom de guerre. Like you have nom de plume, you have a-- a war's name. People didn't want-- because of families, people couldn't divulge their real names. 

And that went on. We did sabotage. We did conflict. I was trained to kill. Of course, Jewish upbringing is not very conducive into killings. And it caused great conflict into me. But the knowledge of my brothers, the knowledge of all my relatives that disappeared kept me going. And I knew it was a job-- and you know, at 16, you do things that later on, for the whole tea in China you would never do. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe some of those things. 

SUBJECT: Some of those things for me, for instance-- being I was so small-- was to crawl to a railroad that was guarded by Germans every 200 feet, and to lay my dynamite there, because that railroad tracks were use for German transports. Now, there are horrible stories that I-- I just cannot go in, because 20 years of nightmare doesn't make it easy to talk about certain horrors. Some people called me a hero. But for me, a hero is only someone who-- who disregards his own safety to save other life, not to destroy life. At least, that's how I was brought up. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you feel any discrimination, because you were Jewish, in the underground? Or did you keep your Jewishness hidden? 

SUBJECT: No, I kept it to myself. I kept-- because even so, I knew. I knew that the French freedom fighters-- who really did fantastic work-- still were the Frenchmen that, when I was six years old and going to school, pointed at-- the finger at me and said, you killed Christ, and beat me up for it. 

INTERVIEWER: But you must have shared sanitary facilities with these men. 

SUBJECT: Sanitaries? We-- 

INTERVIEWER: How did you keep-- how did you keep your Jewishness a secret, physically? 

SUBJECT: Physically? Well, I had no choice. Whenever came around the time-- like September, I knew it was about the time-- 

INTERVIEWER: No, I meant-- you said you were circumcised. Therefore, you were subject to punishment as a child. How did you keep your circumcision situation a-- a secret from the underground people? 

SUBJECT: Well, that wasn't too hard. You-- if-- if you had to-- to perform some normal duties, you just turned around, turned your back to the-- to the others. There were no such thing as facilities or showers. We were living in the woods, in the snow. And for-- once for four days, all we lived on is-- on chewing on tree bark and scoops of snow. 

This is the only type of life we had. So there was no such thing as going to church or services. It-- it-- it is hard to explain those things. But this is the type of life it was. Life and death had absolutely no meanings. You were killing just like, uh-- you'd throw a cigarette away. It didn't mean anything to you anymore. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you fearful that they would find out you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: No, because in those days, the Germans were seeking-- we were a group of-- conducting guerrilla warfare. So constantly, the Germans were looking for us. The Germans and the French-- uh, you know, the French had also a form of Gestapo. I even blocked out the type of name that they-- they used to-- to have. And they were searching for us. And it was constantly hit and run and move from one corner of the woods to another. 

INTERVIEWER: Were you looking for your parents? Was there any communication with your-- 

SUBJECT: No, none whatsoever. For about three years, I didn't know if my father or mother were alive. I didn't know anything at all. It was strictly-- once you are trained for killing, you're-- you're-- you're almost like a-- like an animal. You don't function anymore as a human being. 

However, my Jewish upbringing-- upbringing did prevail, did prevail. And-- and once in a while, when I felt I thought of it, I recited the Shema. This is what kept me going. I kept repeating the Shema. 

When-- when the time for Passover came-- I never knew the exact date. But I made it my-- my business to-- I was-- food was something very rare. So there was no such thing as fasting. There was only a thing of survival. There was only a thing of remembering my Jewishness. And I constantly repeated the Shema. This is what kept me going. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have a very religious background as a young boy? 

SUBJECT: Uh, well, my parents came from very-- a very orthodox family. But somehow, they-- they-- they-- they went more towards reformed. We did have an upbringing. We did have the-- the [NON-ENGLISH] and the-- the Sunday school, and all that. 

And I felt that it helped me through an awful lot, because it forced me to think. Thinking was very hard to come by, because of all the ugliness and all the horrors. The film Holocaust brought out a lot of things. But it hasn't scratched the surface of the truth itself, of the ugliness of it. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you hear about, see anything else happening to other Jews during this time that you were a partisan? 

SUBJECT: No, not-- not personally. But-- because I was constantly in that hit and run guerrilla warfare. There was-- I knew, for instance-- I once walked in the streets of a town. And a man walked by me. And without a word being exchanged, somehow I knew he was a Jew. And he knew I was a Jew. And without a word being exchanged, we passed by each other with a glimpse of a smile in our eyes. 

And I knew I would give my life to save his. And I knew he would give his life to save mine. This is what-- what my Jewish-- what-- what I felt. Those are my feelings. 

INTERVIEWER: Were there any other incidents like that, or other incidents during those three years that you can give us details about? 

SUBJECT: Not incidents like this. This one incident is the one that really started me on thinking, and saying the Shema. Because you have to realize, when you are trained-- being trained for killing, and when you start killing, it is about the most horrifying experience that a human being can have. Because-- because the one who dies doesn't suffer. But the one who kills lives with it the rest of his life. And it is a very, very heavy burden to carry on. 

For 20 years after the war, I had nightmares. I never spoke about my killings. And it took Rabbi Hanks Kerbel about 13 years ago, to bring it out of me, when he made me speak in front of 150 youngsters with the National Federation of Temple Youth. So finally, I don't feel guilty about it. But I don't feel any glory about it. As I said, a hero is only the one who preserves life, not the one who takes life. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you-- did you keep up any contact with those 150 men you were with in that time? 

SUBJECT: No, because most of them were farm boys, farmers from that area. And after the war I went back to Paris. As a matter of fact, our group was sent before Normandy day in order to prepare sabotage in order to prevent Germans from reaching the Normandy, uh, invasion. And it was our job to prevent that. 

INTERVIEWER: How did you do that? 

SUBJECT: Well, again, explosives. My fortune was that by then I was already-- by then I was already 18 years old. And still, at 18, I looked like an 11-, 12-year-old boy. And I was able to smuggle myself through any guard post, because I always was dressed like a little schoolboy. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever overhear any conversations with the French farmers or people that you were coming in contact with about their feelings about the Jews, or German policy? 

SUBJECT: Oh-- oh, yes. That was-- that-- that was constant. The-- the French-- the basic Frenchman is an extremely envious, jealous, anti-Semitic person. It goes back for so-- too many centuries. 

INTERVIEWER: What-- what conversations did you ever hear that you could remember, or what actions? 

SUBJECT: The same thing as in school-- snide remarks about Jews, uh, making fun of Jews, and this. I took it all in, swallowed, kept quiet. I had to for survival. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened after the three years of being a guerrilla fighter? 

SUBJECT: After being a guerrilla fighter I was discharged from the French army-- of which I have my livre militaire, which is your military book. I was, for two years, front line duty. And as a reward, they gave me an extra year. In other words, in my military papers it says I served three years. 

After the war I couldn't go back as a jockey anymore, because it was too late. Being a jockey-- you can give it up for six months. And if you don't get right back into it, it's too late. 

By the time I was discharged from the Army at the age of 20, I had grown from 4' 9" to my tall 5' 2". And I had gained some weight. And all I could accomplish in being a jockey then was just being an exercise boy. And it wasn't for me. I went into leather work. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever see any other Jews, in camps or in any other situations in those years before liberation? 

SUBJECT: No, because-- well, the few Jews that we came in contact with-- remember, everybody was hiding. Those that didn't hide didn't survive. Out of 375,000 Jews in France, barely 50,000 were left at the end of the war. Amongst my relatives, my cousins, uncles, aunts, we were about 45 to 50. At the end of the war we were only six. 

INTERVIEWER: What happened to your mother and father? 

SUBJECT: My mother and father were-- were hiding in a village, in a very remote little village. My father was working here and there. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember the name? 

SUBJECT: Uh, Mau-- Maubourguet. Maubourguet, in the old Pyrenees-- also not too far from the-- the Spanish borders. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you remember who hid them? Did they say that they were hidden by a family, or what? 

SUBJECT: Well-- no. All I-- I can remember is my father saying they found-- they rented a little-- a little shack somewhere and were living there. And my father wasn't on-- always going fishing. They didn't-- they thought he was a fisherman for pleasure. But the only fishing my father did was-- that is the only food they could afford. 

And somehow, they were left-- they were left in peace, because things had changed a little bit when the Americans invaded North Africa. And by then, most of the Jews were already in the concentration camps. 

INTERVIEWER: And your brothers? 

SUBJECT: My brothers, fortunately, after three years in the German concentration camps-- they went through Gross-Rosen, Langenbielau Auschwitz, and many more-- came out-- came out of it. In what shape? It took maybe about two, three years to more or less rehabilitate them-- 

INTERVIEWER: Where-- 

SUBJECT: Into normal life. 

INTERVIEWER: Where were you reunited? And do you remember that-- 

SUBJECT: In Paris. In Paris. And as soon as they came out, a fantastic world organization named ORT, which I'm sure you heard of, took one of my brothers in their hands and worked with him, made-- took him to a school of ma-- marine, of navy, and-- and finally, after two years, more or less, rehabilitated him. 

INTERVIEWER: Um-hmm. Mr. Bouton what was it like to go back to Paris as a free person and a Jew at the end of the war? 

SUBJECT: Well, at the end of the war, there was mainly-- mainly the feeling-- when I came back to Paris and I went to see where my parents had their apartment-- of course, they had to return the apartment that we lived in. And seeing some old prints or paintings that were in my parents' home, seeing them in the apartment of the concierge, seeing some pieces of furniture here and there that used to belong to us hurt. 

And I told them that I wanted that-- at the time, when I came back to Paris, I was wearing a uniform. And of course, wearing a uniform made a lot of people a little bit-- thinking back. You know, as I said, they-- they thought I was a war hero of me. I don't consider myself as such, because I told you why. 

Even today, it still hurts me when I see people walking around with medals. The only medal that I keep is a bullet that was taken out of my body during-- during the wartime. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you-- can let go of that so it's on your sweater? 

SUBJECT: See, this is my medal. To me, it's a reminder. It's a reminder-- the horrifying thought of killing. It is a burden that I will carry on to my grave. But the benefits-- there are benefits, out of every horror and out of every misery. 

INTERVIEWER: Where was that bullet removed from, in you? 

SUBJECT: I don't know if you can see that little mark? 

INTERVIEWER: Um-hmm. Yes, I can. 

SUBJECT: You see that little mark? 

INTERVIEWER: Yes, I can. 

SUBJECT: That's where. So the doctor made me a present. 

INTERVIEWER: Was that the only wound you received, of-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. You see, there's an advantage of being a very short fellow. A lot of bullets were flying over my head. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr. Bouton is there anything else you would like-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. The only thing I would like to say in the-- to-- to end this is that we are forgiving. I don't carry animosity. But I shall never forget. And we, as Jews-- just as during the Passover festival we teach and we retell the story of the Exodus-- we must retell the stories-- the stories of the Spanish Inquisition. We must retell the stories of the pogroms and the stories of the Holocaust, because no longer are we Jews who bend our backs to await the lashes, as in the pogroms. And no longer are we the Jews that will turn the other cheeks, as during the Holocaust. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you still believe in God? 

SUBJECT: Yes, I do believe in God. And I do live by his law-- maybe not as well as other would like me to. But I feel my heritage, my ancestry is my strength. 

INTERVIEWER: Fantastic. You are a fantastic person. That was absolutely-- 

CREW: I didn't get a picture. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. I'm sorry. You know, I-- I'm-- we're not used to working together. So you'll have to forgive me, if I'm-- 

CREW: No, no problem. I will write you notes-- 

SUBJECT: And you know, you're a young man. But what-- 