INTERVIEWER: In terms of amends... 

CREW: AM excuse 

SUBJECT: I'd like to be able-- try to get the psychology somehow. 

INTERVIEWER: Yes. that's the thing. 

SUBJECT: Because that's the -- 

I mentioned that we-- we got this South Ameri-- Paraguay passport, which was sent to us in Sweden. And at the same time, we also got-- my mother was repatriated. And that was done by her family in Hungaria, who, apparently, they paid lots of money. And she was re-- re-issued a Hungarian passport in Amsterdam. So the Hungarian consulate contacted her and said she would become-- because she was a widow-- a Hungarian national. 

And so from one day to the other, we considered ourselves not subject to this legislation of Jews. And we were very happy and free to go without a star and to-- to do everything that non-Jews did. And we felt somehow like, you know, we're on our own. And it was completely, of course, you know, we kidded ourselves. 

For a year it was OK. It lasted exactly one year. And we saw around ourselves people being deported. And almost to the end. 

And in 19-- in the-- in middle 1943 or summer 1943, my brother, who also had a South American passport, with his family, was also deported. But he was sent only to the-- you know, to Westerbork, which was the first camp in Holland where the Jews were concentrated. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you say the name of it was? 

SUBJECT: Westerbork. This was a transit camp for the Dutch Jews in Holland. And we-- my-- my mother and my sister and myself, we thought we will survive in Amsterdam until the end of the war. 

And it was in-- it was the end of 1943. And the war was already-- it was already, I think, after the German debacle in Stalingrad. And we had hopes that this war would be lost by the German and it would not be a matter of many years. And we really believed we could stick it out-- 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother-- 

SUBJECT: --for some completely crazy reason. 

INTERVIEWER: Your brother was deported with his family. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you mean with children? 

SUBJECT: Yes. With three small children. 

INTERVIEWER: And what happened with the children who were-- 

SUBJECT: And they were still in Westerbork. They were-- they remained in Westerbork when we were picked up. Actually, we were-- we were picked up on a Saturday morning. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was home with you at the time you were picked up? 

SUBJECT: My sister and my mother and myself. 

INTERVIEWER: How old was your sister? 

SUBJECT: My sister was maybe 12, 13. And on a Saturday morning, we were going to synagogue. There was-- was a still small, a small Jewish prayer meeting. And we were going with a-- without stars. And we felt very legitimate. And we were going with a person who had a star who was one of the officials who was still around, for the Jewish community. 

And we were picked up by the SS. And they took us home. We had, you know, there was-- the lunch table was already set on Saturday morning. And we had to pack our luggage and we were told, it's finished with this protection. You have to go to Westerbork. And from there, you will be sent to a special camp for foreign nationals. 

INTERVIEWER: Why would you go to synagogue knowing how vulnerable you were? 

SUBJECT: It's-- it's-- it's very hard to explain. It's completely, you know, it's folly. We felt so safe. We bought this-- all this bullshit. We felt so safe. We thought they cannot touch us. Absolutely. 

INTERVIEWER: Because of the passports. 

SUBJECT: Yes. So the Saturday-- 

INTERVIEWER: What did you take with you? 

SUBJECT: We took-- we took with us-- and this is, again, this complete ignoring realities. We too-- instead of taking, you know, backpacks-- normally, people took backpacks. They told us, you will go to a special camp for-- for-- foreign nationals. And this will be a normal life. 

You can take a regular suitcase. You take-- can take clothes. And not only slacks. You can take your belongings. And that's what we did. 

So we arrived in Westerbork in this camp. And there was my brother and-- and there were many, many friends. And for a couple of months, we-- that was end of-- November 1943. And we stayed there until January. 

And in January, we were put-- still believing that we will go to a special camp-- together with a group of 60 women, we were put on a train, not a cattle train. A cattle train meant going to Auschwitz. A regular passenger train meant going to some better camp. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think? What were you thinking about at that point? 

SUBJECT: So at that point, we were thinking that we would go to an exchange camp. Well, they told us, you'll go to a camp where there will be foreign nationals, and there we will be exchanged with German nationals in the-- in the fo-- in-- 

INTERVIEWER: Did you ever question the idea of going to a camp at all? 

SUBJECT: Oh, you-- I mean, no-- you-- question the idea of not going to a camp. Of course we did. But it was too late. 

INTERVIEWER: No, did you question them? Did you s-- did you s-- 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHS] But, you know, this is a very naive question. 

INTERVIEWER: I know. 

SUBJECT: [LAUGHS] This is a very naive question. 

INTERVIEWER: It's a question I always ask. Because I get the same answer. 

SUBJECT: Because-- 

INTERVIEWER: Why did you not question them? 

SUBJECT: Why? They would have laughed at you, like I laugh at you now. Because, you know, the-- they had a-- a very detailed scheme. And that scheme they carried out until the last detail. Was nothing doing. 

Now, this period in Westerbork was a very special period. Because everybody was in transit. And everybody was trying to-- to avoid going to Auschwitz. And very few people managed. Some managed. 

So we departed from my brother and his family. And he hoped he would go to Bergen-Belsen because at that time, it was already clear that people with these other-- South American passports and there were a couple of others would go to Bergen-Belsen and not to Auschwitz. 

So under the circumstances-- and it, again, it sounds crazy-- we were not-- we were not beaten. We were not in a deep depression. We're almost-- I-- I mean, this maybe will sound exaggerated. But there was something. 

We were almost relieved that we ended this period in, you know, in so-called freedom, where we always tried to get out of something which, at the end, was inevitable. Meaning, going to a camp. And they told us we would go to this exchange camp and from there we would be sent either to Switzerland or to Sweden or something like that. 

INTERVIEWER: How were-- 

SUBJECT: And we really believed that. 

INTERVIEWER: How were you treated in the first camp? Did you work? Or did you-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. We w-- and that was the camp-- 

INTERVIEWER: And they were work camps? 

SUBJECT: --were-- which was still mixed. Families were together. 

And it was a very, very strange atmosphere. Because every week there was a transport which was sent to-- to very bad camps. Nobody knew exactly. And some transport every once perhaps-- every month to Bergen-Belsen. And people tried from week to week to postpone not to get on these, or-- this-- being sent away. And this depended also very much on the Jewish officials there. It was a very special-- 

INTERVIEWER: How were they chosen? 

SUBJECT: Who? How they were chosen? 

INTERVIEWER: To leave. Who chose? 

SUBJECT: By Jews. By Jews and Germans together, but certainly with the help of Jews who were the assistants of the German machinery. 

INTERVIEWER: You said they tried not to go. How did they try? And what-- what-- what did they use in order to not be selected? 

SUBJECT: There were two ways-- three ways. One was to work in essential services. For a while this worked. For instance, doctors, or-- or nurses, or officials who worked with the Germans. They were postponed. I mean, they could get postponement. 

Some of them remained in Westerbork until the end of the war, a few of them. Their image was not a very good one. To survive in Westerbork until the end of the war was not exactly a-- a-- a good mark. 

Another way was to be sick. Again, completely crazy. People who were in-- in the sick barrack were unfit to go on transport. For a while, this helped. So some of the doctors had people to-- to be hospitalized in order to postpone transportation for another week. 

A third way, which was open only to very few people, was bribes. People who had fluid money or jewels or something like that, they did sometimes manage to bribe officials. 

INTERVIEWER: If you could-- 

SUBJECT: But in any case, it was a frantic effort to postpone from week to week. At the end, very few people-- I mean, none, none managed, none-- none succeeded. 

INTERVIEWER: If you could avoid being sent, there was a quota to fill. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Exactly. 

INTERVIEWER: So-- 

SUBJECT: That's exactly the thing. I mean, there were-- was a-- an-- a certain amount of people who had to fill this train. So if one succeeded to-- to get out of the transport, the next one would get in. And this is exactly the survival of the fittest mechanism. 

INTERVIEWER: So what was the atmosphere between the people themselves? 

SUBJECT: It was terrible. That's why I say it was a very special atmosphere. 

INTERVIEWER: You mean special difficult, special-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --awful. Because if it wasn't you, it was the next person. 

SUBJECT: Exactly. 

INTERVIEWER: Did families work cooperatively? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: It was family units-- 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: --that would become the unit, then. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So then what happened? 

SUBJECT: Then what happened? We went on this passenger train with 65 women. The common characteristic of all these women was that they had Hungarian passports, Hungarian-- one-- one or two Turkish. So we felt this is a special group. 

We were on this train for a day. And then we came to a place where we were received-- the-- the-- the train stopped. And we received, first of all, barking of dogs and yelling of German, well, what we found out immediately, SS people. And it was quite clear when we descended from the-- from the train that it was not a camp for privileged foreign nationals. It-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was your mother and sis-- your mother and sister were with you? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you think when you-- when you saw the dogs? 

SUBJECT: We were frightened stiff. We were shocked. It-- all of-- all of a sudden dawned on us that we were completely cheated. And as it happened, we came to a woman concentration camp, Ravensbruck. I don't know whether you heard about that. That's a concentration camp which is the sister camp of Dachau. The men of-- you know, the-- the-- the husbands and the-- of the group of our women were sent to Dachau, which we didn't know, of course. 

And-- no, no. See-- excuse me. Buchenwald. It was not that. Buchenwald. And the women were sent to Ravensbruck, which is an old concentration camp which is German had established already in '33. The classical kind of concentration camp, with-- where the SS-- women SS guards were trained. It was the most classical concentration camp there was. 

INTERVIEWER: Can you describe? Because I-- 

SUBJECT: It was not at all a Jewish camp. There were no-- practically no Jews. Very few Jews. We were actually-- when we arrived, we were the only full Jews who came to that camp. 

INTERVIEWER: Who was there? 

SUBJECT: It was a camp who-- that-- when we came, they were perhaps 40, 50,000 people. Afterwards, there were many more. There were several categories. 

Number one, there were German criminals. German woman criminals. And you immediately could identify the people. Because there were different signs on their prison. 

I mean, we-- we entered the camp. We saw these prison cops and different signs. So the Ger-- the criminals had a black triangle. 

Then there were red triangles. And this was the majority. The red triangles were political prisoners from all occupied countries, from Poland, many from Poland, many from Russia. Many from France, from the underground, from the resistance, and from Belgium, from Ho-- Holland. From Holland, we were the first transport. 

Afterwards, there came more non-Jewish people from-- non-Jewish women from Holland who were caught in anti-German activities. It was a big concentration of political prisoners, woman prisoners, who were caught, from all the occupied countries. 

INTERVIEWER: Why do you call it classical? 

SUBJECT: Norway, Norway. Then there was a category-- a small category, but a very significant one-- which was called Mischlinge. They were the offsprings of mixed marriages, Jews, non-Jewish marriages. 

And they had been in Auschwitz. They were the only ones who had been in Auschwitz. And they immediately told us about Auschwitz. It was the first time we learned about Auschwitz. 

And they had sent-- had been sent from Auschwitz. They were not released. But they were not exterminated because of one non-Jewish part of their parents. And they were sent to Ravensbruck to be kept there. 

INTERVIEWER: Who were the guards? 

SUBJECT: And we got-- and we got a-- combined, we were political and Jews. I mean, we had a Magen David. One triangle was yellow and the other triangle was red. This was the-- 

INTERVIEWER: Who were the guards, the kapos? They always talk about the kapos. Were the kapos in this case all German? 

SUBJECT: Yes. The-- No, there weren't-- the kap-- no. There was no such thing as a kapo like, let's say, in Auschwitz. 

There were German woman SS gua-- guards. And the whole thing was actually managed more or less by women, German SS women, with a fewer number-- a small number of high SS male the-- the director of that camp or what they call the command of that camp was a man. There were, maybe, less than a dozen men who were in the chief positions. But the women were running this camp. 

Now, each-- this camp consisted of-- I don't know how to define them-- barracks. And each barrack had a special population. We were, in the beginning, in the barrack of the Russians, of the Russian political prisoners, who were very anti-Semitic. 

And there was a barrack chief who was a prisoner, a camp inmate. And they played, more or less, the role of-- of the kapos. But not exactly like in the death camps. 

INTERVIEWER: Describe what it looked like, what you did every day, how you existed. 

SUBJECT: Well, we-- the-- I have first to describe when we entered this camp, every-- you know, everything was taken away from you. All your belongings were taken away from you. You were given a shower. And you were-- we were lucky we were not shave-- our heads were not shaved, which was an exception. Because most of the people had clear-shaven heads. 

And there were also many small children in our group. And we had to pass some kind of a medical examination. And we were given these prison-- 

INTERVIEWER: Was this a visual medical examination, or-- what were they looking for? Strength? 

SUBJECT: Whether you were strong or whether you were weak or whether you could work. 

INTERVIEWER: Infection? 

SUBJECT: Mm, I think it was more or less for purpose of organizing people into jobs, into work. And-- and then we were given, you know-- dressed and they sent us back. And then the life started. 

And the life st-- in a barrack would be a big wooden structure where three-- the-- you saw these pictures. I mean, I don't have to tell you. Three-- bunks of three beds above each other. And two people in one bed. 

INTERVIEWER: Mattresses? 

SUBJECT: Straw mattresses without, of course, linens or anything. We were allowed to keep our blankets. We had our own blankets. Now, that was the only thing they allowed us to keep for-- in the-- for some strange reason. 

Now, the day was-- the beginning of the day was at 3 o'clock. You had to stand-- 

INTERVIEWER: What clothing did you have? 

SUBJECT: Regular prison clothes. I mean, these striped gow-- dresses, summer and winter. And a pair of wooden shoes like you wear. Not orthopedic ones. [LAUGHS] 

INTERVIEWER: You were issued one dress? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: And for eating? 

SUBJECT: And you-- for eating, you got a-- some kind of a tin-- tin plate and a, I think, wooden spoon or something like that. Then the regular camp regime started, which was a very tough regime. Because you had-- this was near Berlin, Mecklenburg. 

And it was in winter. And it was terribly cold. Terribly cold. And there were no-- you know, we had no woolens, nothing. And no coats. You had to stand from 3:00 to 430 to be counted. 30,000 women. And if they made a mistake, you had to stand something for four hours, five hours. 

And normally you got to work at five o'clock. We were organized in Siemens. Siemens was an electric-- you know, Siemens and Halske is an electric-- a big electric plant in Germany which produced for the German war machinery. And it was run by-- it was operated by prisoners. 

INTERVIEWER: And you went to work in this pajama or this gown. 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: This striped-- 

SUBJECT: Under supervision and so on and so forth. 

INTERVIEWER: Was there breakfast first? 

SUBJECT: Well, breakfast is certainly an exaggeration. [LAUGHS] You got a cup of what they call coffee, which was, you know, coffee. But it was some kind of an artificial kind of coffee. 

And you got once a day a piece of bread. You know, if you saved your bread from last-- from the day before, then you had something to eat. If you didn't, you didn't. I mean, you-- you got a piece of bread per day and you got once a-- a spoon, a big spoon of a warm dish which was usually cabbage. A very-- terrible food, I mean-- and that's all. 

INTERVIEWER: That was enough calories to keep you alive? 

SUBJECT: No. No. [LAUGHS] Definitely not. Because then they-- of course, you had to begin to get adjusted, which was very difficult. 

Many people didn't make it. My mother, for instance, died in-- after a year. She couldn't-- I mean, she-- people got, first of all, also contagious diseases. And dysenteria, and typhoid, and that together with under-- severe undernourishment, very severe undernourishment. They couldn't-- they didn't survive. And they di-- you know, by the thousands, they didn't survive. 

INTERVIEWER: Your mother died just of starvation. 

SUBJECT: Starvation and severe dysenteria. I mean, just goes when they went together. 

INTERVIEWER: When women had severe-- the prisoners had severe dysentery, what-- how did they handle it? How did they manage? 

SUBJECT: Well, it was one of the most degrading-- altogether, the most degrading part of this whole experience is really the dehumanization. Dehum-- dehumanization is-- starts with the physical dehum-- I mean, you had-- you couldn't go to a toilet when you needed to go to a toilet. And if you could go to the toilet, it was-- there was such a big queue that you couldn't make it. And I can elaborate on that. But this was part of the dehumanization process. 

Another part of the dehumanization process was that people really, for food, did everything. They sold themselves and their soul and everything for a piece of bread. 

INTERVIEWER: When you said the dehumanization-- 