INTERVIEWER: Mrs. Klibanski, where are you from? And can you tell us a bit about your family from wherever you came from in your life? 

SUBJECT: I am from Poland. From a town named Grodno, which is now United-- which is now in the Soviet Union. And I lived there with my family. I had two sisters and a brother. Father, mother, and grandmother, and a very big family. Who were all killed by the Germans. I am the only one alive. 

INTERVIEWER: What was your home-life like? 

SUBJECT: It was-- we were not rich. We were simple. Very simple people. Very intelligent, I think. My mother was an actress before she married my father. But after marrying him, she was a-- she stayed at home. 

INTERVIEWER: And what were your special interests when you were a young child? When you were a young girl? 

SUBJECT: I was involved from, maybe from the age of 15 or 16, in a Zionist organization. In 1936 there was a Pogrom in Grodno. Only three people, I think, were killed. But I was very much impressed of what happened. And I remember I was asking myself, why Jews do not have their own country? And why should they live always on the mercy of others? 

And I went to a friend of mine. I knew-- as she was living in the same house. And I heard she has a sister, an elder sister, who is in Achshara. I didn't know what it means exactly. Well I asked her, what is your sister? I heard your sister is preparing yourselves to go to Palestine? So how can I do it? I would like to do it, too. 

And so she told me her sister was in a youth organization. And then she went to Achshara is preparation for a physical walk to go to Palestine at that time. I think this is the right thing I can do, because we didn't have money to go to Palestine. So I was looking to which organization I have-- which organization I have to choose for it. 

And so I had friends, girl friends, who were Hashomer Hatzair. I went there, but I found it was too much-- or only youth who were at school, and not poor people. So I thought, no. I have to go where the poor people are, too. And not exclusive youths. And so I finally found an organization which was Halutz Hatzair. And there I became a member of this organization. Which was a Zionist Socialist youth organization. 

INTERVIEWER: What did your parents think of you joining? 

SUBJECT: I think I had wonderful parents. My mother, especially. Who very much-- who believed very much in everything I did. She thought it is right. If I think it is the right thing, she had nothing against it. I was very, very free to do everything. Whatever I liked. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you do good in school? Were you a good student? 

SUBJECT: Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: Did you have friends who were not Jewish? 

SUBJECT: I was in the-- not in high school, but secondary and popular school. I was in a Polish school with Polish girls. It was only for girls. In the high school later, I was-- this was a Jewish school, for Jewish children, but the Polish language. 

INTERVIEWER: When did you first become aware of the Nazis, and the fact that your life was going to change? 

SUBJECT: I was first aware of the Nazis when they came to our town. And this was in June, 1941. 

INTERVIEWER: You didn't read about it before? You weren't frightened of it before? 

SUBJECT: Yes. We had, in 1939, we had in our place people, young people, who fled from Warsaw and came to Grodno, because Grodno was under the Soviet rule from 1939- to 1941. And they came and told us about the Nazis. So then we heard about-- and we were also reading newspapers, I knew about the Nazis. And even before, when I was still very young, in the Spanish war there was a lot about the Nazis involved in the Spanish, in Spain, in 1936. 

So we knew about the Nazis. But it was not the same when we experienced the Nazis later. 

INTERVIEWER: What did you first notice? I mean, when they came, what did it make you feel? What did you see? 

SUBJECT: You know when the Nazis came, we had to go to work, to forced labor. Even girls. So I found out very quickly that even if they look so terribly and they do everything to afraid people, they became very cowardly in the face of strength of the people who are in the face of them. 

And here I can tell them maybe a story. A group of girls, young girls, as I was. 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: We were sent-- 

INTERVIEWER: How old were you? 

SUBJECT: In 1941-- I was 17. We were sent to clean up from the grass the railway station in Grodno. And I was responsible for the group. We walked, and it began to train. The German who watched us, he went to the station. And so I told the girls, no, we will not walk when it is raining. So we went to the same place where this German was. And so he was very angry, and he said, why did we leave there our walk? I said, we are not used to walk when it is raining. 

And I said it in a manner-- I think I could see it was very much a surprise, but he didn't say anything. And I think in this moment, it was the first time I was in the face of a German guard. And I could see that what I said before-- that he became very-- 

INTERVIEWER: He backed away? He backed down. 

SUBJECT: Yes. Very backed down when they feel some strengthness. 

INTERVIEWER: Were they all Jewish girls, or were they-- 

SUBJECT: No, they were all Jewish girls. Yes. 

INTERVIEWER: So he knew you were Jewish? 

SUBJECT: Yes, of course. He knew, because we had not yet the yellow star, but we had it on the arms. The band with Magen David. So he knew that we were Jewish. 

INTERVIEWER: What had happened to your dream of going to Palestine? 

SUBJECT: I was sure, maybe, it will happen someday. 

INTERVIEWER: And then what happened? 

SUBJECT: What happened? And the end of 1941, two ghettos were created in Grodno. And all the Jewish population of the town, which was 50% of the whole population. It was a town of 50,000 people. 25,000 were Jews. So we had to settle down. We had one day to go in the two ghettos. One ghetto was for artisans. And the second ghetto was for people with no-- 

INTERVIEWER: Skills? 

SUBJECT: Skills. So our family went to the second ghetto. And we had to settle-- we were very far from this place, where we were living. But we were living with not a family, because the house where we were living before was bombed, and everything we had was burned. During the fights over Grodno, because it was an important railway center. So we fled to the countryside with many of the Jewish and not Jewish families who left the town. 

And later when we came, we had nothing. We had nothing. And even we had nowhere to live. So we went to a friend of ours who let us in, because we were a very big family. And there we lived until we had to go to the ghetto. 

And a terrible thing, this day, it was winter and a very heavy snow. And not a dry snow, but very wet. It was November, the 1st of November, 1941. It was only one day, and we had to take everything we had. There was no cars and no horses-- nothing. So we had on the same day to take all our belongings to the ghetto. I remember it was very important to come very early in the ghetto to take some place. You know, because it was not organized. The Germans, for them it was very pleasant to see all the Jews are fighting for a place to live. Because the ghetto was very small, and there were many families. And so each family has to fight to have some place to put something. 

And I remember I came to the gate-- there was only one gate. And there was a very long queue? 

INTERVIEWER: Line. 

SUBJECT: Line. Line to go in. And we knew that we have only this day, and the day was very short. So I couldn't-- I was the oldest daughter in the family. So I felt very much responsible for all the family. And so I look, what can I do not to go through this gate to go in to some place? And this was the first time I tried to-- 

INTERVIEWER: Trick. 

SUBJECT: To trick the Germans, and to find some place and go in not through the gate. And of course, later this became life a sport for me. Because I looked all the ways-- when we were out in the ghetto, I always found places through which I would go out, go in, without permission. Without-- I was not-- I was not-- 

INTERVIEWER: Noticed? 

SUBJECT: No, no, no. I was not-- 

INTERVIEWER: You weren't following the rules? 

SUBJECT: Following the rules. I was not following the rules from the first moment. Because I thought these rules are not to be followed. And later it was a great help for me, because later I did it for some purpose. You know, to fight against the Germans. To go out, to leave outside as non-Jewish and so on. 

INTERVIEWER: What were you doing outside later on? Outside of the ghetto? You left the ghetto? 

SUBJECT: Later on-- in January, 1942, through our ghetto came a man who was later one of the most important organizers of the Jewish Underground and the Jewish fighting in the ghettos in Poland. This was a man-- this was Mordechai Tenebaum Tamaroff, who came in January 1942 from Vilna, where he experienced the mass killing of Jews in Vilna. In Vilna at that time-- while in Grodno ghetto it was-- I mean it was very difficult, but they were not killing. 