SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: OK. This could be too long. Sorry about-- yeah. Um-- uh-- the-- finally, after being in Bergen-Belsen for about four to five months, I realized it was hopeless looking for my parents because the transports kept just coming in. And one effect I had from that searching was that I would always push my way forward-- uh-- to the front so I could see all the women coming in, because I was in the woman's camp. We-- the men and the women in Bergen-Belsen were separated. 

When we came in with the transport to Bergen-Belsen, the separation occurred in the train station already so that when we started our march, I already noticed that there were no men around and no boys. And when I came to look at those transports-- um-- I noticed that one of the soldiers who used to be very irritated with me all the time, especially when I started to ask, in perfect German, could I please call out my mother's name? I knew my mother couldn't hear me, but I thought maybe somebody who knew that she was deaf would tell her that I had been calling out her name. And I would call out her name over and over again. 

By doing that one day for about the fifth or sixth time, the soldier so lost his temper, he just picked me up and flung me against a stone. And I lost consciousness at that time. And the immediate result was that I lost temporarily my hearing, which was in some way, to me, a sense of tremendous worry because I had to be my sister's ears. I had to hear for her. And I was afraid that I had really had my hearing permanently damaged. 

But after about five or six days, my hearing came back. But I, since that time, have always had a loss of hearing, even though at that time, when I had been thrown, I had absolutely perfect hearing. And later on in Bergen-Belsen, I realized that my sister was being watched by the camp doctor. I do not know who it was. It was a German doctor. 

But he would come-- come by the children's barracks all the time, come to my sister, pinch her cheeks, pull her ears, and try to be very friendly with her. And then one day he said to me that he would be able to give us oranges and chocolates if I allowed my sister to go into the hospital for a few days. And my sister was perfectly well. So I couldn't understand why he wanted her in the hospital. And I just-- uh-- was very sassy, and I said, no, you are not, because if you are, I'm going to kick you. 

And-- uh-- I went up and sort of said, I-- I'm really going to-- I'm serious. I mean it. And so he laughed and then forgot about it. 

Later on, the Blockalteste told me that he had hoped to be able to use my sister for scientific research. At that time, I had no idea what it meant. But later on, I realized because that he was very interested in the fact of her deafness. At that time, my hearing had come back, so he didn't know that I had suffered this episode. And one of the things we had always been told not to-- even if we were very, very ill-- never to go to the doctors because they were not to be trusted. 

And so we avoided it as much as possible. And so-- but he would come and visit us. And there was-- at that time, part of the reason he must have come was because there was the beginning of the typhus epidemic. 

And one thing I did receive from the woman in Sered was a small bag of tea, which I was able, during the time of the typhus epidemic, to exchange for a vaccine for my sister. And I was told it was a typhus vaccine. Whether it was one or not, I'm not sure. But the fact is my sister never did get the typhus. I did. 

And so one of the saddest thing in my life has been that I have no recollection of the liberation because I was totally ill with the typhus. I have no recollection of what happened when the English came to Bergen-Belsen. None of the things that people told me afterwards about the joy and the-- and the sense of being moved from where I was to what was converted into a hospital, which was outside, right in the place where the Germans themselves were billeted. 

And one of the men who was liberated-- liberating us was doctor-- was Dr. Kahles, who subsequently wrote about his experiences of liberating the children in Bergen-Belsen. And-- uh-- he was a doctor with the UNRRA. And-- uh-- he told me later on that I was very near death. Had I had to wait another two days for the English, I would not have survived. And-- uh-- it's-- I have brooded on that, that I have not been conscious of what I consider to be the most important experience. 

INTERVIEWER 1: What happened afterwards 

SUBJECT: Afterwards-- uh-- we went-- we were put together in Bergen-Belsen in the children's wing of the hospital, even those who were well. And-- uh-- uh-- immediately, the Red Cross, the hires, started the operation of going to try to locate families, to try to find someone. And in-- in July of 1945, my relatives in Brooklyn who were listening assiduously to the radio heard my name called out. They immediately got in touch with the Red Cross. But there was absolutely-- it was still too-- too chaotic for them to do anything about it. 

And I was finally sent to Sweden, where I was for three years. I came to Sweden. I was given over to a doctor in Sweden who immediately decided to fatten me up because I weighed-- at the age of 11, I weighed as much as a three-year-old child and had a big pot belly. And-- uh-- I slowly recovered from the experience, which they immediately-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Was your sister-- was your sister with you? 

SUBJECT: My sister was with me. She had curiously survived the experience without illness, having turned into a very quiet, silent child and whose sense of the world was totally cut off. And the only person she had to communicate was me. And during the time that I was sick, she had grown completely mute because there was no one to communicate with her, except that the women who had taken care of this group of children were very kind to her, had taken very good care of her. And those-- um-- three women were remarkable women. There's a whole story about them that I could tell. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Is-- is she still alive, your sister? 

SUBJECT: My sister is alive. She is. Came to New York with me. She went to a school. She went to the Lexington School for the Deaf. She married. She has three children. And-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: What do you feel now toward all of this? What did you feel right after, when you came to the United States? What do you feel now? How do you put this in context? 

SUBJECT: Well, coming to the United States was a great shock. I happened to come on-- in August of 1948. It was the hottest day in the history of the United States. 

I had come from Sweden. I walked out of the plane. And I remember turning around and saying, I'm going back, because not only was it very, very hot, but at the airport, greeting this plane which had taken us 24 hours to fly from Stockholm to New York, I was suddenly faced by a whole panoply of black faces. Nobody in Sweden had told me that there were niggers in the United States. 

I knew that they were in Africa but to suddenly come into New York and see all those black faces, I was sure I had come into the wrong country. I was supposed to come to the United States. It was this hot place with all the black people. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What country-- 

SUBJECT: Pardon? 

INTERVIEWER 2: What country, what place-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: New York. 

INTERVIEWER 2: I know. But where did you think you had got? Where did they-- 

SUBJECT: I thought I was somewhere in Africa. I had landed somewhere in Africa. It was so hot. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Your train went to another place. It was surprising. 

SUBJECT: That's right. It was exactly-- it was-- it was my having, in some ways, sense that life was playing tricks on me all of the time, that I wasn't going to the places I thought I was going to. And then at the ramp were my relatives waiting for me, none of whom I knew. I had never met them. They had all left long before I was born. 

They were yelling and screaming, Renee, Renee, Renee. So I knew that I was where I was supposed to be. But what was strange was having to get adjusted not only to a totally different milieu but to relatives I had absolutely no inkling of. 

I-- I remember my father telling me I had an aunt and she was there. But I thought the aunt was in Israel because she had originally gone to Israel. Suddenly she was in New York. 

And-- uh-- it was a very strange thing, because not only did I come to the United States, which was visually, humanly, culturally so different from anything I had experienced, the plentifulness that I saw. I remember going through the streets of Brooklyn and seeing the vegetable stands, the food stands. I couldn't believe that there was-- after having come to Sweden, where obviously there was no war, but there still were shortages. There were still things in rationing. 

To come to the United States where everything just was hanging out on the streets-- all the food, everything, the ice creams, the things that seems like such a strange contrast to what I knew. And then to come through an area of New York, which was totally black, where you saw very few white people. And then coming into Brooklyn, which was Hasidic. It was Williamsburg where all the religious Jews were. And suddenly I realized-- as I was going through it and I was asking all sorts of eager questions, I suddenly realized that this was a very, very strange world, even not only because of the war but even because of what happened afterwards. And I had to get used to the peace. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Is it still? Is it still as strange? 

SUBJECT: Is it still as strange to me now? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Strange world? 

SUBJECT: No. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Anything that's left from-- from that time? 

SUBJECT: I'm sorry, my-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What is left with you from that time? 

SUBJECT: What is left from-- with me? What is left is the sense that-- uh-- that one can really never totally reconcile cultures, that one does make peace. But it's still-- the fact of the two cultures that exists in my mind-- and I'm sure that in other people who have had experiences like me have this-- that the two are two separate units in one's experience. 

And so that there is the me that is the wartime and pre-wartime me and the me that is the post-wartime. It's like having an era before and after. And that while they are all connected in myself, that they are not reconcilable. 

And it took me a long, long time to realize that not only are they not reconcilable. I don't want them to be reconciled, that I wanted them to be separate, that I wanted this other experience not to get lost. One experience which I haven't talked about was an episode which is the central episode of my life, which was when I was in the camp, I managed to find a roll of toilet paper. And I managed to also find-- barter something I had for a pencil. 

And I started to write. And I was writing down everything that was happening to me. I was-- about my longings, my fears, conversations I overheard, things people had said. 

And at one point, this roll of toilet paper was found in one of the searches by the soldiers. And I remember coming back from the Appel seeing a soldier sitting on the lower bunk from the one I was with the toilet paper and rolling it and reading it to someone else and laughing and finding it very amusing. And I-- suddenly I rushed up to snatch it. He pulled it away. And he said, no, this is too good for you. And he took it with him. 

And, of course, I heard the conversation. I heard what they were describing. That-- that-- that one of the things that I remember him saying to the other was, she has a wonderful sense of humor. And I didn't remember writing anything funny in it. 

And I remember feeling, saying, you may have taken that toilet roll, but you haven't stopped me from writing. And that was when I vowed that I would spend the rest of my life writing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Writing what? 

SUBJECT: Writing. 

INTERVIEWER 2: But-- 

SUBJECT: I didn't think of what. 

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you write? 

SUBJECT: But I write stories. I write-- I am in the process of writing a novel. And I've written some stories on the Holocaust, experience of others. I've written it down. I've written my own experience. But I also have written things that I have imagined. 

And I've discovered that the-- my real experiences, while they are there, the imaginary experiences are also there and that I am very glad to have-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: What-- what are your readers? For whom? 

SUBJECT: For whom am I writing this? 

INTERVIEWER 2: Yes. 

SUBJECT: I'm not even thinking about an audience. When I write, I never think about whom I write for. It's the desire to write-- 

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you think there's a difference between your perceptions of what happened and other people who have survived because you were so young? 

SUBJECT: Yes, yes. I think one of the things that, of course, I have suffered from is that I did not know what was going on so that I was able to imagine things which may not have been true and so that often, my sense of what really was going on got lost in what I thought was going on. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Did you know that there was burning in Bergen-Belsen, gas chambers and crematorium? 

SUBJECT: Did I know that what? 

INTERVIEWER 2: There was gas chambers and a crematorium in Bergen-Belsen? 

SUBJECT: No, there were-- as far as I knew, I did not know of gas chambers. I didn't-- but there was-- there was no need. I saw people dying around me everywhere, of hunger, of illness. Um-- I lived-- and that, perhaps, I don't remember other people telling me. But I lived-- right across from us was a charnel house filled with corpses, not just inside but overflowing all over. There were corpses all over. 

I lived-- walked beside the people. And after a while, it-- it just got to be so that one noticed, and one had to say to oneself, I'm not going to see with this. I'm not going to recognize anyone in this person who is lying there. 

And it got to the point where I realized that I had to close my eyes to a number of things. Otherwise, I would not have survived, even at that time, because I saw people around me going mad. I was not only having to live with all these things but with madness. 

INTERVIEWER 2: We have less than a minute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Less than a minute. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Go ahead. 

SUBJECT: Yeah. Now, the thing that I find, of course, which touches me most about the experience is the-- the sharing it with my family. I-- when I came to the United States, I was determined to tell everybody about my experiences. I was shameless, telling everybody in my family. 

And I'm afraid that they were not-- being very religious people, they felt that I had to move my own experience into the general experience of the Jewish people. And I found that it was a way in which they were telling me they couldn't bear to listen to it. It was very hard for them to listen to it. 

They got-- the one thing which I discovered that I ended up by being very protective of my family. And I would say, they can't stand it. I won't tell them. And I would search for other people to tell it to. But there were no other people. And so the decision to write came so strongly upon me that after being in the United States for-- 